

===== BOOK: mosy.txt =====


    
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MIGRATION OF SYMBOLS.

  

BY

  

THE COUNT GOBLET D'ALVIELLA,

  

SENATOR AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF BELGIUM.

  

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

  

SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD, M.D., K.C.I.E.

Click to enlarge

  

London: A. Constable and Co.,

  

[1894]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, September 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: Apollo and the Gammadion.
 (From a vase in the Kunsthistoriches Museum of Vienna.)

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

INTRODUCTION.

THOSE familiar with the delightful papers contributed in recent years by the Count Goblet d'Alviella to the Bulletin de l'Academie royale de Belgique on "le Tricula, ou Vardhamana des Bouddhistes," "l'histoire du Globe Ailee," "la Croix Gammee ou Svastika," "les Arbres Paradisiaques," and other allusive types of the ancient religions of the Old World, warmly welcomed the publication, at Paris, in 1892, of his collective work on La Migration des Symboles, setting forth on a more systematic plan, and with fuller references to original authorities and illustrations from authentic examples, the matured and permanent results of the learned and accomplished author's examination of the enigmatic subject of which he is now everywhere recognized as the greatest living exponent. It had been treated by others in a similar comprehensive spirit, but never before in the same thoroughly scientific manner; and thus, while the writings of Dupuis and Creuzer have, in spite of their immense erudition, but served to discredit it, and are already obsolete, the Count Goblet d'Alviella, by pursuing his investigations on a severely inductive basis, at once, and, so to say, single handed, raised the inquiry to its proper position as a department of archaeological research, producing a work destined to exert an abiding influence on the whole future of the study of symbolism, and also, I would fain hope, on that of the decorative designs of the artistic industries of the West. One, indeed, of Messrs.

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Archibald Constable and Company's special objects in publishing the present English translation of the Count Goblet d'Alviella's alluring book has been to bring it within the reach of the Schools of Art throughout the United Kingdom: the other being to make it as widely accessible as possible to archaeological students in India, where so much of the symbolism of antiquity still survives as a quickening religious and aesthetic force, permeating the entire mass of the Hindu populations,--like that idealizing thread of scarlet which runs through the ropes used in the British Royal Navy, "from the strongest to the weakest,"--elevating it by the constantly felt presence of the unseen realities of human life, and the diffusion throughout it of a popular spiritual culture; and where, consequently, the clues to the mystery of so many historical emblems may be successfully followed up on every hand, even among the humblest and the most illiterate.

Of course, the way had been prepared for the Count Goblet d'Alviella by the remarkable discoveries made during the passing generation of the rich remains of ancient art in Egypt, Phoenicia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Phrygia, and Greece, and by the wide interest created on the continent of Europe in the ancient arts of India by the French International Exhibition of 1878. All this the Count Goblet d'Alviella frankly and generously acknowledges; but none the less is his merit in having applied the true Baconian principles of observation and comparison to the classification of the bewildering mass of materials thus placed at his disposal, and elaborating therefrom, in the laborious processes of his most patient analysis, a volume that will always remain the locus classicus on the various transcendental types constituting the materials of its seductive theme.

The general conclusion arrived at by the Count

[p. ix]

[paragraph continues] Goblet d'Alviella is, as the superscription of the volume indicates, that the religious symbols common to the different historical races of mankind have not originated independently among them, but have, for the most part, been carried from one to the other, in the course of their migrations, conquests, and commerce; and his specific achievement is to have demonstrated the fact by an overwhelming induction of ancient and modern instances. The imprint of "the Feet of Buddha" on the title-page further indicates the Count Goblet d'Alviella's tentative opinion that the more notable of these symbols were carried over the world in the footsteps of Buddhism, or rather of that commerce of the East and West with Babylonia and Egypt, promoted by Nebuchadnezzar III. and Psammetichus I., respectively, out of which, through the internationalization of Hinduism, Buddhism arose in India, as later on, under the influence of the continued intercourse thus initiated between the countries of the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, Christianity and Islam were successively developed from Judaism.

One of the most remarkable instances of the migration of a symbolical type is that afforded by the triskelion ["tripes"], or, as we more familiarly know it, "the Three Legs of Man." It first appears on the coins of Lycia, circa B.C. 480; and then on those of Sicily, where it was adopted by Agathocles, B.C. 317-7, but not as a symbol of the Morning, Mid-day and Afternoon Sun [the "Three Steps of Vishnu"], but of the "three-sided," or rather "three-ended," or "three-pointed" ["triquetrous"], land of Trin-akria, i.e., "Three Capes," the ancient name of Sicily; and, finally, from the seventeenth century, on the coins of the Isle of Man; where, as Mr. John Newton has shown, in the Athenaeum of the 10th of September, 1892, it was introduced by Alexander III. of Scotland, when,

[p. x]

in 1266, that prince took over the island from the Norwegians; he having become familiar with the device at the English Court of Henry III. [1216-72], who for a short time was the nominal sovereign of Sicily. [*1] The triskelion of Lycia is made up of three cocks' heads, a proof added to that presented by the cock sculptured on the "Harpy Monument" at Xanthus, that in the fifth century B. C. [*2] this exclusively Indian bird had already reached the Mediterranean Sea. But on the coins of Sicily and the Isle of Man the triskelion consists of three human legs of an identical type, excepting that those of the latter island are spurred. This form of triskelion is borne on the armorial coats of several old English families, and

[p. xi]

it was in all probability first introduced throughout this country between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries by Crusaders returning from the East by way of Sicily.

The triskelion is but a modification of the gammadion, or "fylfot-cross," a type formally identical with the swastika of the Hindus. The latter was long ago suspected by Edward Thomas to be a sun symbol; but this was not positively proved until Percy Gardner found a coin of the ancient city of Mesembria, struck with a gammadion bearing within its opened centre an image of the sun,--"Mes-embria" meaning the city of the "Mid-day" sun, this name being stamped on some of its coins by the decisive legend . Such a discovery makes one of the "fairy tales of science," and inspires the sequestered student of "the days of old, the years of ancient times," with the perennial enthusiasm that is the true end and highest recreation of all labour. [*1]

The gammadion or swastika, for we may now absolutely identify them, has travelled farther afield than any other sacred type of antiquity; and from Iceland, which it reached in the ninth century A.D., and Thibet and Japan, between the third and eighth, and China, Persia, North Africa, France, Germany, Scandinavia, and the British Isles, between the second century A.D. and the second B.C., and India [*2] and Sicily between the

[p. xii]

third and fourth centuries B.C., and Asia Minor and Greece between the sixth and twelfth centuries B.C., the Count Goblet d'Alviella traces it back on the monuments to the Troad, some time anterior to the thirteenth century B.C.

Then there is the strange eventful history of the migration of the imperial type of the "Double-headed Eagle." It is now borne on the arms of Austria and Russia; and as a form of the Garuda bird [cf: the Assyrian Nisroch, and Etruscan Tuchulcha] is to be found everywhere in Southern India,--on the temple sculptures, in wood carvings, on embroidered, printed, and woven cloths, and on amulets. Also the cherubim guarding the "Tree of Life," on the modern Syrian amulet presented by me to the Count Goblet d'Alviella, and figured by him at page 249 of his original volume, and page <page 202> of the present translation, are distinctly modelled on the traditional type of the "Double-headed Eagle." It first appears on the so-called Hittite sculptures at Eyuk, the ancient Pteria, in Phrygia. In 1217 it is seen on the coins and standards of the Turkman conquerors of Asia Minor; and H. de Hell, in his Voyage en Turquie et en Perse, reproduces [Plate XII.] a variant of it from the walls of their old fortress at Diarbekr. Now it was in 1227-28 that the Emperor Frederick II. set out on the sixth Crusade, landing at Acre on September 7th in the latter year, and being crowned King in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem on March 18th, 1229; and within thirty years from these dates we find the type struck on the coins of the Flemish princes, Otho, Count of Gueldres,

[p. xiii]

[paragraph continues] Arnold, Count of Looz, Robert de Thourette, Bishop of Liege, and others. In 1345 it for the first time replaced the Single-headed Eagle on the armorial bearings of the Holy Roman Empire, represented, since 1806, by the dual state known, since 1868, as the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. It first appeared as the cognizance of the Russian Empire in 1497, on a seal of Ivan [John] III. [1462-1505], the first of the Grand Dukes of Moscow who took the title of Czar of Muscovy, ten years after his marriage [1472] with Sophia, niece of the last Byzantine Caesar, Constantine Palaeologus.

The "Winged Globe," "the Sun of Righteousness with healing on its wings" of Malachi iv. 2, is another sacred type that has wandered under various modifications into every part of the Old World, until it appears over the doors of the Secretary of State's rooms at the India Office, reduced to a meaningless circle, with two appended flowing ribbons, representing the two uraeus snakes of the original Egyptian "Winged Globe," the urim-thummim jewel, attached to the divining zodiacal "breastplate of Aaron." [*1]

One of the most unexpected results of the critical study of these symbols is the establishment of their essential paucity. They undergo, alike by

[p. xiv]

devolution and evolution, and a sort of ceaseless interfusion also, infinite permutations of both type and meaning, but in their earliest monumental forms they are found to be remarkably few.

They were at first but the obvious ideographs of the phenomena of nature that made the deepest religious impression on archaic man, such as the outstretched heavens above him, and the outspread earth beneath; both of which he naturally divided into four quarters, the east "fronting" him as he watched anxiously for the returning sun, the south on his "right" hand, the west "backing" him, and the north on his "left" hand; and this four-fold heaven and earth he signified by a circle, or a square, divided cross-ways; from which he was led to conceive of a "heavenly garden," watered by four rivers, and of a foursquare "heavenly city" with its four went ways; and gradually to model more and more in their similitude the four-square cities of antiquity, and those four-square well watered "paradises" ["far--i.e., heavenly--country"], the ground plans of which yet survive in every part of India. Then came the observation of the daily renewed miracle of the phenomena of vegetable, animal, and human reproduction, expressed at first, as still in India, by the most directly realistic types, and afterwards by the lotus bud and flower, the date palm, and other conspicuously phallic flowers and trees: and that the symbolical "Tree of Life" of the Chaldaeans, Assyrians and Babylonians, is indeed but a conventional representation of the date palm is sufficiently proved by the description given of the adorning of King Solomon's temple in 1 Kings, vii. 29-35:--"And he carved all the walls . . . round about with carved figures of cherubims and palm trees [tamar, the 'date palm']. . . . And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree . . . and he carved upon them carvings of

[p. xv]

cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims and upon the palm trees. . . . And the two doors of fir tree . . . he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers:" and, again, of the adorning of the visionary temple of Ezekiel, chapter xli. 18:--"And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub;" and chapter xl. 26:--"And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches ["propylons," toruns or gopuras of the four cardinal points] thereof were before them, and it had palm trees, one on this side, and another on that, upon the posts thereof." These are exact descriptions of the architectural decoration of the temples and palaces of Nineveh and Babylon, and they should satisfy anyone of, at least, the proximate botanical source of the Sacred Tree of the "Nineveh marbles." The Syrian brasses which have recently become articles of regular import into Europe, however, place the question beyond dispute. The so-called Saibis, the people who make these articles, call themselves mando Yahya, or "disciples of St. John," and are generally referred to by western writers as "Christians of St. John," and Mendaeans. By their neighbours they are called sabiun, literally, "washers," i.e., in the ritualistic sense, "Baptists." They are, and they are not, confoundable with the Sabaeans,--not the people of that name in ancient South Arabia, but the Chaldaean worshippers of the "Host [saba] of Heaven." [*1] The Saibis of Mahomet were not idolaters in any form, but their modern representatives combine with pseudo-Christian and pseudo-Zoroastrian doctrines, the whole remaining body of ancient Chaldaean astrolatry; and how this carne

[p. xvi]

about is a matter of the utmost importance to the students of the history of the arts of the East, and of their applied symbolism. The Saibis of Mahomet's time were recognized by him as believers in a revealed religion, and were always treated by his followers with toleration. But their sword was unsparing against the still surviving star worshippers of Syria and Mesopotamia, and particularly against the handicraftsmen among them, who, in their several ritualistic arts, perpetuated the familiar "types" and "motives" of the obsolescent idolatry of Nineveh and Babylon. These Sabaeans of the Haran and Valley of the Tigris and Euphrates, to escape extermination, sheltered themselves under the name of the Saibis, and introduced all their own pagan practices among the latter sect, which is now really idolatrous. Its members are nearly all artizans, and most of the metal-work from the neighbourhood of Mosul, and Damascus, and Hillah, sold in Alexandria and Cairo, and now largely imported into Paris and London, is fabricated by these "Saibis." The "Tree of Life" appears everywhere on their brass dishes and bowls, and on a dish presented to me by the Count Goblet d'Alviella, and figured in his original volume and in the present translation on Plate V., letter l, the Sacred Tree is realistically rendered by the date palm. The conventional "Tree of Life," under the name of satarvan is an object of still living adoration among them, and as its worship has been traditionally handed down by them from the remotest Chaldaean period, the dish figured by the Count Goblet d'Alviella conclusively proves, so it seems to me, that the ancient Mesopotamian "Tree of Life"

"Encinctured with a twine of leaves,"

was indeed none other than the date palm of "the

[p. xvii]

waters of Babylon,"--associated, at times, with the half mythical homa plant of the Iranian Aryas, the soma of the Vedic Hindus, as the source of the earliest intoxicating sap known in Persia and India. [*1] In The Industrial Arts of India [Chapman

[p. xviii]

and Hall, 1880], I traced this type through all its marvellous metamorphoses in the arts of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and of the Islamite Saracens, and the mediaeval and modern Europeans; and that it was received by the latter not only through the intermediation of the Greeks and Romans and Arabs, and as modified by them, but also, at different unascertained dates, in its crude forms directly from Mesopotamia and Syria, is suggested by a silver coin of Ceolwlf II., King of Mercia, A.D. 874, bearing on its reverse a nine-branched "Tree of Life," standing among the "Host of Heaven," or "Host of God," between two cherubim, or other acolytes, the whole overshadowed by the "Winged Globe," with wings as of palm branches, and the globe marked like a face. The coin is figured [580] in Edward Hawkins' Silver Coins of England [Quaritch, 1887], and its reverse type is there described as follows:--"Two figures seated, holding a globe between them; above Victory with expanded wings; unique."

But beside the sun and moon the others of "the seven planets" of the ancient astronomers came slowly into the observation of archaic man, and the whole universe was perceived to be full of moving life, and was now symbolized by a "Holy Mountain," with its cosmical palm, deep rooted in the earth, the "Garden of Eden" of the Semitic races, and lifting up its laden branches of clustered dates to the highest heavens; and again by a "Virgin Mother." Everywhere he saw creative force in operation, and everywhere adopted the most homely and personal implements of that force as the visible and material symbols of the invisible and spiritual Creator, or Creators, in whose express image he postulated that the worlds were made. It was in this ingenuous unaffected spirit that the Semite nations named their phallic stone, or phallic tree, beth-El, the "house of God," or simply El,

[p. xix]

the Godhead's self. Ashtoreth was symbolized by the phallic Cupressus sempervirens, one of the original "arbores vitae" [asherim] of Anterior Asia; and from it are derived not only the pyramidal images of the goddess in Phoenician sculptures, but the stiff cypress-like representations on the talismanic jewelry of Southern Europe of the Blessed Virgin Mary; to whom we have also consecrated, since the sixteenth century, the American "Arbor Vitae," Thuja occidentale. It is under the impulse of the same naive and artless temper of mind that the Hindus everywhere set up the lingam, and the yoni, and combined lingam and yoni images, and bow down to them and worship them as the supreme symbols of creative deity; and the inability of English people, and of Europeans generally, to enter into their mental disposition in this matter is a most pertinent illustration of that ubiquitous antagonism between Eastern and Western ideas, or between the ancient pagan world still left to us in Southern and Eastern Asia and the modern world of Christendom and Islam, which constitutes one of the greatest difficulties besetting British rule in India.

Only three years ago I recorded in the Times [*1] the flogging, by order of the Police Magistrate of Black Town, Madras, of a Hindu boy "for exhibiting an indecent figure in public view." What he had explicitly done was to set up, in accordance with universal custom, a phallic image before a house that was in course of erection by a Mr. K. Streevanasa, who was first tried under the indictment, but was acquitted, he, the owner, not having been the person who had actually exhibited the image. It is the fact that the image referred to is often very naturally fashioned in Southern India, a most fortunate fact in relation to the

[p. xx]

history of art; but even so it conveys no more idea of indecency to a Hindu, than do the words "fascination," "testimony" [cf. Genesis xxiv., 2, 3, 9; xxxii., 2 5; and xlvii., 29], "Lord and Lady" [Arum sps:], "orchid," et-caetera, to ourselves. It has indeed for the Hindus a significance of the highest sanctity, of which only the remotest trace remains in the words "fascination" and "testimony," and of which there is no trace in the word "orchid" or "orchis," the "testiculus" of the Romans, unless possibly through its Greek synonym saturion. The image was indeed set up before Mr. Streevanasa's house as a symbol of the Deity in whose strength alone can any work of man be surely established, and as a devout and public acknowledgment that, in the words of the Hebrew Psalmist:--"Except the Lord build the house they labour in vain that build it." The pillars Jachin and Boaz set up by king Solomon before the porch of his temple at Jerusalem [1 Kings vii., 21] had exactly the same significance, and their restorations by Chipiez and Perrot, although they disclose none of the offensive realism sometimes observed in similar phallic presentments in the Madras Presidency, are not nearly so severely conventional as those to be everywhere seen in Northern and Western India. [*1] The ultimate

[p. xxi]

artistic form of the symbol, as I have been able to trace it, step by step, from India to Greece and Italy, is the conventional "Tree of Life," or "Symbolical Tree," guarded by affronted beasts or cherubim, that is, "the Two Witnesses." [*1]

At every page we have similar exemplifications of "the long results of time," [*2] worked out with rare

[p. xxii]

scholarship, conscientiousness, and enthusiasm, and with that lucidity of literary expression for which the Count Goblet d'Alviella is distinguished. His book is, therefore, likely to be as welcome to the general reader as to the specialist in archaeology. I wish, however, to emphatically recommend it to the earnest attention of the students of ornamental art, for it is a book which, like Husenbeth's Emblems of the Saints in Art, should ever be with them. Beauty in decoration ought not to be sacrificed to symbolism, but it is always enhanced by being symbolical; while to employ

[p. xxiii]

these sacred ancient types irrespective of their significance is to make nonsense of an artistic composition, and is, in reality, as distressing a solecism as the use of fine words by pretentious people ignorant of their etymological derivation and full meaning.

I am in no way responsible for the present translation; but having read it through from beginning to end I have found that, although it cannot be said to in any degree reflect the literary quality of the original French, it is perfectly accurate, and this is what would above all else be desired of the translation of so strictly a scientific work as La Migration des Symboles, alike by its English readers, and its author,--who, I have, in conclusion, to gratefully add, has been good enough to completely revise the text where it has occasionally been found necessary to adapt it to the discoveries made since the first publication of the Count Goblet d'Alviella's profoundly fascinating volume.

GEORGE BIRDWOOD.

7, APSLEY TERRACE, ACTON, NEAR LONDON, W.
         Saturday, 7th July, 1894.

Footnotes

^x:1 Caesar, De Bello Gallico, v. 13, describes Britannia as: "Insula natura triquetra;" and one of the coins of Edward I. has the king's head in a triangle, such as is seen on the Irish money of the time, but here its symbolism, if there be any, is probably Christian: yet some coins of Henry III. have the Persian sun and moon, "Crescent and Star," above the king's head. Beside the instances of the classical triskelion given by the Count Goblet D'Alviella, I may here add that it occurs on the shield of Memnon in the scene of his contest with Achilles, painted, in black, on an archaic Attic vase, figured in James Millengen's Peintures antiques et inedites des vases grecs [Rome, 1813]; and that a similar triquetrous cognizance, resembling a triple-headed hammer, is seen on the shield of one of the warriors in the well-known sea fight painted by Aristonophos, in the seventh century B.C., on a crater from Cervetri [Caere, Agylla], now in the Museo Etrusco Capitolino, Rome.

^x:2 We find the cock also blazoned on the shield of one of the young men assisting Herakles in capturing the herd of Geryones, as the myth is painted by Euphronios on a cylex by Chachrylion, now in the Munich Pinakothek; and two cocks fighting furiously in the scene representing Amphiaraus with Euriphyle and her child [Alcmaeon] on another Attic vase of the same period, now in the Berlin Antiquarium; and if the Corinthian vase painted, in black, with fighting heroes, of whom one bears a cock on his shield, figured in the Monuments inediti dell' Institute Correspondenza Archaeologica [Rome], is correctly dated by Arthur Schneider [Der troische Sagenkreis, Leipzig, 1886], the Indian cock was familiarly known in Greece even so early as the seventh century B.C.

^xi:1 "Das Beste, was wir von der Geschichte haben, is der Enthusiasmus, den sie erregt."--GOETHE.

"Omnia quae gerebam ad aliquam animi mei partem pertinebunt."--CICERO.

This last is a distinct reflection of the Buddhist doctrine of karma, with the hope of immortality for a difference.

^xi:2 At the close of Chapter III. the Count Goblet d'Alviella would seem to imply that the swastika had now almost disappeared from the symbolism of India. But this is by no means the case. It is universally found worked into the mats, and cotton rugs, and finer textile fabrics of Assam; and in Western India always appears on the wooden ladles used in [p. xii] the worship of Agni, and at the head of every Hindu invoice of goods and book of accounts. The fact of its being carved on the ladles with which the libations of ghi [clarified butter] are offered to Agni is surely some proof of at least a congenital connection between the swastika and the arani.

^xiii:1 See my remarks on the "Breastplate of Aaron," in the Journal of the Society of Arts for March 18th, 1887; and with reference to "the Hand of Providence" sometimes associated with the Winged Globe, see my letters on "The tughra of the Turks" in the Journal of the Society of Arts for September 4th and 25th and October 9th, 1891. This "Hand" is represented on the reverse of some of the coins of Eadweard the Elder, A.D. 901-25, appearing out of a cloud in the formula of benediction; and again on a "St. Peter's coin" of the same period, A.D. 900-50, but so rudely that numismatists have never yet identified it, and, indeed, it is only identifiable by the representation on others of these "St. Peter's coins" of the bow [with an arrow here] seen in the Hand associated with the Winged Globe of the Persians.

^xv:1 The name of the Joktanite Sabaeans is spelt with the letter samech, and that of the Cushite Sabaeans with a sin.

^xvii:1 It is difficult to determine the ultimate botanical source of the homa of the ancient Persians, the soma of the Hindus. The proximate source of homa in Persia was the vine, and, later, the date palm. In India the plants identified with the soma plant are Sarcostemma brevistigma, and other species of Sarcostemma, but it may be questioned whether these plants were the ultimate sources of the Vedic soma juice, or the Indian substitutes for the grape and date palm. The Parsis of Bombay import from Persia as homa the stems of the jointed fir, Ephedra vulgaris, and they use also the twigs of the spurge-wort, Euphorbia Neriifolia. It has been argued against the identification of any Sarcostemma as the source of homa or soma that the juice of no Asclepiad could be voluntarily drunken as an intoxicant by man; but in Western India an intoxicating beverage, called bar, is prepared from the juice of Calotropis gigantea, and drunk with relish by the hill people about Mahabaleshwur; and we know from Pliny, xiv. 19, that the ancients made intoxicating drinks from the juice of all sorts of unlikely plants. Beside this the homa or soma twigs may have been added, like hops, merely as an adjuvant to the intoxicant prepared with it. They were gathered by moonlight, and carried home in carts drawn by rams, and mixed, after fermentation, and straining through a sieve of goat's hair, with barley wort and ghi [or clarified butter]; and the enjoyment of the brew was sacramental:

"We've quaff'd the soma bright,
 And are immortal grown;
 We've entered into light,
 And all the gods have known."

[paragraph continues] As a libation to Agni, soma is now superseded in India by ghi.

Soma means not only the juice of the soma plant, Sarcostemma brevistigma, and Siva, as identified with its intoxicating juice, but the moon, as in somvara, Monday, which gave its name to the soma plant and juice. Soma-yaga is the rite, in Vedic times the sacrificial rite, in the celebration of which soma was drunk; soma-yagi and soma-devi are the celebrants of the rite; soma-pa are "soma drinkers," i.e., Brahmans; soma-varga-tili are a caste of oil millers, the members of which worship Siva as Soma; and soma-vati, the ceremony observed by the women of Maharashtra by circumambulating the sacred fig-tree [Urostigma religiosum] whenever the new moon falls on a Monday.

^xix:1 Of Sept. 3rd, 1891.

^xx:1 These closely resemble the omphalos of Apollo Pythius at Delphi, which, as we learn from the accounts of Pausanias [X. 16] and Strabo [IX. iii. 6], and various Greek coins and fictile paintings, was simply a beth-El or lingam. In the same way in India "the navel of Vishnu" is identical with "the lingam of Siva;" and it is a Brahmanical saying that "those who think they differ err." On the marble bas-relief from Sparta, figured in the Mittheilungen der Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts in Athen [vol. xiii. plate xii.], and on a stater of Cyzicus, figured by Canon Greenwell in the Numismatic Chronicle [3rd series, vol. viii., plate i., No. 23], the Pythian omphalos is represented between two eagles, of which Strabo relates: "A fable, referred to by Pindar, was invented, according to which two eagles or, as others say, two crows, set free by [p. xxi] Jupiter, one from the east, the other from the west, alighted together at Delphi. In the temple is seen a sort of navel wrapped in bands, surmounted by figures representing the birds of the fable."

These "bands" are none other than the rosaries and garlands with which the lingam in India is hung on high Saivite holidays, while the "supporters" of the naturalistic lingams to be sometimes seen in Southern India leave no doubt as to the significance of the "two eagles" or "two crows," which in the Spartan bas-relief point as clearly as these Southern Indian lingams to the ultimate origin of the symbolical "Tree of Life":--

                       "The Tree of Life,
 The middle tree, and highest there that grew,"

Delphi itself providing the counterpart of the yoni, [delfus, cf.: adelfos, omogastrios, ek neduos], the ultimate "Garden of Eden."

In the scene of the murder of Neoptolemos, figured in red on an amphora of the fourth century B.C., found at Ruvo in Apulia, and now in the Caputi Collection, the elaborately garlanded omphalos is represented rising up from an eight-divided base, closely resembling the eight-petalled "Lotus Throne" of some of the Saivite combined lingam yoni images: the yoni and the symbolical Lotus being in India one and the same matrical emblem.

^xxi:1 One of the most interesting of the Mediaeval Christian Trees of Life was the "Arbor Perindex," known also as the arbre de Judee. The legend was that it grew in India, and typified the Catholic Roman Church, the doves, cooing among its branches, being the Congregation of the Faithful, and the Serpent, which sought to entice them away from their healing habitation, to destroy them, "that ancient worm the Devil." Not the least interesting point in connection with this Tree of Life is its name, "Arbor Perindex," parinda being the Hindustani and Persian for "bird."

^xxi:2 The reader will have understood from the first that the Count Goblet d'Alviella here treats of symbols only after they [p. xxii]have become historical, and indeed monumental, and that the symbolism of pantomime, the gesture language of primaeval, and primitive or savage man, which survives among civilized men in the current formulae of salutation and clerical benediction, in thumb "biting" and pointing, making "long-noses," et caetera, is beyond the sphere of his work; as is also the symbolism of colours, numbers, and purely geometrical figures, such as the Pythagorean talisman, known by the various names of pentalpha, Signum Solomonis, Fuga Daemonorum, Druid's Foot, pentangle, et caetera. [**] A very piquant form of the archaic, and probably primitive, or, it may even be, primaeval practices in which the Greek word symbol originated still widely survives in India; where, when "our Mr. Thomas Atkins" arranges a tryst with a casual Indian sweetheart, the latter breaks a piece of pottery in two with him, each keeping the fragment left in their respective right hands, to be fitted together again when they next meet,--and thus make sure that they are the same couple as met before. In this simple sum-bolon, or "tally," we have the actual chirs-aelychoth, or "sherd of good fellowship," of the Phoenicians, corresponding with the "tessera hospitalis" of the Romans. When I was at school at Plymouth fifty years ago the boys in pledging themselves to any secrecy invariably did so by holding a potsherd between them. If it was a very dark and direful conspiracy to which we bound ourselves we spat on the sherd.

^xxi:* It is sometimes identified with the Scutum Davidis, which appears to me to rather be the figure formed by the intersection of two equilateral triangles, one of the symbols of supreme Deity. It is also sometimes denominated the "pentacle," a symbolical headdress, the form of which I have never been able to accurately determine.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxiv]

  

POSTSCRIPTUM.

At the last moment of going to press I have chanced upon three remarkable variants of the swastika which the Count Goblet d'Alviella wishes me to reproduce here. The first is from a sepulchral stone at Meigle in Perthshire, and the second, which is a sinister swastika, from a Cross at St. Vigeans in Forfarshire.

Click to enlarge

Both these are illustrated in Stuart's Sculptured Stones of Scotland. The third is from one of the old Mahometan buildings of the Mo(n)gol period at Lahore.

Click to enlarge

This is also ignorantly rendered as the inauspicious suwastika; and twisted into a legend, which I read as, ya Fattah, "O Opener," "Beginner," "Leader," "Victorious," "Conqueror," and so forth.

GEO. B.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxv]

  

CONTENTS.

         	INTRODUCTION

      	pp.

      	<page vii>-<page xxiii>

     
     	AUTHOR'S PREFACE

      	pp.

      	<page 1>-<page 9>

     
     	CHAP. I. ON SYMBOLS COMMON TO DIFFERENT RACES

      	pp.

      	<page 11>-<page 31>

     
     	CHAP. II. ON THE GAMMADION OR SWASTIKA

      	pp.

      	<page 32>-<page 83>

     
     	CHAP. III. ON THE CAUSES OF ALTERATION IN THE MEANING AND FORM OF   SYMBOLS

      	pp.

      	<page 84>-<page 117>

     
     	CHAP. IV. SYMBOLISM AND MYTHOLOGY OF THE TREE

      	pp.

      	<page 118>-<page 176>

     
     	CHAP. V. ON THE TRANSMUTATION OF SYMBOLS

      	pp.

      	<page 177>-<page 203>

     
     	CHAP. VI. ON THE WINGED GLOBE, THE CADUCEUS, AND THE TRISULA

      	pp.

      	<page 204>-<page 269>

     
     	ADDENDA

      	pp.

      	<page 270>-<page 272>

     
     	INDEX

      	pp.

      	<page 273>-<page 277>

     
     

LIST OF PLATES.

         	PLATE I.

      	Apollo and the Gammadion

      	Frontispiece

     
     	PLATE II.

      	 

      	to face p.

      	60

     
     	PLATE III.

      	TABLE ILLUSTRATING THE MIGRATION OF THE GAMMADION

      	to face p.

      	80

     
     	PLATE IV.

      	 

      	to face p.

      	123

     
     	PLATE V.

      	 

      	to face p.

      	129

     
     	PLATE VI.

      	MIGRATIONS OF THE EASTERN TYPE OF THE SACRED TREE

      	to face p.

      	161

     
   
     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

FEW words have acquired such a wide signification as the word symbol. [*1] Originally applied, amongst the Greeks, to the two halves of the tablet they divided between themselves as a pledge of hospitality--in the manner of our contract forms, detached along a line of perforations from the counterfoil record--it was gradually extended to the engraved shells by which those initiated in the mysteries made themselves known to each other; and even to the more or less esoteric formulas and sacramental rites that may be said to have constituted the visible bond of their fellowship. At the same time its meaning was so amplified as to include on the one hand oracles, omens, and every extraordinary phenomenon that could be passed off as a warning from the gods, and on the other, military pass-words, badges of corporate bodies, tokens of attendance, and pledges of every kind, from the wedding ring, to the ring deposited before partaking of a banquet as an earnest for the due payment of one's share of it. In short the term came to gradually mean everything that, whether by general agreement or by analogy, conventionally represented something or somebody.

A symbol might be defined as a representation which does not aim at being a reproduction. A reproduction implies if not identity with, at least

[p. 2]

similitude to, the original; but a symbol only requires that it shall have certain features in common with the object represented, so that, by its presence alone, it may evoke the conception of the latter, as is the case with a missile weapon and lightning, a sickle and harvest-time, a ring and marriage, a pair of scales and the idea of justice, kneeling and the sentiment of submission, and so forth.

By symbolism the simplest, the commonest objects are transformed, idealized, and acquire a new and, so to say, an illimitable value. In the Eleusinian mysteries, the author of Philosophoumena relates that, at the initiation to the higher degree, "there was exhibited as the great, the admirable, the most perfect object of mystic contemplation, an ear of corn that had been reaped in silence." [*1] The scrap of cloth which, in ordinary circumstances, we discard as a rag, at the top of a staff sums up all the aspirations included in the idea of one's country; and two crossed lines suffice to recall to millions of Christians the redemption of the world by the voluntary sacrifice of a god.

We live in the midst of symbolical representations, from the ceremonies celebrating a birth to the funereal emblems adorning the tomb; from the shaking of hands all round of a morning to the applause with which we gratify the actor, or lecturer, of the evening; from the impressions figuring on the seal of our letters to the bank notes in our pocket-book. The pictorial and plastic arts are naught else but symbolism, even when they claim to adhere to the servile imitation of reality. We write, as we speak, in symbols; and it is in symbols again that we think, if those schools of philosophy are to be believed which affirm our powerlessness to perceive things in themselves. The philosophy

[p. 3]

of evolution goes the length of proclaiming, through the organ of its founder, that the conception of force, to which it refers all phenomena, is simply the symbol of an unknown and unknowable Reality. Herbert Spencer even adds, in the most explicit terms, that it will always be permissible for us to picture to ourselves that Reality by concrete symbols, so long as we do not regard them as resemblances of that for which they stand. [*1]

In this sense we may apply to the symbol what Professor Sabatier has written of the myth:--"To create a myth, that is to say, to catch a glimpse of a higher truth behind a palpable reality, is the most manifest sign of the greatness of the human soul, and the proof of its faculty of infinite growth and development." [*2] Without doubt the symbols that have attracted in the highest degree the veneration of the multitude have been the representative signs of gods, often uncouth and indecent; but what have the gods themselves ever been, except the more or less imperfect symbols of the Being transcending all definition Whom the human conscience has more and more clearly divined through and above all these gods?

It is sentiment, and above all, religious sentiment, that resorts largely to symbolism; and in order to place itself in more intimate communication with the being, or abstraction, it desires to approach. To that end men are everywhere seen either choosing natural, or artificial, objects to remind them of the Great Hidden One, or themselves imitating in a systematic manner the acts and deeds they attribute to Him--which is a way of participating in His life--

[p. 4]

or again rendering objective by acts, as various as they are significant, all the gradations of the sentiments with which He inspires them, from the most profound humility to the most ardent love. Hence the extreme diversity of symbols; which may be divided into two classes, according as they consist of acts or rites, and of objects or emblems. We will here occupy ourselves exclusively with this second category, or rather with the figured representations it suggests, and which past generations have transmitted to us as so many material vestiges of their beliefs. Even thus restricted, the field of investigation is vast enough to make one fearful of wandering from the right way.

Studies in comparative symbolism have fallen, during the latter half of this century, into a discredit which their former vicissitudes sufficiently explain. To the syntheses no less premature than brilliant, constructed with insufficient and imperfect materials by the rationalistic school, whose most illustrious representative was the French Dupuis, there succeeded, more than fifty years ago, the system, more philosophical than historical, of Creuzer and his followers, who claimed to discover in all the religious practices of antiquity the disguised or disfigured reflection of a profound primitive wisdom. All these theories, after having successively captivated the learned, have been slowly overthrown by the accumulated objections afforded by later discoveries in archaeology, ethnography, philology, and history; and, as so often happens, the reaction against them has been in proportion to the first infatuation in their favour.

Even the more recent attempts of MM. Lajard and Emile Burnouf, although keeping more closely to facts, were not of such a nature as to cause us to retrace our steps. It seemed as if comparative archaeology must definitely sacrifice all imagination

[p. 5]

that could profit critical research, and to-day certain scientists would even attempt nothing less than the proscription of all hypothesis in investigations relating to the origin and signification of symbolism; as if hypothesis was not in every sort of study a necessary factor of scientific progress, provided it be not enunciated as an ascertained fact.

Meanwhile, for anyone who would wish to resume this kind of investigation, the situation has greatly changed within the last thirty-five years. Documents which allow us to compare, under all the desirable conditions of authenticity, the symbolic representations of different nations, have accumulated to such a degree, that henceforth the principal bar to their utilization lies in their number and their dissemination. It is not so many years ago that the transactions of the Academies founded in the principal capitals of Europe, and the new-born annals of a few archaeological societies, constituted, together with certain great publications relating to the monuments of classical antiquity and of Egypt, the only collections to which the historian of symbolism could turn. To-day we have everywhere at hand, in publications which will never be surpassed in importance and in accuracy, the result of excavations carried on simultaneously in Chaldaea, Assyria, Persia, Asia Minor, Phoenicia, Egypt and Libya, not forgetting the reproduction of memorials discovered or studied anew in Greece, Italy, India, the extreme East, and even in the two Americas. Archaeological reviews and special collections, which have rendered so much service to the study of ancient art, have multiplied even in the smallest states of Europe. There is no branch of archaeology, from the study of seals to numismatics, which has not its organs and societies. Thanks specially to the liberality of

[p. 6]

the different governments, not only have museums been enriched in proportion to the discoveries made, but the more important collections form the subject of descriptive catalogues which allow of the utilization of materials at a distance. Lastly, the joint labours of many workers, planned from the most various points of view, are centralizing all these documents, thus lightening the task of those who desire to restore the traces and elucidate the meaning of the principal symbols of the world.

Moreover the deciphering of inscriptions, the classification and interpretation of written documents, the general advancement of the study of history, more especially religious history, whilst enlightening us on the creeds of nations, enable us the better to establish the connection between their symbols and their myths; at the same time that a more exact knowledge of the social and geographical centres whence these symbols originated aids us to discover in many cases the origins of the image which has furnished a body to the idea.

Henceforth there is no longer any reason why in the study of symbols we may not arrive at results as positive as in the study of myths. The comparative examination of myths long ago entered upon a scientific phase, whether, with Professor Max Muller and the philological school, we are content to compare the traditions of nations speaking allied languages; or, with Mr. Andrew Lang and the majority of ethnographers, we do not scruple to compare the mythology of all known peoples. Now, the myth, which may be defined as a dramatization of natural phenomena, or of abstract events, offers more than one feature in common with the symbol. Both depend upon reasoning by analogy, which in the one case creates an imaginary tale, in the other a material image.

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] Doubtless there is this difference, somewhat ignored by those who have obscured the idea of religious symbolism by blending it with mythology, that in the symbol we must be conscious of a distinction between the image and the object, or being, thus represented, whilst an essential feature of the myth is to believe the narration to be in conformity with the reality. But it is easy to understand that both are frequently formed by the help of the same mental operations, and above all are transmitted through the same channels.

In any case, there are religions which we cannot understand if we do not endeavour to supplement the insufficiency of the texts by the study of the monuments. A significant symptom in this connection is the growing tendency among savants to utilize, in the study of particular religions, the texts to verify the symbols, and the symbols to verify the texts; as may be seen in the recent works of Senart on the history of Buddhism, Gaidoz and Bertrand on the symbols of ancient Gaul, J. Menant on the sculptured stones of Central Asia, and Fr. Lenormant, Clermont-Ganneau, Ledrain, and Ph. Berger on the symbols of the Semitic religions. These works are the best proofs of the services which the interpretation of symbols can render to the history of religions when strictly scientific methods are rigidly followed.

It is not merely a question of avoiding preconceived ideas and hasty generalizations. What is needed above all is to provisionally substitute analysis for synthesis, the history of symbols for the history of symbolism; in other words, to take the principal symbolical figures one by one, in order to establish their respective history, first among each people, and then over the whole area of countries where they are found. It may

[p. 8]

happen that we may succeed., after repeated and patient investigations of this kind, if not in establishing the laws of symbolism, as has been done for comparative grammar, at least in collecting together the materials for a general history of symbolism, as has been already accomplished for almost every other branch of knowledge.

My aim is simply to furnish a contribution to this history, by investigating the limits within which certain symbolical representations have been transmitted from people to people, and how far in the. course of their migrations their meaning and their form may have been modified. I have here applied myself particularly to figures which, by the importance and the very complexity of their role, have seemed to me the most capable of throwing some light on the general conditions of symbolical transmission, such as the gammadion or tetrascele and the triscele, the Paradisaical Tree, or rather the special type it assumed amongst the Assyrians, the Sacred Cone of the western Semitic nations, the Winged Globe of Egypt, the Caduceus of the Phoenicians, and the trisula of the Buddhists. This selection will further permit me to bring into prominence one of the most curious and perhaps least explored sides of comparative symbolism. I speak here of the attraction which analogous symbols exercise on one another, or rather of the tendency they display to coalesce and lose themselves in intermediate types.

Most of the observations which I have brought together in the following chapters have already appeared during the last three years in the Bulletins de l'Academie royale de Belgique, the Revue des Deux-Mondes, and in the Revue de l'Histoire des Religions. In recasting them as a whole I have fully considered the remarks which their first publication elicited from sympathetic critics, as well as the modifications produced in my own views by subsequent

[p. 9]

researches. I have also added a variety of illustrations calculated to show more strongly the cases of symbolical filiation and fusion of which I have endeavoured to verify the existence and elucidate the theory.

GOBLET D'ALVIELLA.

COURT SAINT ETIENNE, BRABANT,
        March, 1891.

Footnotes

^1:1 Sumbolon, from sun and ballein, to throw together.

^2:1 Philosophoumena, v. i., ed. Cruyce. Paris, 1860, p. 171.

^3:1 First Principles. Lond. 1862,  section 32.

^3:2 A. SABATIER. Memoire sur la notion hebraique de l'esprit. Paris, 1879.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10] [p. 11]

  

THE MIGRATION OF SYMBOLS.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

ON SYMBOLS COMMON TO DIFFERENT RACES.

Identity of certain images in the symbolism of different races.--On spontaneous coincidences in the applications of the symbolical faculty.--The Cross apart from Christianity.--St. Anthony's Cross potencee.--The fight between the eagle and the serpent.--Readiness with which symbols are transmitted from nation to nation.--Principal causes of their diffusion.--The complexity and singularity of identical symbols is a presumption in favour of their unity of origin.--The triscele.--The Double-headed Eagle.--The Hand of Providence.--Information supplied by identity of meaning and use.--The Lotus-flower.

THE variety of symbols seems at first to be as boundless as the combinations of the human imagination. It is not uncommon, however, to discover the same symbolical figures amongst races the furthest apart. These coincidences can hardly be explained by chance, like the combinations of the kaleidoscope. Except in the case of symbols found amongst peoples who belong to the same race, and who, consequently, may have carried away from their common cradle certain elements of their respective symbolism, there are only two possible solutions: either these analogous images have been conceived independently, in virtue of a law of the human mind, or else they have passed from one country to another by a process of borrowing.

[p. 12]

There exists a symbolism so natural that, after the manner of certain implements peculiar to the stone ages, it does not belong to any definite region or race, but constitutes a characteristic feature of humanity in a certain phase of development.

To this category belong, for example, the representations of the sun by a disc or radiating face, of the moon by a crescent, of the air by birds, of the water by fishes, also by a wavy line, and so forth.

Perhaps certain more complicated analogies should be added to these, such as the symbolizing of the different phases of human existence by the life of the tree, the generative forces of nature by phallic emblems, the divine triads, and generally every triple combination whose members are equal, by the equilateral triangle, and, lastly, the four main directions of space by a cross.

What theories have not been built upon the existence of the equilateral cross as an object of veneration amongst nearly all the races of the Old and the New World! Of late years orthodox writers have protested with good reason against the claim of attributing a pagan origin to the Cross of the Christians because earlier creeds had included cruciform signs in their symbolism. And the same objection might be urged against those who seek for Christian infiltrations in certain other religions under the pretext that they possess the sign of the Redemption.

When the Spaniards took possession of Central America, they found in the native temples real Crosses, which were regarded as the symbol, sometimes of a divinity at once terrible and beneficent --Tlaloc, sometimes of a civilizing hero, white and bearded--Quetzacoalt, stated by tradition to have come from the East. They concluded from this that the Cross had reached the Toltecs through

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Christian missions of which all trace was lost; and, as legend must always fix upon a name, they gave the honour to St. Thomas, the legendary apostle of all the Indies. Although this proposition has again found defenders in recent congresses of Americanists, it may be regarded as irrevocably condemned. It has been ascertained beyond all possibility of future doubt that the Cross of pre-Columbian America is a kind of compass card, that it represents the four quarters whence comes the rain, or rather the four main winds which bring rain, and that it thus became the symbol of the god Tlaloc, the dispenser of the celestial waters, and, lastly, of the mythical personage known by the name of Quetzacoalt. [*1]

By a similar process of reasoning the Assyrians

FIG. 1. IDEOGRAM OF ANU.
 (RAWLINSON. Western Asia Inscriptions, vol. ii. pl. 48, fig. 30 obv.)

were led to represent by an equilateral cross their god of the sky, Anu. The ideogram of this god is formed by four cruciform characters which radiate at right angles from the circle or lozenge denoting the sun in the cuneiform inscriptions. Is

[p. 14]

not the sky indeed the space in which light radiates?

It is proper to remark that amongst the Assyrians themselves the equilateral cross, as denoting the main directions in which the sun shines, became also the symbol of that luminary, and consequently, here again, of the god who governs it. It was the same with the Chaldaeans, the Hindus, the Greeks, the Persians, and perhaps with the Gauls, and the ancient civilizers of Northern America (fig. 2).

FIG. 2. SOLAR CROSSES [*1].

In China, the equilateral cross inscribed in a square  represents the earth, and according to Mr. Samuel Beal, a saying is met with there to the effect that "God made the earth in the form of a cross." [*2]

Egyptian writing utilizes among its signs the Greek and even the Latin Cross. In connection

[p. 15]

with this we find in a recent article by the Abbe Ansault a characteristic example of the readiness with which one may go astray in the identification of symbols, if satisfied with a merely superficial resemblance. On the famous Damietta stone, the Greek words Ptolemaios Suter, "Ptolemy the Saviour," are rendered by the demotic characters forming the equivalent of Ptolemaios, followed by the sign ; from which the author concludes that the term Saviour being rendered by a cross, this sign was with the Egyptians, an allusion to the future coming of the Redeemer. [*1] Unhappily for this ingenious interpretation, M. de Harlez, who has taken the trouble to refute M. Ansault's article, points out to him that in

FIG. 3. HIEROGLYPH OF THE HAMMER
 (E. COEMANS, Manuel de langue egyptienne, p. 47,  section xviii.)

demotic the sign  is the simplest form of a hieroglyph representing a hammer, or a boring tool, and is usually employed to express the idea of grinding, avenging, and by amplification, "the Grinder," "the Avenger," a not uncommon epithet of Horus, and some other gods. [*2]

Even in the presence of an analogy of signification combined with a resemblance of forms, it is well to look twice before identifying symbols. The St. Anthony's Cross (croix potencee, literally "gibbet-cross")  is found, with almost the same symbolical signification, in Palestine, in Gaul, and in ancient Germany, in the Christian Catacombs, and amongst the ancient inhabitants of Central

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] America. Among the Phoenicians and their kindred races, it was the character known by the name of tau, and from an oft quoted passage in Ezekiel [*1] we learn that it was accounted a sign of life and health. Among the Celts and the ancient Germans it was the representation of the celestial Two-headed Mallet which was accounted an instrument of life and of fecundity. Amongst the early Christians it was a form sometimes given to the Cross of Christ, itself called the Tree of Life. [*2] In Central America where, according to M. Albert Reville, the Cross was surnamed the Tree of Plenty, [*3] it assumed also the form of the tau.

Are we to conclude from this that all these gibbet-crosses have the same origin and the same aim? That would be a rather hasty conclusion. The symbolical signification of the tau is explained by its resemblance to the Key of Life or crux ansata of Egypt, so widely diffused throughout all Western Asia. The Double Hammer of Thor and of Tarann is a symbol of the lightning, and, for this reason, could not fail to represent the vivifying forces of the storm, according to the tradition common among the Indo-European nations. [*4] Similarly, if in pre-Columbian America, the Cross became an emblem of fertility, it is, as we have seen, because it represents the rain-god. As for the early Christians, if they made of the Cross a symbol of life, it is especially in the spiritual

[p. 17]

sense; and, if they sometimes gave it the form of the palibulum, it was because such was the instrument employed among the Romans in the punishment by crucifixion.

 

In the mythology of primitive nations the contest between the sky, or sun, and the clouds is frequently represented by a fight between an eagle and a serpent. This subject has been treated more than once in ancient art. [*1] Already in the Homeric ages it had become a symbol of victory, for we are told in the Iliad that the Trojans were on the point of abandoning the assault on the Greek entrenchments through having seen an eagle which held a serpent in its claws take flight, being wounded by its prey. [*2] Now according to the tradition of the Aztecs, the founding of Mexico is said to have been resolved on owing to the apparition of an eagle which, perched upon an agave, and with wings outstretched towards the rising sun, held a serpent in its talons. [*3] The first conquerors of Mexico saw therein an emblem of future greatness, and to the present day this emblem figures in the arms of the capital. Yet it is unlikely that the Aztecs had read Homer.

 

On the other hand, the ease with which symbols are borrowed is indisputable. Represented on the ordinary productions of industry, favourite subjects with artists, they pass unceasingly from one country to another, with commodities of commerce and articles of ornament; as witness the specimens of Hindu, Chinese, and Japanese symbolism and pictorial art which have penetrated

[p. 18]

among us with the vases, the fabrics, and all the curiosities of the far East. The centres of artistic culture have always been foci of symbolic exportation. Have there not been found even among the "treasures" of our mediaeval churches on the one hand, and among those of Chinese and Japanese temples on the other, masterpieces of Sassanian art, which themselves reproduce the symbols of classic paganism? [*1]

In olden times soldiers and sailors and travellers of every profession never left home without taking with them, under some form or another, their symbols and gods, a knowledge of which they thus spread in remote parts--bringing back from abroad others in return. Slavery, so largely known in the ancient world, must likewise have favoured the importation of symbols through the medium of those innumerable captives whom the fortune of war, or the chances of piracy, brought everywhere from the most distant regions, without depriving them of the memory of their gods and the forms of their worship. Lastly, coins have never failed to propagate through immense distances the symbols of the nations who put them into circulation. Gallic coins are nothing but counterfeits of the Greek coinage of Phillip or Alexander, and even in the tumuli of Scandinavia native coins have been found which roughly imitated the coinage of Bactria. [*2]

Now nothing is so contagious as a symbol unless perhaps a superstition; they are all the more so when combined together, as they generally were among the nations of antiquity, who scarcely

[p. 19]

adopted a symbol without attaching a talismanic value to it. Even to-day there are tourists who return from Naples with a coral horn, suspended, according to the sex of the traveller, from the bracelet, or the watchchain. Do they really believe that they have found a preservative against the evil eye in this Italian survival of an old Chaldaean symbol? To many of them it is assuredly only a local curiosity, a trinket, a souvenir of travel. But there are some amongst the number who let themselves be influenced, even unconsciously, by the Neapolitan superstition. "It can do no harm and may perhaps do good" they would be tempted to reply, in imitation of certain gamblers when bantered about their fetiches.

We have here an argument which is almost universal among polytheistic populations, where everyone thinks it safe to render homage not only to his own gods, but also to those of others, and even to unknown divinities, for do we ever know of whom we may have need in this world, or in the next? Egyptian scarabaei have been found by the thousand from Mesopotamia to Sardinia, wherever either the armies of the Pharaohs or the ships of the Phoenicians penetrated. Everywhere too in these latitudes there have been found native scarabaei made in imitation of those of Egypt, and reproducing with more or less exactness the symbols which the engravers of the valley of the Nile displayed so lavishly on the flat side of these amulets. It is thus again that, long before the diffusion of coins, the pottery, the jewels, the statuettes of Greece and of Etruria, furnished Central and Western Europe with divine types and symbolic figures.

 

Are there any indications which enable us to determine whether analogous symbols have been

[p. 20]

produced independently, or were derived from the same source?

Intricacy and singularity of forms when they exceed certain limits may justify the second of these propositions.

We may well suppose that in the desire to symbolize the strength or activity of superhuman beings, the Egyptians, the Aztecs, the Hindus, and the Chinese, have been separately led to enrich by several pairs of arms and legs, or even by several heads, certain figured representations of their superhuman beings. [*1] But does this hypothesis of an independent origin hold good when, for example, we see both on the ancient coins of Lycia and in the feudal coat of arms of the Isle of Man, a figure at once so precise as the triscele or triquetra, those three legs, joined together at the thigh, which radiate from a central point?

FIG. 4. TRISCeLE ON THE SHIELD OF ENCELADUS.
 (DE WITTE and LENORMANT. Monuments Ceramographiques, vol. i., pl. viii.)

There is nothing for it but to ask one's self how this ancient solar symbol can have passed from one country to the other. The intermediate stage may perhaps be found in Sicily, where the triscele was used in the coinage, from the time of Agathocles, to symbolize the configuration of the island with three promontories. As the Isle of Man also presents this geographical peculiarity, it is very possible that, at the commencement of the

[p. 21]

middle ages, a Norman baron, or even a Crusader, or simple adventurer, returning to his home after a sojourn in Sicily, applied to his native country a symbol still living in the classic traditions of the ancient Trinacria, save that in order to suit the age he added spurs to the heels. [*1]

 

We are familiar with the Double-headed Eagle of the old German empire, still blazoned on the armorial bearings of Austria and of Russia. What was the surprise of the English travellers Barth and Hamilton, when, in exploring Asia

Click to enlarge

FIG. 5. BAS-RELIEF OF EYUK.
 (PERROT and CHIPIEZ. L'Art dans l'antiquite, vol. iv., fig. 343.

[paragraph continues] Minor about fifty years ago, they discovered a Double-headed Eagle of the same type sculptured in the midst of religious scenes on Pterian bas-reliefs dating back to the civilisation of the Hittites?

[p. 22]

It is difficult to admit that, on both sides, there was conceived spontaneously, on identical lines, a representation of the eagle so contrary to the laws of nature. M. de Longperier has solved the enigma by reminding us that it was only about 1345 that the Eagle with Two Heads replaced the monocephalous one on the armorial bearings of the Western Empire. It would seem to have been Flemish princes who, during the Crusades, appropriated the device from the coins and standards of the Turkomans, then the masters of Asia Minor. The latter had adopted it as the symbol of omnipotence, perhaps the hamka, the fabulous bird of Moslem tradition, which carries off the buffalo and the elephant, as the kite carries off the mouse. "Thus," observes M. Perrot, "there would seem to have been transplanted into our modern Europe a symbol belonging originally to an Asiatic creed of the highest antiquity; and by a singular turn of fortune the Turks saw, at Belgrade and at Lepanto, their advance towards the West barred by that same eagle which had conducted them triumphantly along the banks of the Euphrates and the shores of the Bosphorus." [*1]

Perchance the Turkomans themselves had borrowed this symbol from the sculptures carved by their mysterious predecessors on the rocks of Eyuk and of Iasili-Kaia. But it is equally possible that they acquired it through the medium of the Persians. We find in the collection of M. de Gobineau an intaglio, attributed by him to the time of the Arsacidae, on which is engraved the traditional type of the Double-headed Eagle holding, as at Eyuk, a hare in each claw.

[p. 23]

M. de Longperier observes that if the stem of certain ferns (Pteris aquilina) be cut transversely a fairly accurate image of the Double-headed Eagle

FIG. 6. ARSACIAN INTAGLIO.
 (Revue Archeologique of 1894, vol. xxvii., pl. v., No. 391.

is obtained. Now the fern is named in Greek pteris or pteria, as is the province where the bas-reliefs of Eyuk are found. The learned archaeologist wondered if it was not this similarity which caused the Double-headed Eagle to be chosen as the symbol of Pteria: [*1] but we know now that the bas-reliefs in question date from a period far earlier than that of the appearance of the Greeks in this part of the world, and, besides, it is probable that the Greeks had given a name to the fern before knowing Pteria. The most that can be admitted is that the resemblance of the Hittite symbol to the bicephalous figure obtained from the fern led the Greeks to name the country after the plant.

The Greeks, whom we have seen adopting as a symbol of victory the figure of an eagle holding a serpent between its talons, sometimes replaced the serpent by a hare which corresponded with the Hittite scheme. Only they rejected anything monstrous that the latter might offer, and contented themselves with faithfully copying nature. [*2] India on the contrary seems to have accepted without hesitation the bicephalous type which Persia probably transmitted to it. We there find the Double-headed Eagle on ancient coins, where

[p. 24]

it holds an elephant instead of a hare, not only in each talon, but also in each beak. Moor saw in this a representation of Garuda the solar Eagle which Vishnu rode. In any case we here draw singularly near the hamka of the Turks; and it may even be that the latter derived their legend of the fabulous bird from some representation of this kind, where the part of the hare was taken by an elephant, or buffalo.

FIG. 7. ANCIENT INDIAN COIN.
 (MOOR. Hindoo Pantheon, pl. 103, fig. 3.)

It cannot, however, be said that Greece had nothing to do with the production of this emblem.

M. Clermont-Ganneau has shown how, in the popular iconography, complex monsters were frequently produced by a false interpretation of groups formed of separate individuals. There is, for example, an image of Phoenician origin which shows us Orthros in the form of two dogs distinctly apart. "Hellenic image makers," he goes on to say, "unite the two animals, while fable goes still further and endows the imaginary creature with a third head which it does not always possess in ancient art." [*1] Thus again the Chimaera originates in the group, so widespread in Lycian art, of a lion devouring a goat; the two animals having been taken for one by the Greek copyist. In the same manner the triple Geryon slain by Herakles owes its existence to a wrong interpretation of the scene, taken originally from Egypt, in which a king is seen raising his club as if to strike three barbarians, who are grouped in such a manner as to give the

[p. 25]

illusion of a single body with three heads, six arms, and six legs.

I had long since surmised a similar origin in the Double-headed Eagle, when, turning over once more the pages of Schliemann's Mykenae, I discovered the solution of the problem in some golden fibulae dug up by the famous archaeologist among the tombs of the ancient Mycenae (fig. 8 and 9). We there find two eagles, as Schliemann says, "leaning against each other with their whole bodies and even with their claws while turning their heads in opposite directions."

At Eyuk the two eagles are fused in one. In this instance it is not Greek mythology which has clumsily interpreted a Phoenician image, but the Asiatic sculptor who has misunderstood the real meaning of the Mycenian image.

When, therefore, the Double-headed Eagle changed sides in the thirteenth century of our era, during the struggle which has waged for more than thirty centuries between Europe and Asia, it did nothing else than return, after many wanderings, to its original home.

         	

      	

     
   FIG. 8, 9. JEWELS FROM MYKENae.
 (SCHLIEMANN, Mykenae.)

I will cite yet another symbol, come from afar, the Semitic origin of which is not to be gainsaid; even when we cannot identify all the stages of the route it followed in order to reach us.

[p. 26]

Christian symbolism has often represented God the Father, or Providence, "the Hand of God," by a hand emerging from a cloud. In some of these figures the finger-tips emit rays of light, "as if it were a living sun," observes M. Didron in his Histoire de Dieu; and a miniature of the ninth century in the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris, shows the Divine Hand in the middle of a nimbus encircling a Cross.

FIG. 10. THE HAND OF GOD.
 (DIDRON. Histoire de Dieu, p. 32.)

M. Gaidoz has compared this figure with certain Gallic amulets, the solar Wheels formed of four rays through which a hand passes. [*1]

Might not the two symbols have their prototype upon an Assyrian obelisk, where two hands are shown to issue from a solar Disk, the right open and exhibiting the palm, the left closed and holding a bow?

FIG. 11. ASSYRIAN SYMBOL.
 (G. RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies, vol. ii. p. 233.)

The representation of the open, or uplifted, hand, intended to typify the divine might, is, moreover,

[p. 27]

common to all branches of the Semitic race; it appears already amongst the Chaldaeans, for a cylinder, of Babylonian origin, exhibits an uplifted hand, which emerges from a pyramidal base, between persons in an attitude of adoration; this is precisely the type of our "Hand of Justice."

FIG. 12. CHALDaeAN CYLINDER.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xxvii., fig. 5.)

According to M. Francois Lenormant, the celebrated pyramid of Borsippa was called "the Temple of the Right Hand," and one of the names of Babylon was that of "the city of the Hand of Anu," or, what amounts to the same thing, of "the Celestial Hand." [*1]

The hand uplifted towards the sky is an oft repeated image on the ex voto of Carthage, and even at the present time it is figured on native houses in Palestine and Marocco to ward off evil spirits from the dwellers therein. [*2] Moreover this symbol passed also to India, where it decorates the

[p. 28]

pedestal of the Holy Tree in a bas-relief at Bharhut (see pl. iv., fig. h).

 

In default of adequate proofs drawn from singularity of form, identity of meaning and of use may afford strong presumptions in favour of the relationship of symbols.

There would be nothing surprising in Hindus and Egyptians having independently adopted, as a symbol of the sun, the lotus-flower, which every morning opens under the first rays of that luminary to close again at eventide, and which seems to spring up of itself on the surface of the placid waters. However, the hypothesis of a transmission becomes very plausible when, in the iconography of the two nations, we see this flower serving both as a support to the solar gods, Horus and Vishnu, and figuring in the hand of the goddesses associated with these gods, Hathor and Lukshmi, the Venuses of Egypt and India. Lastly, this plausibility becomes a sort of certainty when, on both sides, we find the lotus employed to interpret the same shade of thought in some indirect and subtle enough applications of solar symbolism.

It must indeed be remarked that on either side the Lotus-flower symbolizes less the sun itself than the solar Matrix, the mysterious sanctuary into which the sun retires every evening, there to acquire fresh life.

This miracle, which was believed to be renewed every day, was regarded as the origin of whatever exists. The Egyptians, who believed that the world had sprung from the liquid element, made the sun to proceed from a Lotus which one day had emerged from the primordial waters; [*1] this they rendered in their iconography by representing

[p. 29]

Horus as springing forth from a lotus-shaped calyx held by Hathor. [*1] In the same way the Indian sacred books constantly speak of gods as sprung from the lotus; it is on a golden Lotus that Brahma appears in the beginning of time, and it is with the different parts of this plant that he created the world. [*2] A Hindu legend, related by Father Vincenzo de Santa Catarina, states that Brahma keeps watch six months of the year and sleeps the other six in a Lotus-flower of extraordinary size and beauty. [*3]

Hence a fresh enlargement given to the figurative meaning of the lotus. The symbol of solar renascence, it became, with the Egyptians, the symbol of human renascence and, generally, of life in its eternal and unceasingly renewed essence. On a sarcophagus in the Louvre there is depicted a scarabaeus emerging from a Lotus between Isis and Nephthys in their characteristic attitude of guardians and protectresses of the dead. [*4] Thus were represented both the sun and the deceased passing through the tomb to renew their existence in the luminous fields of space. The lotus was even adopted with this signification in the funeral symbolism of Europe. It is met with again, not in the Greek traditions relating to the Lotophagi, those fabulous people who partook of the lotus in order to forget life and its troubles, but even in the inscriptions on tombstones which are met with, dating from the latter centuries of Paganism, from Libya to Belgium. [*5]

Renascence has but few attractions for the}

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] Brahmans, and still fewer for the Bhuddists. The latter adopted the ancient Flower of Life but to symbolize, according to their different schools, nature in the sum of her manifestations--the eternally active matter--the innumerable worlds which fill space--the Buddha dwelling in each of them--lastly, the teaching of the Master, that is to say, the means of escaping from that chain of causes and effects which engenders personal existence. It is thus that they carried to the confines of Asia the Lotus of the Good Law; and even to-day in the Himalayas there is no valley so remote that the traveller does not hear everywhere on his approach, as an utterance of sanctification and of welcome, the mystic formula: om mani padmi om,--"Oh! the Jewel in the Lotus."

However, popular traditions and engraved monuments would suffice to remind us of the ties which unite the Lotus of Buddhism to that of Egypt. A legend relates that, when the Buddhisattva appears, a miraculous Lotus springs out of the earth, and he seats himself thereon, and takes in all the worlds at a glance. [*1] Buddha, besides, is everywhere represented seated on the Lotus-flower like Vishnu and Horus. It is perhaps not impossible to fix the intermediate stages of this symbolism. The Lotus passed from Egypt to the monuments of Phoenicia and, towards the eighth century before our era, to those of Assyria, [*2] which in their turn transmitted it to Persia. Thus, in the sculptures of Phoenicia goddesses are found who hold in the hand a Lotus-flower, and, in the Sassanian bas-reliefs at Tagh-i-Bostan, the solar god Mithras stands upon a

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Lotus-flower. [*1] Lastly, among the Mesopotamians and the Persians it is not uncommon to find the Lotus blossoming on shrubs in which may be recognized either the Sacred Tree of the Semitic religions, or the Iranian tree which secretes the Elixir of Immortality. [*2]

Nowadays the beautiful rose-blossomed lotus, Nymphaea Nelumbo, observed on the monuments of Egypt, no longer grows in that country in its wild state, but by a curious coincidence, it has remained in the flora, as in the symbolism, of India. [*3]

FIG. 13. CAVES OF KANERKI.
 (FERGUSSON and BURGESS. Cave Temples of India, pl. x., fig. 35.)

[paragraph continues] We may add that it has been imported from India to China and Japan, so that it is still one of the principal symbolical figures by which at the present day we recognize the sacred vases and other objects employed in religious services by the Buddhists of these countries. [*4]

Footnotes

^13:1 ALBERT REVILLE, Religions du Mexique, de l'Amerique centrale et du Perou. Paris, 1885.--It appears that in South America also the Cross was a wind-rose. A Belgian traveller, M. E. Peterken, relates that he saw in the Argentine Republic a monolith in the form of a Latin Cross, called by the natives "the Father of the four winds." (Congress of Americanists of 1877, Paris and Luxemburg, 1888. Vol. i. p. 57.)--In North America the Cross symbolizes both the sun and the sky. Among the Blackfeet Indians, according to Mrs. Murray Aynsley (Transactions of the Quatuor Coronati, vol. v. p. 82), it represents the "old man in the sun who rules the winds."

^14:1 a. Within a Disc in Assyrian bas-reliefs. J. MENANT, Pierres gravees de la Haute-Asie, Paris, 1886, vol. ii. p. 71.--b. Alternating with the radiated Disc, on ancient Indian coins. A. CUNNINGHAM, The Bhilsa Topes, pl. xxxi., figs. 8 and 9.--c. Surmounting the solar Disc, on a whorl, from Troy. SCHLIEMANN, Ilios, ville et pays des Troyens, Paris, 1885, No. 1954.--d. Sceptre in the hand of Apollo on a coin of Gallienus. VICT. DURUM, Histoire des Romains, Paris, 1885, vol. viii. p. 42--e. In a Mithriatic scene on an engraved stone. LAJARD, Introduction a l'etude du culte de Mithra, Atlas, pl. cii., fig. 7.--f. Above a lion, on a Gallic coin. ED. FLOUEST, Deux steles de Laraire, Paris, 1885, pl. xvii.--For the American solar Cross, see further on, fig. 29, the engraving on a shell found in the mounds of the Mississippi.

^14:2 The Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 67, et seq.

^15:1 Le culte de la croix avant Jesus-Christ, in the French periodical, le Correspondant of the 25th October, 1889.

^15:2 Le culte de la croix avant le christianisme, in La Science catholique of the 15th February, 1890, p. 163.

^16:1 Ezek. ix. 4-6.

^16:2 A. DE GUBERNATIS, Mythologie des Plantes. Paris, 1878, vol. i., p. 6.

^16:3 Religions du Mexique, etc., p. 91.

^16:4 A. KUHN, Herabkunft des Feuers. Berlin, 1889.--A Germanic tradition, related by M. Karl Blind, shows to what an extent the old Pagan beliefs have been fused, in the popular imagination, with the dogmas of Christianity. The Virgin Mary, in order to explain the mystery of her conception, says that "the Smith from above" threw the Hammer into her breast. (Antiquary, 1884, p. 200.)

^17:1 Particularly on the coins of Elis. (BARCLAY V. HEAD, Historia Numorum, p. 353.)

^17:2 Iliad, book xii., l. 200, et seq.

^17:3 ALB. REVILLE, Religions du Mexique, etc., p. 29.

^18:1 M. LOUIS GONSE, L'Art japonais, p. 143, draws particular attention to a Sassanian vase, decorated with winged horses recalling the Greek Pegasus, among the treasures in the temple of Horiouji at Nara.

^18:2 C. A. HOLMBOE, Traces de bouddhisme en Norvege. Paris, 1857, p. 30, el seq.

^20:1 Captain Becker saw once in Central Africa an idol with many heads; it was explained to him that the fetiche was able therefore to better detect criminals. La vie en Afrique. Bruxelles, 1888, vol. ii. p. 304.

^21:1 It is from the thirteenth century that the triscele figures in the coat-of-arms of the Isle of Man. According to a letter from Mr. John Newton, published in The Athenaeum of the 10th September, 1892, it had been introduced there by Alexander III. of Scotland, when that Prince took over the Island of Man from the Norwegians in 1266, he himself having become familiar with that emblem at the English Court during the reign of Henry III. This king had been appointed by the favour of Pope Innocent IV. the nominal sovereign of Sicily, with which country, however, his connection was but short-lived.--The triquetra is likewise met with in the armorial bearings [p. 22] of several noble families in England, Germany, Switzerland, and Poland. (MICHEL DE SMIGRODZKI. Geschichte der Suastika. Braunschwlig, 1890, pl. ii. fig. 155.)

^22:1 PERROT and CHIPIEZ. L'Art dans l'antiquite, vol. iv. p. 683.

^23:1 Revue archeologique of 1845, vol. ii. p. 82.

^23:2 The coins of Elis. (BARCLAY V. HEAD. Loc. cit.)

^24:1 CLERMONT-GANNEAU. L'imagerie phenicienne. Paris, vol. i. p. 15-19.

^26:1 H. GAIDOZ. Le dieu gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de la roue. Paris, 1886, p. 64.

^27:1 Gazette archeologique of; 1877, p. 31.

^27:2 PH. BERGER in the Gazette archeologique of 1876, pp. 119-120.--It is remarkable that certain of the aborigines of Australia attribute similar power to their chiefs' or ancestors' hands, which they detach from the corpse and carefully preserve in their tribe. An English traveller, Mr. Howitt, states that at the sight of an aurora australis all the Kurnai in the camp began to swing one of these dried hands towards the portent, shouting out, "Send it away! send it away! do not let it burn us up!" (Jour. Anthropological Institute. London, 1883-1884, p. 189.)

^28:1 G. MASPERO, in the Revue de l'histoire des religions, vol. xviii., 1889, p. 21.

^29:1 G. LAFAYE. Histoire des divinites d'Alexandrie hors de l'Egypte. Paris, 1884, p. 247.

^29:2 JAMES DARMESTETER. Essais orientaux. Paris,, 1883, p. 148.

^29:3 DE GUBERNATIS. Mythologie des plantes, vol. I. p. 206.

^29:4 This painting is reproduced by M. Ledrain in the Gazette archeologique of 1878, p. 192.

^29:5 See further fig. 16 and 17.

^30:1 SENART. La legende du Bouddha in the Journal asiatique. Paris, 1874, 347.

^30:2 At least this is the date assigned by Layard, who gives the epoch of the building of Khorsabad as the date of the first appearance of the Egyptian lotus in Assyria as a symbol or subject for ornament. (Nineveh and its Remains, vol. ii. p. 213.)

^31:1 FLANDIN and COSTE. Voyage en Perse, vol. i., pl. iii. and xiv.

^31:2 See further on, chap. iv.

^31:3 PERROT and CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite, vol. i. p. 578.

^31:4 MICHEL PALeOLOGUE. L'art chinois. Paris, 1887, p. 45.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

ON THE GAMMADION OR SWASTIKA.

I. Geographical distribution of the gammadion.--Different patterns of the gammadion.--Its common occurrence amongst all the nations of the Old World, with the exception of the Egyptians, the Phoenicians, the Mesopotamians, and the Persians.--The fylfot.--The swastika.

II. Previous interpretations of the gammadion.--Opinions of Messrs. George Birdwood, Alexander Cunningham, Waring, W. Schwartz, Emile Burnouf, R. P. Greg, Ludwig Muller, and others.

III. Probable meaning of the gammadion.--The gammadion a charm.--The gammadion symbolical of the solar movement, and, by analogy, of the heavenly bodies in general.--The arms of the gammadion are rays which move.--Connection between the tetrascele and the triscele.--Figures connected with the gammadion.--Equivalence of the gammadion and certain solar images.--The Three Steps of Vishnu.--Lunar tetrasceles.

IV. Cradle of the gammadion.--Was it conceived simultaneously in several places?--Uniformity of its meaning and use.--Discussion as to its Aryan or Pelasgic origin.--Information furnished by the "whorls" of Hissarlik and the prehistoric pottery of Northern Italy.--The question is archaeological, not ethnical.--Conclusions.

  

I. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE GAMMADION.

FIG. 14. GAMMADIONS

THE name gammadion is given to that form of cross whose extremities are bent back at right

[p. 33]

angles, as if to form four gammas joined together at the base (fig. 14).

It may be called a cross pattee when the bent parts end in a point so as to form a sort of foot (fig. 15a), and a cross with hooks when the arms after being bent a first time are again twisted either inwards (15b), or outwards (15c). Lastly, it takes the name of tetrascele when the arms are rounded off whilst curving backwards (15d).

FIG. 15. VARIETIES OF THE GAMMADION

With the exception of the solar Disk and the Greek Cross there are few symbolical marks so widely distributed.

Dr. Schliemann, exploring the debris of the towns piled upon the plateau of Hissarlik, beginning with the second or "burnt city," which the learned explorer identifies with the Ilium of Priam, [*1] found innumerable gammadions, especially amongst the decorations of those terra cotta disks which have been thought to be "whorls," and which served perhaps as ex voto. [*2] It likewise ornaments certain idols of feminine shape, which recall roughly the appearance of the Chaldaean Ishtar; in one of these statuettes, a leaden one, it occupies the centre of the triangle denoting the belly. [*3]

In Greece, as in Cyprus and at Rhodes, it first appears on that pottery with geometrical ornamentation which constitutes the second period of

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] Grecian ceramics; [*1] it then passes to those vases with decorations taken from living objects, whose appearance seems to coincide with the development of Phoenician influences on the shores of Greece. [*2]

It is seen on the archaic pottery of Cyprus, and of Rhodes, and of Athens, on both sides of the conventional Tree, so frequently reproduced on the inscribed monuments of Hither Asia between two monsters facing each other (see further on, pl. iv.). It appears on an Athenian vase in a burial scene, three times repeated in front of the funeral car. [*3] On a vase from Thera several gammadions are reproduced round an image of the Persian Artemis. [*4] At Mycenae it figures on ornaments collected during Dr. Schliemann's excavations. [*5] At Pergamus it adorns the balustrade of the portico which surrounded the temple of Athene, and at Orchomenus the sculptured roof of the so-called nuptial chamber in the palace of the Treasury. [*6] Lastly, when the introduction of money disclosed a new outlet for the symbolic forms of religion and of art, it became a favourite emblem in the coinage, not only of the Archipelago and of Greece Proper, but also of Macedon, Thrace, Crete, Lycia, and Paphlagonia.

From Corinth, where it figures amongst the most ancient mint marks, it passed to Syracuse under Timoleon, to be afterwards spread abroad on the

[p. 35]

coins of Sicily and of Magna Graecia. [*1] In Northern Italy it was known even before the advent of the Etruscans, for it has been met with on pottery dating from the terramare civilization. [*2] It appears also on the roof of those ossuaries, in the form of a hut, which reproduce on a small scale the wicker hovels of the people of that epoch. [*3] In the Villanova period it adorns vases with geometrical decorations found at Caere, Chiusi, Albano, and at Cumae, [*4] and when Etruria became accessible to oriental influences it appears on fibulae and other golden ornaments. [*5]

At a still later period it is found on the breasts of personages decorating the walls of a Samnite tomb near Capua; [*6] lastly it appears as a motif for decoration in the Roman mosaics. It is singular that at Rome itself it has not been met with on any monument prior to the third, or perhaps the fourth, century of our era. About that period the Christians of the Catacombs had no hesitation in including it amongst their representations of the Cross of Christ. Not only did they carve it upon the tombs, but they also used it to ornament the garments of certain priestly personages, such as the fossores, and even the tunic of the Good Shepherd. [*7] At Milan it forms a row of curved Crosses round the pulpit of St. Ambrose.

On the other hand, it appears to have been

[p. 36]

widely distributed throughout the provinces of the Roman empire, especially among the Celts, where in many cases it is difficult to decide whether it is connected with imported civilization, or with indigenous tradition. From Switzerland, and even from the Danubian countries, to the most remote parts of Great Britain, it has been found on vases, on metal plates, on fibulae, on sword belts, and on arms. [*1] In England it adorns fragments of mosaics collected from the ruins of several villas, [*2] as well as a funeral urn unearthed in a mound of the bronze age. [*3] In Gaul it is observed frequently enough on coins ranging from the third century B.C. to the third century of our era, and even later, for it is met with on a Merovingian piece. [*4] We may add that it already figures on fragments of pottery and even on terra cotta matrices found in a lacustrine city in Lake Bourget. [*5]

In Belgium, we meet with it at Estinnes (Hainault) and at Anthee (Province of Namur) in tile debris dating back to the Roman epoch. [*6] It is also seen repeated several times, in association with the Lotus-flower, among the inscriptions on tombstones discovered, some years ago, in the Belgo-Roman cemetery of Juslenville, near Pepinster (fig. 16).

An interesting discussion, arose in the Institut archeologique liegeois as to whether--in spite of the invocation D[iis] M[anibus]--the presence of the gammadion did not imply the Christian

[p. 37]

character of this sepulchral monument. [*1] To the arguments brought forward to refute this theory we may add that a sepulchral stele of an unquestionably

FIG. 16. TOMBSTONE FROM JUSLENVILLE
 (Institut archeologique liegeois, vol. x. (1870), pl. xiii.)

pagan character, discovered in Algeria, offers an analogous combination of two gammadions placed over a Wheel.

FIG. 17. LIBYAN SEPULCHRAL STELE.
 (Proceedings of the Soc. franc. de numism. et d'archeol., vol. ii., pl. iii. 3.)

The fact may be mentioned that in the middle of the Christian era, eleven or twelve centuries later, the gammadion reappears on a sepulchre in

[p. 38]

the same Belgian province. On a tombstone of the fourteenth century, discovered in 1871, during the construction of a tunnel at Huy, three personages are sculptured, one of whom is a priest clothed in a chasuble, and on this chasuble three bands of gammadions can be distinctly seen. [*1]

The gammadion, associated with the Wheel, as well as with the Thunderbolt, likewise adorns votive altars found, in England, and near the Pyrenees, on the site of Roman encampments. [*2]

FIG. 18. ALTAR IN THE TOULOUSE MUSEUM.
 (Reveu archeologique de 1880, vol. xl. p. 17.)

At Velaux, in the Bouches-du-Rhone department, there has been found the headless statue of a god sitting cross-legged, who bore on its breast a row of crocketed crosses surmounting another row of equilateral crosses. [*3]

In Ireland, however, and in Scotland, the gammadion seems really to have marked Christian sepulchres, for it is met with on tombstones associated with Latin Crosses. [*4]

The Rev. Charles Graves, Bishop of Limerick, has described an ogham stone found in an abandoned

[p. 39]

cemetery in Kerry, which he believes to belong to the sixth century; it bears an arrow between two gammadions. [*1]

The Anglo-Saxons gave to the gammadion the name of fylfot, from the Norse fiol (full, viel = "numerous"), and fot (foot). [*2] It has been observed on pottery and funeral urns of the bronze age in Silesia, in Pomerania, and the eastern islands of Denmark. In the following ages it is met with on ornaments, on sword-hilts, on golden brackets, on sculptured rocks, and on tombstones. [*3] Amongst the Scandinavians it ended by combining, doubtlessly

FIG. 19. CROSS ON A RUNIC STONE FROM SWEDEN.
 (LUDWIG MuLLER, p. 94, fig. a.)

under the influence of Christianity, with the Latin Cross.

In an old Danish church it ornaments baptismal fonts which date from the early times of Christianity. [*4] In Iceland, according to Mr. Hjaltalin, it is still in use at the present day as a magic sign. [*5]

Amongst the Slays and Finns it has not yet been found, save in a sporadic state, and about the period of their conversion to Christianity only. We may remark, by the way, that it is very difficult

[p. 40]

to determine the age and nationality of the terra cotta or bronze objects on which it has been observed in countries of mixed or superposed races, such as Hungary, Poland, Lithuania and Bohemia.

In the Caucasus, M. Chantre has met with it on ear-drops, ornamental plates, sword-hilts, and other objects found in burial-places dating back to the bronze period and the first iron age. [*1]

Amongst the Persians its presence has been pointed out on some Arsacian and Sassanian coins only. [*2]

The Hittites introduced it on a bas-relief at Ibriz, in Lycaonia, where it forms a border on the dress of a king, or priest, who offers up a sacrifice to a god. [*3]

The Phoenicians do not seem to have known or, at least, to have used it, except on some of the coins which they struck in Sicily in imitation of Greek pieces. A coin of Byzacium on which it is figured, near the head of Astarte, dates from the reign of Augustus. [*4]

It is not met with either in Egypt, in Assyria, or in Chaldaea.

In India it bears the name of swastika, when its arms are bent towards the right (fig. 14a), and sauwastika when they are turned in the other direction (fig. 14b). The word swastika is a derivative of swasti, which again comes from su = well, and the verb asti = it is; the expression would seem therefore to correspond with a Greek formula--ey esti, and, in fact, amongst the Hindus

[p. 41]

as amongst the Buddhists, its representation has always passed for a propitious sign. [*1]

The grammarian Panini mentions it as a character used for earmarking cattle. We see in the Ramayana that the ships of the fleet, on which Bharata embarked for Ceylon, bore, doubtlessly on their bows, the sign of the swastika. [*2] Passing now to inscribed monuments we find the gammadion on the bars of silver, shaped like dominos, which, in certain parts of India, preceded the use of money proper. [*3]

It even appears upon a coin of Krananda, which is held to be the oldest Indian coin, and which is

FIG. 20. ANCIENT INDIAN COIN.
 (Archaeological Survey of India, vol. x., pl. ii., fig. 8.)

likewise remarkable as exhibiting the first representation of the trisula. [*4]

Occurring frequently at the beginning and the end of the most ancient Buddhist inscriptions, several examples of it are to be seen on the Foot-Prints of Buddha sculptured at Amravati. [*5] The swastika represents, moreover, according to Buddhist tradition, the first of the sixty-five marks which distinguished the Master's feet, whilst the

[p. 42]

fourth is formed by the sauwastika, and the third by the nandyavarta, a kind of labyrinth, which, in the manner of the Greek meander, may be connected with the gammadion. [*1]

FIG. 21. THE NANDYAVARTA.

It must be observed that amongst the Jains, the gammadion is regarded as the emblem of Suparsva, the seventh of the twenty-four Tirthankaras, whilst the nandyavarta is that of the eighteenth. [*2]

Even at the present day, according to Mr. Taylor, the Hindus, at the time of the new year, paint a gammadion in red at the commencement of their account books, and, in their weddings and other ceremonies, they sketch it in flour on the floors of their houses. [*3] It also figures at the end of manuscripts of a recent period, at least under a form which, according to M. Kern, is a development of the tetrascele. [*4]

The gammadion has been likewise preserved to the present time amongst the Buddhists of Tibet, where the women make use of it in the ornamentation of their skirts, and where it is placed on the

[p. 43]

breasts of the dead. [*1] In China--where it bears the name of ouan--and in Japan it adorns vases, caskets, and the representations of divinities, as may be seen in the Musee Guimet at Paris; it is even figured upon the breasts of certain statues of Buddha and the Buddhisattvas, where, according to M. Paleologue, it would seem to symbolize the heart. [*2] According to another interpretation, given by the Annamite bonzes, it might be the cicatrice of a spear-thrust received by Buddha; but these bonzes, according to M. G. Dumoutier, continue to venerate this symbol without understanding it. [*3]

In the Woolwich Arsenal the gammadion may be seen upon a cannon captured at the Taku forts by the English. According to M. G. Dumoutier it is nothing else than the ancient Chinese character che, which implies the idea of perfection, of excellence, and would seem to signify the renewal and the endless duration of life. [*4] In Japan, according to M. de Milloue, it represents the number 10,000, which symbolizes that which is infinite, perfect, excellent, and is employed as a sign of felicity. [*5] A statue of the Buddhisattva Jiso, in the Musee Guimet, rests upon a pedestal ornamented with swastikas.

Lastly let us conclude this long recital, which is in danger of becoming tedious without hope of being complete, by mentioning the presence of the gammadion in Africa, on bronzes brought from Coomassie by the last English Ashantee

[p. 44]

expedition;  in South America, on a calabash from the Lenguas tribe; in North America, on pottery from the mounds and from Yucatan, as also on the rattles made from a gourd which the Pueblos Indians use in their religious dances. 

Footnotes

^33:1 SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, ville et pays des Troyens. Paris, 1885, pp. 507 et seq.

^33:2 SCHLIEMANN. Troja. London, 1884, p. 39.--See below fig. 22, 23a, 30, also plate ii., etc.

^33:3 SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, fig. 226. See also Troja (English ed.) on an "owl headed" vase of the most recent prehistoric city.

^34:1 ALB. DUMONT. Peintures ceramiques de la Grece propre. Paris, 1873, vol. i., pl. xv., fig. 17.

^34:2 PERROT and CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite. Paris, 1885, vol. iii., figs. 513, 515, 518.

^34:3 VICTOR DURUY. Histoire des Grecs. Paris, 1888, vol. i., fig. 729.

^34:4 DAREMBERG and SAGLIO. Dictionnaire des antiquites des grecques et romaines. Fasc. 12. Paris, 1888. S. v. Diane, p. 153, fig. 2389.

^34:5 SCHLIEMANN. Mycenes. Paris, 1879, P. 193.

^34:6 SCHLIEMANN. Troja, p. 123.

^35:1 Numismatic Chronicle. London, vol. viii. (3rd series), p. 103.

^35:2 DE MORTILLET. Musee prehistorique, pl. xcix.

^35:3 J. MARTHA. Archeologie etrusque et romaine, fig. 1.

^35:4 ALEXANDRE BERTRAND. Archeologie celtique et gauloise. Paris, 2nd ed., 1889, figs. 65-68.

^35:5 ALEXANDRE BERTRAND. La Gaule avant les Gaulois. Paris, 1884, fig. 77.

^35:6 TH. ROLLER. Les catacombes de Rome. Paris, vol. ii. p. 32.

^35:7 TH. ROLLER. Les catacombes de Rome, vol. i., pl. vi. 1; pl. x., 29, 30, 31; pl. xxxxii., 15; pl. xxxix., i 9; vol. ii., pl. lv., 2; pl. lxxxviii., 13, and pl. xciv., 2.

^36:1 MORTILLET. Musee prehistorique, pl. xciii., xcviii. and c.

^36:2 ROB. SEWELL, in the Jour. Rl. As. Soc., vol. xviii. (new series), p. 383.

^36:3 DE MORTILLET. Le signe de la croix avant le christianisme. Paris, 1866, fig. 76.

^36:4 LELEWEL. Numismatique du moyen age. Atlas, pl. iv., No. 57.

^36:5 ERN. CHANTRE. L'age du Bronze. Paris, 1876, 2nd part, pp. 194, 195.

^36:6 Bulletins de l'Institut archeologique liegeois, vol. x. p. 106.

^37:1 It was maintained that these letters signified:--DoMus aeterna or D[eo] M[aximo], so that instead of reading, Diis manibus Primus Marci Filius, M. Buckens, formerly Professor at the Academy of the Fine Arts at Liege, did not hesitate, by a free interpretation of the gammadions, the floral ornamentation, the triangle, the niche, and the lotus leaves, to translate them textually as follows: "The last abode of the son of Marcus in Jesus Christ, God, baptized in the name of the Father and of the Holy Ghost"! (Bulletins de l'Institut archeologique liegeois, vol. x. (1870), p. 55.)

^38:1 The stone is now in the "Musee du Parc du Cinquantenaire" at Brussels.

^38:2 LUD. MuLLER. Det saakaldte Hagekors. Copenhagen, 1877, pp. 21, 22.

^38:3 ALEX. BERTRAND. L'autel de Saintes et les triades gauloises, in the Revue archeologique of 1880, vol. xxxix. p. 343

^38:4 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., p. 114.

^39:1 Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxvii., Feb., 1879. See also the same vol., April, 1879, On the Croix gammee or Swastika.

^39:2 R. P. GREG. The Fylfot and Swastika, in Archaeologia. London, vol. xlviii., part ii., 1885, p. 298.

^39:3 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., passim.--R. P. GREG. Loc. cit., pl. xix., fig. 27, 31, 32, 33.--C. A. HOLMBOE. Traces du bouddhisme en Norvege. Paris, 1857, pp. 34 et seq.

^39:4 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., p. 113.

^39:5 Nineteenth Century for June, 1879, p. 1098.

^40:1 ERN. CHANTRE. Recherches archeologiques dans le Caucase. Paris, 1886, vol. ii., atlas, pl. xi., xv., etc.

^40:2 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., fig. 3.

^40:3 PERROT and CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite, vol. iv., fig. 354.

^40:4 Numismatique de l'ancienne Afrique. Copenhagen, 1860-1862, vol. ii. p. 40, No. 4.

^41:1 See Prof. Max Muller's letter, in SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, pp. 517-521.

^41:2 Ramayana.

^41:3 EDW. B. THOMAS. The early Indian Coinage, in the Numismatic Chronicle, vol. iv. (new series), pl. xi.

^41:4 See our fig. 146.

^41:5 JAMES FERGUSSON. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. London. Murray, 1876, p, 184. See our title-page.

^42:1 EUG. BURNOUF. Le Lotus de la Bonne-Loi. Paris, 1852, p. 626.

^42:2 COLEBROOKE. Observations on the Jainas, vol. ix., Asiatic Researches, p. 308.

^42:3 EUG. BURNOUF. Op. cit., p. 626.

^42:4 KERN:. Der Buddhismus. Leipzig, 1884, vol. ii. p. 239, note 3.--Colebrooke gives to this sign the name of srivatsa, and makes it out to be the distinctive mark of the tenth Tirthankara of the Jains. M. Schwartz has compared it to the four-leaved clover, which also "brings luck."

^43:1 Journal Asiatique, 2nd series, vol. iv. p. 245. PALLAS. Samlungen historischer Nachrichten uber die mongolischen Volkerschaften, vol. i. p. 277.

^43:2 MICHEL PALeOLOGUE. L'Art chinois, p. 47.

^43:3 G. DUMOUTIER. Les Symboles, les Emblemes et les Accessoires du culte chez les Annamites. Paris, 1891, pp. 19-20.

^43:4 G. DUMOUTIER. Le svastika et la roue solaire en Chine, in the Revue d'Ethnographie. Paris, 1885, p. 331.

^43:5 DE MILLOUe. Le svastika, in the Bulletins de la Societe d'Anthropologie of Lyons, 1881, v. i. pp. 191 et seq.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. DIFFERENT INTERPRETATIONS OF THE GAMMADION.

That a great number of gammadions have been mere ornaments, monetary signs, or trade-marks, is a fact which it would be idle to dispute. But the uses which have been made of this figure in all the countries which I have just instanced, the nature of the symbols with which it is found associated, its constant presence on altars, tombstones, sepulchral urns, idols, and priestly vestments, besides the testimony of written documents and popular superstitions, afford more than sufficient proof that in Europe as in Asia it partook everywhere of the nature of the amulet, the talisman, and the phylactery. [*3] Moreover, for the gammadion to have thus become a charm, it must first of all have been brought into contact with a being, or a phenomenon, more or less concrete and distinct, invested, rightly or wrongly, with some sort of influence on the destiny of mankind. Might it not be possible to rind out this original meaning of the gammadion by laying stress on the indications provided by the monuments themselves?

[p. 45]

Many archaeologists have thought so, whilst however arriving at different solutions. There is hardly a symbol which has given rise to more varied --not even the trisula of the Buddhists, which is saying a great deal.

I will confine myself to mentioning the opinion of those who have confounded the gammadion with the crux ansata of the Egyptians, the tau of the Phoenicians, the vajra of India, the Hammer of Thor, or the Arrow of Perkun--all of which are signs having a form and meaning too clearly defined for this identification to be maintained without corroborative evidence. If even the gammadion ever replaced one of them--as in the Catacombs it sometimes takes the place of the Cross of Christ--it only did so as a substitute, as the symbol of a symbol.

Several writers have ascribed a phallic import to the gammadion, some, like M. J. Hoffman, seeing therein the union of the male with the female principle; [*1] others, as Sir George Birdwood, believing that they recognize in it especially the symbol of the female sex. [*2] The latter supposition would seem to be sufficiently justified by the position assigned to the gammadion on some female idols from the Troad, as also by its association with the image of certain goddesses, the Persian Artemis, Here, Demeter, Astarte. But the gammadion may very well have furnished a symbol of fecundity, as elsewhere a common symbol of prosperity and of salvation, without therefore being necessarily a phallic sign. In the one case, as in the other, the point in question is to ascertain if this is not a secondary meaning, connected with a less abstract conception.

General Cunningham believes that he found in

[p. 46]

the swastika a Pali monogram formed of four characters corresponding to our letters S. U. T. I. [*1] But Professor Max Muller maintains that the likeness is hardly striking, and seems to be purely accidental. [*2] In any case, the explanation would apply only to the Indian gammadion; an objection which may likewise be urged against Mr. Frederic Pincott's hypothesis, that the swastika is the emblem of the four castes united in the same symbolical combination. [*3]

Waring held that the gammadion was a figurative  of water, on account of its resemblance to the meander, and also of its frequent occurrence in combination with the wavy line, a well-known symbol for water in motion. [*4] However, as we shall see further on, this combination is far from being invariable, and certainly the form of the gammadion has, in itself, nothing which conjures up the idea of running water, or of rain.

Others have discerned in it a symbol of the storm, or lightning, because it can be separated into two zigzags or interlaced Z's. W. Schwartz, who, with his usual ability, has upheld this theory,--which conforms with his general views on the meteorological origin of myths and symbols,--draws attention to the numerous points of contact existing between the lightning and the different forms of the Cross not only in the symbolism of many religions, but also in popular language. [*5] This agrees with the practice, so common in Catholic countries, of making the sign of the Cross, on the appearance of lightning, to prevent being

[p. 47]

struck, as also with the custom spread amongst our peasantry, especially in Flemish Brabant, of tracing a Cross in whitewash on their houses to preserve them from the same calamity. But it may be questioned if these customs are not owing to the general talismanic value which the Christian symbol receives in the popular beliefs: the sign of the Cross, in fact, is reputed to drive away evil spirits and to call in divine protection. As for Crosses painted on the outer walls, they seem to be held of use not only against lightning, but also against fires, epidemics amongst cattle, and, generally, against all the unforeseen accidents which threaten the dwelling-place.

In any case there is here no question of the gammadion, and the popular talk about the flashes of lightning "which cross" is not sufficient to account for the derivation of the form of the fylfot. I am well aware that amongst the ancient Germans, and even amongst the Celts, the gammadion is sometimes met side by side with the symbols of thunder on weapons, amulets, ornaments, and even on altars. But these objects present also to our view the image of the Disk, the Crescent, the triscele, and many other symbolical figures. [*1] It would seem as if the engraver had simply wished to bring together all the symbols possessing, to his knowledge, a phylacteric, or talismanic character; by a process of reasoning analogous to that which, in the latter period of Greek paganism, prompted the manufacture of pantheian figures.

M. Emile Burnouf makes the gammadion the symbol of fire, or rather of the mystical twofold arani, that is to say of the fire-drill, which was used to produce fire amongst the early Aryans. "This sign," he writes, "represents the two pieces of wood forming the arani, whose extremities were

[p. 48]

curved, or else enlarged, so that they could be firmly kept in place by four nails. At the point where they joined there was a small hole in which was placed the piece of wood, shaped like a spear, whose violent rotation, produced by whipping, made Agni to appear." [*1]

Up till now it has been by no means proved that the lower part of the arani ever had the form of the swastika or even of the Cross. On the contrary there are reasons for supposing that it was usually a mere log of wood in which the point of the pramantha was made to turn. [*2] Perhaps, in some cases, it had a circular form; the fire was then produced by making it revolve round a nave. If, as has been maintained, it really assumed, in some Indian temples, the appearance of the gammadion, it had doubtlessly been given this form to imitate the swastika. [*3] As for the four points which are placed between the arms of certain gammadions, there is nothing to prove that they represent nails (see our plate II., litt. B, Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23), and in most cases they do not even touch the branches of the cross which, according to M. Burnouf, they are intended to fasten. Schliemann, who seems not unwilling to subscribe to M. Emile Burnouf's theory, observes that in Troas the gammadion accompanies the linear drawings of burning altars, [*4] but--admitting that these are altars--can they not blaze in the honour of some other god than the fire itself? Further, nothing prevents us from supposing that the sun itself has been represented as a blazing altar.

[p. 49]

In support of M. Burnouf's theory, attention might further be called to the fact that the swastika with branches turned towards the right is, amongst the Hindus, accounted of the feminine gender, which would make it agree with the symbolism of the arani. But it must be remarked that the swastika turned in the other direction passes as masculine. Moreover, according to Sir George Birdwood, it is a common custom in modern India to divide into the two sexes all objects occurring in interdependent pairs.

Mr. R.-P. Greg has written, in the Memoirs published by the Society of Antiquaries, London, a very interesting study on the gammadion, in which, whilst striving to deal impartially with the other explanations of this sign, he contends it is especially a symbol of the air, or rather of the god who rules the phenomena of the atmosphere, Indra with the Hindus, Thor with the ancient Germans and the Scandinavians, Perkun with the Slays, Zeus with the Pelasgians and Greeks, Jupiter tonans and pluvius with the Latin race. [*1] Unfortunately, the proofs which he adduces are neither numerous nor conclusive. The fact that in India the bull is sacred to Indra, and that on certain monetary ingots the gammadion surmounts an image of this animal, is hardly sufficient to prove that the swastika is a symbol of Indra. [*2] It is likewise difficult to admit that the gammadion represents the god of the atmosphere amongst the Greeks because on some pottery from Cyprus there are gammadions which recall the image of birds flying in the air.

The above-named writer makes much of the fact that on many incised monuments the gammadion is placed above images representing the earth,

[p. 50]

or terrestrial creatures, and below other images symbolizing the sky, or the sun. But this arrangement is far from being invariable or even predominant. Frequently the gammadion is found on the same level with astronomical symbols; sometimes even it occupies the upper place. Mr. Greg, it is true, gets over the difficulty by asserting that in this case it must represent the god of the ether in the capacity of supreme God. [*1]

The only example I am acquainted with of a gammadion consecrated to Zeus, or to Jupiter, is on a votive altar, where it is incised above the letters I. O. M. [*2] But this is a Celto-Roman altar, erected, to all appearance, by Dacians garrisoned in Ambloganna, a town in Great Britain; that is to say, that here again we may be in the presence of a strange god, assimilated to the supreme divinity of the empire, the Jupiter Optimus Maximus of the Romans. Moreover, the gammadion is here flanked by two four-rayed Wheels, symbols which M. Gaidoz has clearly proved to have been, amongst the Gauls, of a solar character. [*3]

Lastly, Ludvig Muller, Percy Gardner, S. Beal, Edward B. Thomas, Max Muller, H. Gaidoz, and others, have succeeded, by their studies of Hindu, Greek, Celtic, and ancient German monuments, in establishing the fact that the gammadion has been, among all these nations a symbolical representation of the sun, or of a solar god. I should like here to sum up the respective conclusions of these authors, setting forth, at the same time, the other reasons which have led me, not only to accept, but also to develop their interpretation. This attempt may perhaps be the less superfluous since, judging by the comparatively recent works of M. M. Greg

[p. 51]

and Schwartz, the solar, or even the astronomical character of the gammadion is not yet beyond dispute.

Footnotes

^44:1 SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, figs. 248, 249, and 250.

^44:2 T. LAMY. Le svastika et la roue solaire en Amerique, in the Revue d'Ethnographie. Paris, 1885, p. 15.

^44:3 M. Michel de Smigrodzki, who in his recent essay, Zur Geschichte der Svastika (Braunschwig, 1890, extracted from the Archiv fur Anthropologie), has classified chronologically a considerable number of gammadions belonging to monuments of the most different periods and nations, has made it his special study to show that this cross has everywhere had a symbolical, and not merely an ornamental value.

^45:1 Das Buddha Pantheon von Nippon, quoted by M. LUDVIG MuLLER, Op. cit., p. 103.

^45:2 Jour. R. As. Soc., v. xviii. (n. s.), p. 408.

^46:1 The Bhilsa Topes. London, 1884, p. 386.

^46:2 Letter to Schliemann in Ilios, p. 520.

^46:3 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xix. (n.s.), p. 245.

^46:4 Ceramic Art in Remote Ages. London, 1875, p. 13, et seq.

^46:5 Der Blitz als geometrisches Gebild, in the Jubilaumschrift der Posener Naturwissenchaft. Verein, 1887, pp. 221-234.

^47:1 R. P. GREG, in Archaeologia, 1885, pl. xix. fig. 31, 32, 23; pl. xx., fig. 2.

^48:1 EMILE BURNOUF. La science des Religions. Paris, 1876, p. 240.

^48:2 J. C. NESFIELD. Mythology of Fire in the Calcutta Review of April, 1884, p. 375.

^48:3 It is thus the Buddhists have even erected stoupas in the form of the gammadion. (Cf. SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, p. 520.)

^48:4 SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, figs. 1872, 1911, 1914, 1916.

^49:1 R.-P. GREG. The Fylfot and Swastika, in Archaeologia, 1885, p. 293 et seq.

^49:2 ID., ibid., p. 302.

^50:1 R.-P. GREG. Loc. cit., pp. 307 and 309.

^50:2 LUDVIG MuLLER. Op. cit., fig. 29.

^50:3 H. GAIDOZ. Le dieu gaulois du Soleil et le symbolisme de la roue. Paris, 1886.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. PROBABLE MEANING OF THE GAMMADION.

We have seen that most nations represented the sun by a circle. Some, also, have depicted it by a cruciform sign, more particularly the Assyrians, the Hindus, the Greeks, the Celts, etc. (see fig. 2).

This symbolism doubtlessly renders the idea of the solar radiation in the four directions of space. But the sun does not restrict itself to darting its rays in all directions, it seems, further, animated by a circular movement from east to west. The latter action may have been symbolized, sometimes by changing the Disk into a Wheel, sometimes by adding to the four extremities of the solar Cross feet, or broken lines, usually turned in the same direction.

Sometimes the curve of the rays was rounded off, perhaps either to accentuate still further the idea of a rotary motion by a figure borrowed from the elementary laws of mechanics, or else by an effect of that tendency, which, in primitive writings, has everywhere substituted the cursive for the angular. Thus was obtained the tetrascele (cf. fig. 15d), which, as I have said above, is simply a variety of the gammadion.

M. Gaidoz has defined the gammadion as a graphic doublet of the Wheel. [*1] The expression is exact, and is even a very happy one, provided it means, not that the gammadion is derived from the Wheel by the suppression of a part of the felloe, but that it is, like the Wheel, a symbolical representation of the solar movement.

For the very reason that the gammadion represents the sun in its apparent course it has readily

[p. 52]

become a symbol of prosperity, of fecundity, of blessing, and--with the help of superstition--it has everywhere received the meaning of a charm, as in India the very name swastika implies.

Moreover, after having figured the sun in motion, it may have become a symbol of the astronomical movement in general, applied to certain celestial bodies, the moon, for example--or even to everything which seems to move of itself, the air, water, lightning, fire--in as far as it really served as a sign of these different phenomena, which fact has still to be made good. [*1]--This, in brief, is the whole theory of the gammadion.

This theory is not the outcome of any a priori reasoning; it is founded on the following considerations:

A. The form of the gammadion.

B. The connection between the tetrascele and triscele.

C. The association of the gammadion with the images, symbols, and divinities of the sun.

D. The part it plays in certain symbolical combinations, where it sometimes accompanies and sometimes replaces the representation of the solar Disk.

A. The branches of the gammadion are rays in motion.

To be convinced of this, it is only necessary to cast one's eyes on the manner in which, at all times, the idea of solar movement has been graphically expressed (fig. 22).

The first of these figures (a) is an ancient fibula found in Italy. At the top is seen a Disk from which radiate small rays, bent at right angles; these rays seem to have been modelled on the

[p. 53]

branches of the gammadions sketched immediately beneath.

The second (b) is taken from the "whorls" of Troy. Crooked rays, turned towards the right, alternate with straight and undulating rays, all of which proceed from the same Disk.

The third (c) comes from a reliquary of the

FIG. 22. [*1]

thirteenth century, on which it forms a pendant to the lunar crescent, with an image of Christ between them. That this is a representation of the solar Disk results not only from its parallelism with the Crescent, but also from the fact that on a number of mediaeval Christian monuments Christ is thus represented between the sun and moon. [*2]

The same image--a Disk with five inflected rays--is met with on coins of Macedon (d), where it alternates sometimes with the tetrascele (e).

Mr. Samuel Beal, who distinguishes two parts in the gammadion,--an equilateral cross and four hooks,--thinks that the purpose of the former is to symbolize the earth; as for the hooks, they might serve to indicate the direction of the solar movement round our planet. [*3] But the figures which

[p. 54]

we have reproduced here give more than sufficient proof that the arms of the gammadion, if they are solar rays, are so in their whole length; besides, the Disk which sometimes forms their point of intersection is certainly an image of the sun; lastly, there is no indication that, either in classic antiquity, or in India, the earth was ever symbolized by an equilateral cross.

B. The triscele, formed by the same process as the tetraskele, was an undeniable representation of the solar movement.

This assertion is especially obvious in the case of triskeles formed of three legs bent, as in the

FIG. 23. VARIETIES OF THE TRISCeLE. [*1]

act of running, so frequently seen on coins of Asia Minor.

On Celtiberian coins the face of the sun appears between the legs. The same combination is found, above the image of a bull, on a votive stele of Carthage, reproduced by Gesenius. [*2]

Is it possible to better interpret the idea of motion, and of its application to the image of the sun?

I will further instance the coins of Aspendus, in Pamphylia, where the three legs, ranged round a

[p. 55]

central disk, are literally combined with animal representations of the sun, the eagle, the wild boar, and the lion. [*1] Lastly, on certain coins of Syracuse the triscele permutes with the solar Disk above the quadriga and the winged horse. [*2]

Moreover, the connection between the triscele and the tetrascele is manifest from their very shape. The transition from one to the other is visible on the "whorls" of Troy as well as on coins of Macedon and Lycia.

FIG. 24. SYMBOLS ON LYCIAN COINS.
 (LUDVIG MuLLER, figs. 48 and 49.)

C. The images oftenest associated with the gammadion are representations of the sun and the solar divinities.

Greek coins often show, side by side with the gammadion, the head of Apollo, or the reproduction of his attributes. On a piece from Damastion, in Epirus, the gammadion is engraved between the supports of the Delphic tripod; [*3] on painted vases from Rhodes and Athens it figures beside the omphalos. [*4] A crater in the Museum of Ancient Art in Vienna shows an image of Apollo bearing it on his breast (see our Plate I.); on a vase from Melos it precedes the chariot of the god. [*5] Even amongst the Gauls it accompanies, on coins, the laurelled and nimbus-encompassed head of

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Apollo Belenus. [*1] To be sure, it is also found on Greek medals associated with the images of Dionysos, Hercules, Hermes, and of several goddesses. But, in addition to the explanations of this peculiarity which I have given, it must be borne in mind how readily polytheistic nations and cities assign to their principal god the emblems as well as the attributes of other divinities--witness, in classic antiquity, the use of the Caduceus, the Thunderbolt, the Cornucopia, and so forth.

Amongst the symbols accompanying the gammadion there is none nearly so frequent as the solar Disk. The two signs are, in a manner, counterparts, not only amongst the Greeks, the Romans, and the Celts, but also with the Hindus, the Japanese, and the Chinese. I have already given some examples (figs. 17, 18, 20). On a "whorl"

FIG. 25. WHORL FROM HISSARLIK.
 (SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, No. 1990.)

from Hissarlik this parallel order is repeated three times.

FIG. 26. [*2]

Sometimes, as if to accentuate this juxtaposition, the gammadion is inscribed in the disk itself.

[p. 57]

Sometimes, on the contrary, it is the solar Disk which is inscribed in the centre of the gammadion, as may be verified particularly on a Tibetan symbol reproduced by Hodgson, [*1] and also on a coin from Gnossus, in Crete, where, perhaps, it depicts the Labyrinth.

FIG. 27. CRETAN COIN.
 (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), pl. iii., No. 6.

On a Gallic coin, of which numerous specimens have been found in the Belgian province of Limburg and in the Namur country, a tetrascele is visible, formed by four horses' heads ranged in a circle round a Disk.

FIG. 28. GALLO-BELGIAN COIN.
 (HUCHER. L'art gaulois, p. 169.)

It is impossible not to recognize here an application of solar symbolism, as M. Eug. Hucher has so frankly admitted, in language whose terms exclude all preconceived ideas upon the solar nature of the tetrascele, or even on the affinity existing between the Gallic symbol and the gammadion: "These four busts of horses," he writes,

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] "are evidently the rudiments of the four fiery steeds which draw the chariot of Helios in Etruscan and Greek antiquity. But the fact cannot be ignored that the gyratory arrangement, not in use amongst the Greeks, is a product of the Celtic imagination." [*1]

What, perhaps, is the product of the Celtic imagination, is the ingenious transformation of the arms of the gammadion into horses' busts. Would it not be possible to find in Greek symbolism precedents, and even models for this metamorphosis?--witness the cocks' heads and lions' busts which take the place of the rays of the triscele on Lycian coins. [*2]

We may observe, by the way, that the horse, and the cock, as well as the eagle, and the lion, are essentially solar animals.

It is interesting to verify the fact that the same combination has been produced, doubtlessly through the spontaneous agency of similar factors, in Northern America. There have been found,

FIG. 29. ENGRAVED SHELL FROM THE MISSISSIPPI MOUNDS.
 (HOLMES. Bureau of Ethnology, vol. ii., p. 282.)

amongst the engraved shells of the mounds or tumuli of the Mississippi, several specimens of solar Crosses inscribed in circles, or squares, each side forming a support to a bird's head turned in.

[p. 59]

the same direction--which, as a whole, forms a veritable gammadion.

D. In certain symbolical combinations the gammadion alternates with the representation of the sun.

Edward Thomas has pointed out the fact that, amongst the Jains of modern India, the sun, although held in great honour, does not appear amongst the respective signs of the twenty-four Tirthankaras, the saints or mythological founders of the sect. But, whilst the eighth of these personages has the half-moon as an emblem, the seventh has the swastika for a distinctive sign. [*1] Moreover, as the same writer remarks, the swastika and the Disk replace constantly each other on the ancient coins of Ujain and Andhra.

Another proof of the equivalence between the gammadion and the image, or, at least, the light of the sun, is found amongst the coins of Mesembria in Thrace. The very name of this town, Mesembria, may be translated as "mid-day," that is, the "town of noon," as Mr. Percy Gardner calls it. [*2] Now, on some coins, this name is figured by a legend which speaks for itself: 

It is impossible to show more clearly the identity of the gammadion with the idea of light or of the day.--"But," objects Mr. Greg, "the day is not necessarily the `sun."--In addition to this distinction being rather subtle, how can one continue to doubt, in face of the facility with which in Greece, as in India and elsewhere, the gammadion interchanges with the Solar Disk and vice versa? [*3]

I will take the liberty of calling attention to the

[p. 60]

adjoining plate (II.), where I have brought together several peculiar examples of those transpositions. They are arranged in two classes of combinations, which, by their regularity no less than by their frequency, seem to imply a symbolical intention. In the first is visible a grouping together of three signs gammadions, or Disks, round the one central Disk; in the second it is these same signs, to the number of four, which are arranged in a square or lozenge, either round a fifth analogous sign, or else, between the branches of an equilateral cross. I should here like to attempt, in connection with the general meaning of the gammadion, an explanation of these symbolical arrangements--in so far, of course, as on certain Disks these signs are not merely ornaments, intended to fill up the empty spaces.

The three first numbers of the first combination (litt. A) are taken from the "whorls" of Hissarlik; [*1] the fourth from a sepulchral vase from Denmark; [*2] the fifth from Silesian pottery; [*3] the sixth, which represents a foot-print of Buddha, from the bas-reliefs of Amaravati; [*4] the seventh, a curious example of the trisula, from the Graeco-Buddhist sculptures of Yusufzai, in North-western India. [*5] To these must be added, on the following page, the image taken from Hindu symbols and reproduced by Guignaut, after Nicolas Muller.

It is this latter figure which will assist us in explaining the others, or, at least, in formulating a conjecture as to their signification.

The subject is a tree, standing apparently for the Cosmic Tree of Hindu mythology, which sprang

Click to enlarge

PLATE II

[p. 61]

from the primordial egg in the bosom of the chaotic ocean. It spreads out into three branches, each of which supports a sun, whilst a fourth and

FIG. 30. HINDU SYMBOL.
 (GUIGNAUT, vol. iv., 2nd part, pl. ii., fig. 16.)

larger sun is placed at the bifurcation of the branches.

Guignaut informs us, in his translation of Creuzer, that this image was a symbol of the trimurti, the Hindu Trinity. We need not here investigate this very questionable proposition. I think, however, that the learned Frenchman was right when he added, in a foot-note:--"There are here three suns, and yet it is always the same sun." [*1]

In reality might not the object of this combination be to represent the sun in the three points or positions which circumscribe its apparent daily course, its rising, its zenith, and its setting; which the figurative language of Vedic mythology has rendered by the Three Steps of Vishnu?

We know that at all times popular imagery, in order to represent movements, or changes of position, has resorted to the artifice of multiplying the image of the same personage, or object, whilst assigning to it a different attitude each time. It is the process of juxtaposition applied to the idea of succession, or, as M. Clermont Ganneau has expressed it: "The reappearance of the actors to mark the succession of the acts." [*2] Do we ourselves

[p. 62]

represent otherwise, in our astronomical diagrams, the phases of the moon, or the different positions of the sun in the ecliptic?

The same meaning seems to me to be applicable to the three swastikas incised round a Disk on a Foot-print of Buddha (litt. A, No. 6). In fact, Buddha's Feet were originally the Feet of Vishnu; Buddhism was content to attribute to the footsteps of its founder the marks already worshipped by Hindu tradition. [*1] The other signs which adorn this mark seem to singularly complicate its symbolism. But it must not be forgotten that the Buddhists have accumulated, on the sacred Foot of their Master, almost all the symbols they have been able either to invent or borrow. Tradition counts as many as sixty-five! Moreover, most of these signs are also solar symbols, at least the Rosettes, the Trident, and the trisula, the latter representing, as I shall hereafter show, the effulgence, or the radiation of the solar fire.

Edward Thomas has fully admitted that there must be some connection between the three diurnal positions of the sun and the incised symbols on the foot-print at Amaravati. But if, in the central Disk, he discerns the noon-day sun, it is the trisula, on the heel, which seems to him to represent the rising sun, whilst the swastikas depicted on the toes might typify the last rays of sunset. As for the other swastikas, the two signs on the heel might symbolize the Asvins, the third, the god Pushan.--For my part, I see nothing which can justify these latter comparisons. Mr. Thomas was more fortunate when he connected an image, taken by Sir Henry Rawlinson from an obelisk at Koyunjik, with the Hindu symbolism relating to the three positions of the sun. [*2] Three solar Disks

[p. 63]

are there represented side by side; the middle one sends forth straight rays, and a hand holding a bow (see above, fig. 11); the two others, of rather smaller dimensions, emit rays which are bent at the extremities, as if by an effect of centrifugal force. [*1]

This interpretation may be further applied to the three Wheels placed on the points of the trisula in a Graeco-Buddhist bas-relief of Yusufzai (litt. A, No. 7). If, as I believe I shall prove, [*2] the central Disk of the trisulas was an image of the sun before it became, with the Buddhists, the Wheel of the Law, as much may be said of the three Wheels which here crown the points of the ancient symbol.

In Greece, I am not aware that the mythology alludes to the "three strides" of the sun. But symbolical images sometimes take the place of figures of speech. Does not, for example, the triscele, formed of three legs radiating round a disc, admit of the same interpretation as the Hindu tree with its four suns? There is, moreover, presumptive evidence that the Greeks distinguished three positions of the sun, and even that they selected distinct personages to represent those principal moments of its daily life. Near Lycosura, in

[p. 64]

[paragraph continues] Arcadia, stood the sanctuary of Zeus Lycaeus, where, according to Pausanias, bodies cast no shadow. It was situated on a mountain between two temples, one, to the east, was sacred to the Pythian Apollo, the other, towards the west, was dedicated to Pan Nomios. [*1] Apollo, the slayer of the Python, well represents the morning sun dispelling the darkness in the east. As for the Lycaean Jupiter of Arcadia, it is the sun in all its mid-day glory, at the hour when bodies cast the least shadow. [*2] Lastly, Pan, the lover of Selene, has incontestably a solar character, or at least is connected with the sun when setting. M. Ch. Lenormant has brought into prominence the light-giving character of this divinity, whom Herodotus compares, without hesitation, to Chem or Min, an Egyptian personification of the nocturnal or subterranean sun. [*3]

Our own popular traditions seem also to have preserved the remembrance of the three solar steps, at least in those parts of Germany and England where, till lately, the villagers climbed a hill on Easter-eve, in order to perform three bounds of joy at sun-rise. "And yet," adds Sir Thomas Browne, "the sun does not dance on that day." [*4] It must be remarked that popular language still speaks of the "legs of the sun," referring to those rays which sometimes seem to move about on the ground when their focus is hidden behind a cloud.

 

Let us now pass to the second group (pl. ii., litt. B), which represents combinations of four

[p. 65]

secondary figures ranged round a central one. [*1] I will here venture--always by way of hypothesis--an explanation similar to the preceding ones. Equilateral crosses representing the sky, or the horizon, have been found on Assyrian monuments. Their extremities are sometimes ended by little disks,  [*2] It may be questioned, not only whether these disks do not represent so many suns, as is the case in the preceding combinations, but also whether they do not relate to four different positions of the luminary, which would, perhaps, suggest no longer its daily course, but its annual revolution, marked by the solstices and equinoxes.

However this may be, the symbol of four Disks united by a Cross, spread, as a subject of decoration, through Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, and India, being sometimes simplified by the substitution of a central Disk for the Cross (pl. ii., litt. B, Nos. 9 to 13), sometimes complicated by the introduction of the gammadion (Nos. 8, 16, and 18 to 23), without counting the variations produced by

[p. 66]

the partial or general transpositions of the Disks and gammadions. No. 17 represents a Cross whose gamma character results precisely from the addition of a Disk to the right of each arm. Nos. 14 to 18 may be considered as forming a transition to the symbols 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23, where it is no longer the gammadion which is inscribed in or alongside the Disks, but where the Disks themselves are placed between the branches of the gammadion. Perhaps also the combinations reproduced at the bottom of the plate may come directly from the equilateral cross, with disks placed between the branches . The latter, after having ornamented Hissarlik pottery and the most ancient coins of Lydia, was preserved even on the coins and coats of arms of the Christian Middle Ages, its intermediate stages being the pottery of the "palafittes" in Savoy, and, later, the numerous Gallic coins on which the disks between the arms are sometimes changed into Wheels and Crescents. [*1]

In these four disks or points, Mr. Greg discerns stars or small fires. [*2] I wonder what fires would be here for. We might as well accept the four nails of Emile Burnouf. I much prefer to believe that, in conformity with the usual interpretation of the Disk, they were originally representations of the sun; and do not these suns, perhaps, represent, to use Guignaut's expression, "always the same sun" at a different point of the celestial horizon?

The theory that the gammadion symbolizes the sun's motion, has met with the objection that the ancients were not acquainted with the rotation of the sun on its own axis. But, properly speaking, there is here no question of a rotatory motion.

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] What they wished to denote in bending the rays of the disk, was the circular translation in space which the sun seems to undergo during the day, or the year. The proof of this is found in the symbolism of the Wheel, which likewise served to represent the progress of the sun, without, for that reason, implying a knowledge of the solar rotation.

An ancient rite, occurring in different branches of the Indo-European family, consisted in making the circuit of the object intended to be honoured, or sanctified, keeping, meanwhile, the right side turned towards it, that is to say, following the apparent direction of the sun. Known in India by the name of pradakshina, and still practised by the Buddhists of Tibet round their sacred stones, this custom has survived to our own times in different parts of Europe. Dr. MacLeod relates that the Highlanders of Scotland, when they came to wish his father a happy New Year, made in this manner the circuit of the house, in order to ensure its prosperity during the year. At St. Fillans, by Comrie, in Perthshire, this circumambulation, called deasil (deisul), was performed round a miraculous well, to which people came in search of health. A similar custom seems to have existed in the Jura Mountains. [*1]

Another objection is, that a certain number of gammadions have their branches turned towards the left, that is to say, in the opposite direction to the apparent course of the solar revolution. [*2] Prof. Max Muller has remarked that, perhaps, in this case, it was intended to represent the retrograde motion of the autumnal sun, in opposition to its progressive movement in the spring. [*3] Unfortunately,

[p. 68]

the eminent Indian scholar produces no evidence in support of this hypothesis. [*1] Would it not be simpler to admit that the direction of the branches is of secondary importance in the symbolism of the gammadion? When it was desired to symbolize the progress of the sun, namely, its faculty of translation through space, rather than the direction in which it turns, little attention will have been paid to the direction given to the rays. Although, in general, the form of the swastika predominates, the branches are turned towards the left in a great number of gammadions or tetrasceles which are undeniably connected with the personifications or the symbols of the sun. [*2] The same peculiarity may, moreover, be remarked on trisceles whose solar character is not disputed, [*3] and even on direct images of the sun, such as Disks whose rays, bent in order to render the idea of motion, are turned towards the left as well as towards the right. [*4] Lastly, it sometimes happens that the same monument includes several gammadions whose branches are turned respectively

[p. 69]

in the opposite direction. [*1] Tradition, as we have seen, counts the two forms among the signs of good omen which adorn the feet of Buddha. The Musee Guimet possesses two statues of Buddha decorated with the gammadion, one, of Japanese manufacture, bears the swastika; the other, of Chinese origin, the sauwastika.

I must here call attention to an ingenious theory brought forward, in 1891, by M. E. Harroy, director of the Ecole moyenne de Verviers, at the Archaeological and Historical Congress of Brussels, to account for the origin of the gammadion, and its connection with the equilateral cross. [*2] He believes he has discovered, in the arrangement of certain cromlechs, indications which would point to their having formed a sort of astronomical dial, as exact as it was primitive. For its construction

FIG. 31.

FIG. 31

he only requires three stones. At twenty paces from a point of observation, A, let us place, he says, a stone, B, in the direction in which the sun rises on the 21st of June; then at the same distance

[p. 70]

from A place a second stone, C, in the direction in which the sun rises on the 21st of December.

The line B C will point north and south; A E east, and A E' west. A B, A E, A C, and A E, will give the directions in which the sun rises on the 21st of June, the 21st of September, the 21st of December, and the 21st of March respectively; A C', A E', A B', and A E', the directions in which it will set on the same dates. This cross, illustrating the course of the sun, will naturally become the symbol of the luminary, and four strokes might have been added to the extremities of the lines in order to give "the notion of impulsion of the rotatory movement of the regulating orb."

I will draw attention to the fact that, as the points B and C approach or go further apart, according to the latitude, this figure can only depict a cross in a fairly narrow zone of the terrestrial globe, and that, consequently, the explanation of M. Harroy is solely applicable to our latitudes. Even here, moreover, however simple the reasoning processes are which might have led to the construction of this natural observatory, there remains to be proved satisfactorily that such an idea was ever entertained and put into practice by our prehistoric ancestors.

I have admitted above that the gammadion, in so far as it was a symbol of the astronomical movement, may have been applied to the revolutions or even to the phases of the moon. The fact is all the more plausible since the equilateral cross seems itself to have been employed to symbolize lunar as well as solar radiation; if we may judge from a Mithraic image, where the points of the Crescent supporting the bust of the lunar goddess are each surmounted by an equilateral cross. [*1] In this manner the frequent attribution

[p. 71]

of the gammadion to lunar goddesses, such as the different forms of the Asiatic Artemis, might also be accounted for.

On coins of Gnossus, in Crete, the lunar Crescent

FIG. 32. CRETAN COIN.
 (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx., new series, pl. ii., fig. 7.)

takes the place of the solar Disk in the centre of the gammadion.

A coin, which is believed to belong to Apollonius

FIG. 33. LUNAR TeTRASCeLE.
 (BARCLAY V. HEAD. Numismatic Chronicle, vol. vii. (3rd series), pl. xi., fig. 48.)

ad Rhyndacum, shows a gammadion flanked by four Crescents.

On the sepulchral stelai of Numidia the two gammadions surmounting the image of the dead (see our fig. 17, where one of them is, so to speak, underlined by a Wheel) may be seen to give place, sometimes to two radiated Disks, sometimes to a Wheel and a Crescent, sometimes to an equilateral Cross and a Crescent, and, lastly, sometimes to two Crescents. [*1] From which it might be concluded that the gammadion serves equally to replace the image of the sun and that of the moon.

M. Schliemann found at Hissarlik, in the strata

[p. 72]

lying above the "burnt city," a terra-cotta sphere divided into parallel zones by horizontal lines. In the middle zone are thirteen gammadions drawn up in line side by side. The celebrated explorer of Ilium believed he discovered therein a terrestrial sphere, on which the gammadions, symbols of fire, seemed to indicate the torrid zone. Mr. R. P. Greg, faithful to his theory, prefers to discern therein a representation of the universe, where the swastikas would seem to symbolize the supreme power of Zeus.  May I be allowed to ask, in my turn, if there may not be seen herein a celestial sphere, on which the thirteen gammadions represent thirteen moons, that is to say, the lunar year?

Click to enlarge

FIG. 34. FUSAiOLE OR WHORL FROM ILIOS.
 (SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, figs. 245 and 246.)

Footnotes

^51:1 H. GAIDOZ. Op. cit., p. 113.

^52:1 "On a terra-cotta from Salamine, representing a tethrippos or four-wheeled chariot, a gammadion is painted on each quarter of the wheel."--CESNOLA, Salamina, London, 1832, fig. 226.

^53:1 a. Congres international d'anthropologie et d'archeologie prehistoriques. Reports of the Copenhagen Session, 1875, p. 486. b. SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, No. 1993. c. On a reliquary from Maestricht in the Museum of Antiquities in Brussels, No. 24 in catalogue. d and e. On coins from Macedon. Numism. Chronicle, vol. xx. (N. S.), pl. iv., Nos. 6 and 9.

^53:2 The same figure, separated from the lunar crescent by the cross, is met with on a sculpture at Kelloe in Durham. (On a sculptured cross of Kelloe, in Archaeologia, vol. lii., part i., p. 74.)

^53:3 Indian Antiquary, 1880, p. 67 et seq.

^54:1 a. On a coin from Megara (PERCY GARDNER, Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (N. S.), p. 60). b. On a Lycian coin (FELLOWS, Coins of Ancient Lycia. London, 1855, pl. x.). c. On a Lycian coin (Numism. Chron., vol. viii. (3rd series), pl. v., No. 1). d. On a Celtiberian coin (LUD. MuLLER, fig. 46).

^54:2 GESENIUS. Scripturae linguaeque Phoenicae monumenta. Leipsic, tab. 23.

^55:1 BARCLAY V. HEAD. Hist. num., p. 581.

^55:2 Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), pl. iii., figs. 1 and 3.

^55:3 Numismata cimelii regii Austriaci. Vienna, 1755, part i., tab. viii., No. 3.

^55:4 J. B. WARING. Ceramic Art in remote Ages. London, 1875, pl. xxvii., f. 9.

^55:5 J. OVERBECK. Atlas der griechischen Mythologie, Apollon, pl. xix., fig. 7.

^56:1 LUD. MuLLER. Op. Cit., fig. 27.

^56:2 a. On a "fusaiole" from Hissarlik. SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, [p. 57] No. 1987. b. On a Celtic stone of Scotland. R.-P. GREG, Archaeologia, 1885, pl. xix., fig. 27. c. On an ex voto of clay in the sanctuary at Barhut. Numism. Chron., vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., fig. 24. See also below, pl. ii., litt. B, No. 16.

^57:1 See below, No. 18, litt. B of pl. ii.

^58:1 EUG. HUCHER. L'art gaulois. Paris, 1868, vol. ii., p. 169.

^58:2 See below, chap. v., figs. 89, 90, 91.

^59:1 Indian Antiquary, 1881, pp. 67, 68.

^59:2 PERCY GARDNER. Solar Symbols on the Coins of Macedon and Thrace, in the Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (N. S.), p. 59.

^59:3 IBID. Loc. cit., pp. 55-58.--On coins from Segesta the gammadion, which surmounts the image of a dog, alternates with a four-spoked wheel. (Hunter, pl. xlviii., 4, and lvii., 5.)

^60:1 SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, Nos. 1951, 1947, and 1861.

^60:2 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., fig. 31.

^60:3 IBID. Op. cit., fig. 30.

^60:4 JAMES FERGUSSON. Eastern and Indian Architecture. London, p. 184.

^60:5 Graeco-Buddhist sculptures of Yusufzai, in the publication Preservation of National Monuments of India, pl. xxi.

^61:1 GUIGNAUT. Les religions de l'antiquite. Paris, 184r, vol. iv., first part, p. 4.

^61:2 See CLERMONT-GANNEAU. L'imagerie phenicienne, p. 10.

^62:1 SENART. La legende du Bouddha in the Journal asiatique. Paris, 1873, vol. ii., p. 278, and 1875, vol. ii., pp. 120, 121.

^62:2 Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (N. S.), pp. 31, 32.

^63:1 Foot-prints have been used more than once as a vestige of presence, a testimonial of passage, a symbol of walking. One finds them on stones dedicated to Isis and to Venus, in the latter days of the Roman empire, where, according to Letronne's interpretation, they are equivalent to the well-known inscription, Eltha entautha, "I have been here." When the soles of both feet point each in an opposite direction, they may imply the idea of going and returning, a symbol of gratitude to the gods for a safe journey, "Pro itu ac reditu felice."--On Christian tombstones of the same epoch they sometimes are accompanied by the words In Deo, meaning, perhaps, "Walked into God." (See RAOUL ROCHETTE, Sur les peintures des Catacombes dans les Memoires publies par l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, t. xiii., p. 235.)

^63:2 See further, chap. vi.

^64:1 PAUSANIAS, VIII., 38.

^64:2 A. MAURY. Religions de la Grece antique. Paris, 1857, vol. i., p. 59.

^64:3 CH. LENORMANT. Galerie mythologique in the Tresor de numismatique. Paris, 1850, p. 25.

^64:4 E. B. TYLOR. Civilisation primitive, vol. ii., p. 385.

^65:1 Nos. 8, 9, 12, and 19 are taken from Hissarlik pottery (SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, No. 1218, 1873, 1958, and 1822); No. 10, from a cup from Nola (LUD. MuLLER, fig. 18); No. 11, from an archaic Athenian vase (ID., fig. 7); No. 13 from a cylinder of Villanova (DE MORTILLET. La croix avant le christianisme. Paris, 1866, fig. 39); No. 14, from a coin of Belgian Gaul (Revue numismatique. Paris, 1885, pl. vi., No. 4); Nos. 15 and 16, from ancient Indian coins (A. CUNNINGHAM. Bhilsa Topes. London, 1854, pl. xxxi., figs. 3 and 4); No. 17, also from an ancient Hindu coin (GREG. Archaeologia, 1885, pl. xix., fig. 29); No. 18, from Buddhist symbols of Tibet (HODGSON. Buddhist Symbols in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xviii., 1st series, pl. i., fig. 20); No. 20, from an earthenware vessel of Santorin (WARING. Ceramic Art in Remote Ages, pl. xliii., fig. 2); No. 21, from a coin of Macedon (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx., new series, pl. iv., No. 7); No. 22, from the bas-reliefs of Amaranati (cf. above, litt. A, No. 6); lastly, No. 23, from a girdle of bronzed leaves found in a tumulus of Alsace (DE MORTILLET. Musee prehistorique, pl. c., No. 1235).

^65:2 VICTOR DURUY. Symboles paiens de la croix, in the Revue politique et litteraire, 14th January, 1882, p. 51, fig. 8.

^66:1 L. MAXE WERLY. Monnaies a la croix, in the Revue belge de Numismatique. Brussels, 1879, pl. xii. and xiii.

^66:2 GREG. Loc. cit., p. 296.

^67:1 Sir JOHN LUBBOCK. Origin of Civilisation. London, 1870, pp. 214 and 226.

^67:2 F. PINCOTT, in the Journal of the Roy. Asiat. Soc., vol. xix. (new series), p. 245.

^67:3 Letter to M. SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, p. 520.

^68:1 However, in the last edition, recently published, of the Report on the Old Records of the India Office (London, 1891, pp. x-xi), Sir George Birdwood makes mention of, the fact that the "right-handed" swastika is, with the Hindus, the emblem of the god Ganesh; that it represents the male principle; that it typifies the sun in its daily course from east to west, and that, lastly, it symbolizes light, life, and glory. The "left-handed" swastika, or sauwastika, on the contrary, is the emblem of the goddess Kali; it represents the female principle, typifies the course of the sun in the subterranean world from west to east, and symbolizes darkness, death, and destruction.

^68:2 Such, for example, are the gammadions inscribed between the supports of the tripod of Apollo on a coin of Damastion mentioned above, and the gammadion on the breast of an Apollo reproduced in our plate i.

^68:3 P. SIX, in the Revue de Numismatique. Paris, 1886, P. 147.

^68:4 PERCY GARDNER. Numism. Chron., vol. xx., pl. iv. No. 20.

^69:1 TH. ROLLER. Les catacombes de Rome, vol. i., pl. vi., 1.--Cf. certain disks on the Hissarlik whorls. (SCHLIEMANN. Ilios, No. 1951.)

^69:2 Proceedings of the Congres archeologique et historique of Brussels, vol. i. Brussels, 1892, pp. 248-250.

^70:1 LAJARD. Atlas, pl. lxxviii.

^71:1 Steles du Koudiat el Batoum, in the Comptes rendus de la Societe francaise de numismatique et d'archeologie, vol. ii., pl. iii, figs. 1 to 6.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV. THE BIRTH-PLACE OF THE GAMMADION.

Can we determine the cradle of the gammadion, or, at least, the region whence it sprang, to be transported to the four corners of the Old World? To be sure, it may have been formed spontaneously here and there, in the manner of the equilateral crosses, the circles, the triangles, the

[p. 73]

flower-mark, and the other geometric ornaments so common in primitive decoration.

But the specimens which we have been examining are too identical, in their meaning as in their use, for us not to admit the original unity of the sign, or, at the very least, of its symbolical meaning.

A first observation, made long ago, is that the gammadion is almost the exclusive property of the Aryan race. It is found, in fact, among all the peoples of the Indo-European branch, whilst it is completely absent among the Egyptians, the Chaldaeans, the Assyrians, and even the Phoenicians, although these latter were not very scrupulous in borrowing the ornaments and symbols of their neighbours. As for the Tibetans, the Chinese, and the Japanese, amongst whom it is neither less frequent nor less venerated, it is not difficult to prove that it must have come to them, with Buddhism, from India.

There was only a step from this to the conclusion that the gammadion is a survival of the symbolism created, or adopted, by the common ancestors of the Aryans, and this step has been easily got over. Had we not the precedents of philology, which cannot come upon the same radical in the principal dialects of the Indo-European nations without tracing its existence to the period when these people spoke the same language? We did not even stop there. Desirous of investing the gammadion with an importance proportioned to the high destiny imputed to it, one has endeavoured to make it the symbol of the supreme God whom the Aryans are said to have adored before their dispersion. Thus we have seen Mr. Greg exhibit the gammadion as the emblem of the god of the sky, or air, who, in the course of the Indo-European migrations, was converted into Indra, Zeus, Jupiter, Thor, and so forth. M. Ludwig Muller, on his side, after having by his

[p. 74]

very complete and conscientious work on the gammadion contributed so much to proving it to be a solar symbol, takes care to add that before receiving this signification it might well have been, with the primitive Aryans, "the emblem of the divinity who comprehended all the gods, or, again, of the omnipotent God of the universe."

To this end he draws attention to the fact that the gammadion is associated with divinities of different nature, and that, therefore, it might well have the value of a generic sign for divinity, in the manner of the Star which figures before the divine names in the cuneiform inscriptions of Mesopotamia: "The sign," he concludes, "expressed then figuratively the word theos, which corresponded with deva, from which it is derived; it is thus the primitive Aryans called the divinity whose symbol this sign probably was." Who knows if it did not imply and retain a still higher signification; if, for example, the Greeks, "following the Pelasgians," did not employ it to symbolize a god elevated above the Olympians, or even the One and Supreme Being of philosophy arid religious tradition, "the unknown God, to whom, according to Saint Paul, an altar was dedicated at Athens"? [*1]

This is doing great honour to the gammadion. To reduce these theories to their real value it is only necessary to show that they are conjectures with no foundation in history. When the latter begins to raise the veil which conceals the origins of the Greeks, the Romans, the ancient Germans, the Celts, the Slays, the Hindus, and

[p. 75]

the Persians, we find these nations adoring the vague numina of which they caught a glimpse behind the principal phenomena of nature, worshipping the multitude of spirits, and indulging in all the practices of inferior religions, with here and there outbursts of poetry and spirituality which were as the promise and the dawn of their future religious development.

It is probable that before historic times they had already fetiches, perhaps even idols, in the manner of those uncouth xoana which are met with in the beginnings of Greek art. But it is unlikely that at the far more distant epoch of their first separation they had already possessed symbols, that is to say, ideographic signs, figures representing the divinity without aspiring to be its image or receptacle. In any case we may here apply the adage affirmantis onus probandi; upon those who wish to make the gammadion a legacy of the "primitive" Aryans, it is incumbent to prove that these Aryans practised symbolism; that amongst their symbols the gammadion had a place, and that this gammadion typified the old Diu pater, the Heavenly Father of subsequent mythologies.

Should the same criticism be extended to the theories which make the gammadion a Pelasgic symbol,--whether by Pelasgians be understood the Western Aryans in general, or merely the ancestors of the Greeks, of the ancient Italians, and of the Aryan populations who, primitively, fixed their residence in the basin of the Danube?

We can here no longer be so affirmative in our negations. It is, indeed, an undeniable fact that the gammadion figures amongst the geometric ornaments on certain pottery styled Pelasgic, because, in the bronze period, or the first iron age, it is found amongst all the Aryan peoples, from Asia Minor to the shores of the Atlantic. [*1] But, to

[p. 76]

begin with, the very term Pelasgian does not seem to me a happy one, and it may be noted that there is now a tendency amongst archaeologists to drop it. This term either refers to the pre-Hellenic, and the pre-Etruscan phase of civilization in the South of Europe, when it is only a word designed to hide our ignorance, or else it claims to apply to a determinate people, and then it confounds under the same denomination very different populations, of whom nothing authorizes us to make an ethnic group. Moreover, in so far as the first appearances of the gammadion are concerned, it is possible, and even necessary, to limit still further our geographical field of research.

Without going into the question whether geometric decoration may not have originated in an independent manner amongst different nations, it must be observed that this style of ornamentation embraces two periods, that of painted and that of incised decoration. Now, in this latter period, which is everywhere the most ancient, the gammadion is only found on the "whorls" of Hissarlik and the pottery of the terramares. We have here, therefore, two early homes of our symbol, one on the shores of the Hellespont, the other in the north of Italy.

Was it propagated from one country to another by the usual medium of commerce? It must be admitted that at this period the relations between the Troad and the basin of the Po were very doubtful. Etruria certainly underwent Asiatic influences; but whether the legendary migration of Tyrrhenius and of his Lydians be admitted or not, this influence was only felt at a period subsequent to the "palafittes" of Emilia, if not to the necropolis of Villanova.

There remains, therefore, the supposition that the gammadion might have been introduced into the two countries by the same nation.

[p. 77]

We know that the Trojans came originally from Thrace. There is, again, a very plausible tradition to the effect that the ancestors, or predecessors, of the Etruscans, and, in general, the earliest known inhabitants of northern Italy, entered the peninsula from the north or north-east, after leaving the valley of the Danube. It is, therefore, in this latter region that we must look for the first home of the gammadion. It must be remarked that when, later on, the coinage reproduces the types and symbols of the local religions, the countries nearest the Danube, such as Macedon and Thrace, are amongst those whose coins frequently exhibit the gammadion, the tetrascele, and the triscele. [*1] Besides, it is especially at Athens that it is found on the pottery of Greece proper, and we know that Attica is supposed to have been primitively colonized by the Thracians.

In any case, to judge from the discoveries of M. Schliemann, it was especially amongst the Trojans that the gammadion played an important part from a symbolical and religious point of view; which may be attributed to the belief that it was there closer to its cradle and even nearer to its original signification. "The nations who had invaded the Balkan peninsula and colonized Thrace," writes M. Maspero, "crossed, at a very early period, the two arms of the sea which separated them from Asia, and transported there most of the names which they had already introduced into their European home. There were Dardanians in Macedon, on the borders of the Axios, as in the Troad, on the borders of the Ida, Kebrenes at the foot of the Balkans, and a town, Kebrene, near Ilium." [*2] Who will be astonished that these, emigrants

[p. 78]

had taken with them, to the opposite shore of the Hellespont, the symbols as well as the rites and traditions which formed the basis of their creed in the basin of the Danube? Doubtlessly they borrowed a great deal from the creeds of the nations amongst whom they settled. But where has the gammadion been discovered amongst the vestiges of the far more ancient civilization whose religious and artistic influence they were not long before feeling?

Mr. Sayce, it is true, having met with it in Lycaonia, on the bas-relief of Ibriz, maintains the impossibility of deciding if it is a symbol imported from the Trojans amongst the Hittites, or if, on the contrary, it is to be attributed to the latter. [*1] Yet, whilst the oldest "whorls" of Hissarlik go back at least to the fourteenth or fifteenth century B.C., the bas-relief of Ibriz reveals an influence of Phrygian, and even Assyrian art, which is, perhaps, contemporaneous with King Midas, and which, in any case, cannot have risen long before the accession of the Sargonidae; that is to say, in order to determine the age of the monument we must come down to the ninth or eighth century before our era. [*2]

It is therefore not difficult, here, as everywhere else, to connect the origins of the gammadion with the early centres which we have assigned to it. Even when it occurs in the north and west of Europe, with objects of the bronze period, it is generally on pottery recalling the vases with geometric decorations of Greece and Etruria, and later, on coins reproducing, more or less roughly,

[p. 79]

the monetary types of Greece. It seems to have been introduced into Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Iceland, in the same manner as that in which the runic writing was brought from the Danube valley to the shores of the Baltic and the ocean. It may have penetrated into Gaul, and from there into England and Ireland, either through Savoy, from the time of the "palafittes," or with the pottery and jewelry imported by sea and by land from the East, or, lastly, with the Macedonian coins which represent the origin of Gallic coinage.

We have already seen how it was brought among the islands of the Mediterranean, and into Greece proper, then from Greece to Sicily and Southern Italy. It must be observed that even at Rome it seems to have always been connected with the traditions of the East. The only tombstone in the open air on which it has, so far, been noticed in the vicinity of the Eternal City is that of a Syrian. [*1] We must not forget that the Christianity of the Catacombs was likewise a religion of Oriental origin.

In the extreme East, the origins of the gammadion can be traced without difficulty to the swastika of India. It remains to be investigated if the latter, in its turn, may be connected with the gammadion of the West. M. Ludwig Muller, desirous of proving that this symbol was prior to the dispersion of the Indo-Europeans, maintains that the swastika cannot have passed from the Hindus to the Greeks, or vice versa, because the religions of these two races differed too much for an exchange of symbols to be possible. My whole book tends to prove that this is no obstacle. I will have occasion, in particular, to show how India borrowed several of its principal symbols

[p. 80]

from Mesopotamia, from Persia, and even from Greece. Why should the swastika form an exception?

Here, however, occurs a difficulty, which we must not conceal. The swastika does not appear on the coins struck in Bactriana, or in India, by Alexander and his Indo-Greek successors. Even amongst the Indo-Scythians, whose coinage copies the Greek types, it is only visible on barbarous imitations of the coins of Basu Deva. [*1] On the other hand, as we have shown, it adorns the coins of Krananda, and the most ancient monetary ingots of India. Moreover, Panini, who already makes mention of the swastika, is sometimes considered to have lived in the middle of the fourth century B.C. [*2] It might therefore be possible that the Hindus had known the swastika before feeling in their arts, and even in their symbolism, the influence of the Greek invasion. Yet, for the best of reasons, it is neither the Chaldaeans, the Assyrians, the Phoenicians, nor even the Egyptians, who can have imparted the gammadion to Hindustan. There only remain, then, the Persians, whose influence on the nascent arts of India was certainly felt before Alexander. But in Persia itself the gammadion only appears as an exception, on a few rare coins approaching our era. [*3]--Perhaps we would do well to look towards the Caucasus, where the antique ornaments with gammadions, collected by M. Chantre, lead us

Click to enlarge

PLATE III.--TABLE ILLUSTRATING THE MIGRATIONS OF THE GAMMADION

[p. 81]

back to a civilization closely enough allied, by its industrial and decorative types, to that of Mycenae.

Until new discoveries permit us to decide the question, this gap in the genealogy of the swastika will be equally embarrassing for those who would like to make the gammadion the common property of the Aryan race, for it remains to be explained why it is wanting amongst the ancient Persians.--It is right, too, to call attention to its absence on the most ancient pottery of Greece and the Archipelago, where it only appears with geometric decoration.--In reality, the problem is less a question of ethnography than of archaeology, or rather of comparative art. [*1]

If the gammadion is found amongst none of the nations composing the Egypto-Semitic group, if, amongst the Aryans of Persia, it never played but a secondary and obliterated part, might it not be because the art and symbolism of these different nations possess other figures which discharge a similar function, whether as a phylactery, or else as an astronomical, or a divine symbol? The real talismanic cross of the countries stretching from Persia to Libya is the crux ansata, the Key of Life

[p. 82]

of the Egyptian monuments. As for their principal symbol of the sun in motion, is it not the Winged Circle, whose migrations I trace in another chapter? There would seem to be between these figures and the gammadion, I will not say a natural antipathy, but a repetition of the same idea. Where the gammadion predominates--that is to say, in the whole Aryan world, except Persia--the Winged Circle and the crux ansata have never succeeded in establishing themselves in good earnest. Even in India, granting that these two last figures really crossed the Indus with the Greek, or the Iranian symbolism, they are only met with in an altered form, and with a new meaning. [*1]

In brief, the ancient world might be divided into two zones, characterized, one by the presence of the gammadion, the other by that of the Winged Globe as well as of the crux ansata; and these two provinces barely penetrate one another at a few points of their frontier, in Cyprus, at Rhodes, in Asia Minor, and in Libya. The former belongs to Greek civilization, the latter to Egypto-Babylonian culture.

As for India, everything, so far, tends to show that the swastika was introduced into that country from Greece, the Caucasus, or Asia Minor, by ways which we do not yet know. However that may be, it is owing to its adoption by the Bhuddhists of India that the gammadion still prevails amongst a great part of the Mongolian races, whilst, with the exception of a few isolated and insignificant cases which still survive amongst the actual populations of Hindustan, and, perhaps, of Iceland, it has completely disappeared from Aryan symbolism and even folk-lore. [*2]

[p. 83]

Footnotes

^72:1 GREG. Archaeologia, 1885, p. 304.

^74:1 LUD. MuLLER. Op. cit., p. 107.--M. Alexandre Bertrand, for whose long-promised study on the gammadion we are waiting with justifiable impatience, makes it, with the Gauls at least, the symbol of a nameless divinity. (La Gaule avant les Gaulois. Paris, 1884, p. 12.)--If, by this expression, the eminent archaeologist means a divinity whose name we are ignorant of, no one will gainsay the fact. But if he alludes to a divinity who had no name, this is quite another matter.

^75:1 MAX COLLIGNON. Archeologie grecque, p. 276.

^77:1 PERCY GARDNER. Solar Symbols on the Coins of Macedon and Thrace, in the Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (N. S.), p. 49 et seq.

^77:2 G. MASPERO. Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient. Paris, 1886, p. 241.

^78:1 A. H. SAYCE. The Hittites, the Story of a forgotten Empire. London, 1888, p. 142.

^78:2 PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquitie, vol. iv., pp. 728 and 794, note 1.--With the exception of the bas-relief of Ibriz, the gammadion has only been remarked on a single Hittite monument; it is a cylinder, probably of uncertain date. (SCHLIEMANN. Troja, p. 125.)

^79:1 LUD. MuLLER. Op. Cit., p. 62.

^80:1 PERCY GARDNER. Coins of Greek and Scythic Kings of India and Bactria. London, 1886, p. 160.

^80:2 MONIER WILLIAMS. Indian Wisdom. London, 1876, p. 173.

^80:3 M. LUDW. MuLLER draws attention to a coin of the Achaemenidae in the British Museum, which would seem to bear the gammadion; but it is there a countermark which must belong to a much later period.--In the coinage prior to Alexander, the western gammadion does not seem to have advanced towards the east further than Asia Minor.

^81:1 See the table on plate iii., where I have endeavoured to trace, in a manner, the genealogy of the gammadion in the Ancient World. Supposing it be necessary to change certain approximate dates, those, for example, of the centuries in which the civilizations of Mycenae and Villanova flourished, the succession of the terms is none the less the same in each series, as is also the connection between the series themselves. It will be seen by this table that there has been, over the whole of Europe, two successive importations of the gammadion; one, prehistorical, almost everywhere following the diffusion of pottery and of ornaments with geometric decorations; and the other contemporary with the imitation of Greek coins. Perhaps we must attribute to the existence of these two successive currents the cause of the variations which M. Lud. Muller points out, amongst the Germanic nations, between the forms of the gammadion in the bronze period and in the iron age.

^82:1 See chap. vi.

^82:2 Some mention might be made of the gammadions which have been discovered in other parts of the world. In what mysterious way did this combination of lines come to be [p. 83] stranded amongst the Ashantees? There is, however, nothing against its having been conceived there, and spontaneously executed, like so many other geometric designs which are found even in the centre of the dark continent.--The same phenomena may have occurred in the two Americas. Yet, when we see it specially employed as a religious symbol amongst the Pueblo Indians, we are led to inquire if we have not here some vestige of a communication with the Old World. There can be no question of an influence subsequent to the advent of the Spaniards, for if these latter had brought the Pueblos the emblem of the Cross, it certainly would not have been under the form of the gammadion. There remain two ways by which the transmission of the symbol might have been effected; to the east, by the expeditions of the still pagan inhabitants of Iceland; to the west, by an influence coming from China or Japan. I would incline rather to the second theory. Mr. R. P. Greg has proved that another sign, similar to the swastika, the ornament known as the fret or meander, is frequently met with on the ancient pottery of the New World; this, too, in conditions recalling its employment amongst the nations of our extreme East. (R.-P. GREG. The Fret or Key ornamentation in Mexico, in Archaeologia, vol. xlvii., pp. 157-160.)

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

ON THE CAUSES OF ALTERATION IN THE MEANING AND FORM OF SYMBOLS.

Causes which may alter the primary interpretation of symbolical types.--Loss of the primitive signification.--New meanings attached to uncomprehended symbols.--Harpocrates, the god of silence.--Identical symbols applied to different traditions.--Saint George and Horus.--Daniel and the Chaldaean Hercules.--The two doves facing each other.--Chaldaean origin of the religious symbolism of the Persians.--Sources of the Christian symbolism of the Catacombs.--Causes which may alter the form of symbols.--Tendency to simplify the figures.--Tendency to beautify them.--Origins and transformations of the Thunderbolt.--The antecedents of Sagittarius.--Mistakes due to ignorance and maladroitness.--Reconstruction of a new intelligible type from degenerate elements.--Gradual transformation of linear symbols into human figures, and of human figures into linear symbols.--Substitution of one element for another in a symbolical combination.--Lily and Lotus.--Addition of new elements to a former figure.--The perron of Liege.

FOR two symbolical figures to have a common origin it is not always necessary that they should have the same meaning. It frequently happens that a symbol changes its meaning in passing from one country to another.

In this manner a symbol can very well become a mere ornament when, on account of its aesthetic value, or simply by reason of its originality, it is reproduced by artists who are unacquainted with its primitive acceptation. Such, for example, are those clasps in the shape of gammadions which are frequently offered for sale to visitors at Homburg, and which, according to M. Gaidoz, are

[p. 85]

reproductions of antique fibulae found, some years ago, on the site of a Roman encampment not far from that place. [*1]

A symbol, again, may retain merely a talismanic value, like those crucifixes, converted into fetiches, which are the only vestiges of Christianity left, among certain tribes of the Lower Congo, by the Portuguese domination of last century.

Sometimes, in similar cases, the new owners of the image will endeavour to explain it by a more or less ingenious interpretation, and in this manner they will restore to it a symbolical import, though applied to a new conception.

The rising sun has often been compared to a new-born child. Amongst the Egyptians, this comparison led to Horus being represented as an infant sucking its finger. The Greeks imagined that he placed his finger on his lips to enjoin secrecy on the initiated, and they made him the image of Harpocrates, the god of silence. [*2]

This is what M. Clermont-Ganneau has very happily termed iconological mythology; it is here no longer the myth which gives rise to the image, but the image which gives rise to the myth.

We may further quote, as an interpretation of the same kind, the legend related by Hygin, which made the Caduceus originate in Hermes throwing his wand between two serpents fighting. It is evident that, here also, this hypothesis, soon to be transformed into a myth by the popular imagination, was due to a desire, unconscious perhaps, to explain the Caduceus.

Most frequently it is a conception pre-existent in the local traditions which we think we find amongst the products of foreign imagery. The Egyptians of the later period sometimes represented

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Horus under the form of a horseman piercing a crocodile with his spear. M. Clermont-Ganneau has shown how this symbolical image of the sun dispersing the clouds served as a model to the early representations of St. George and the Dragon. [*1] The same subject had already been employed by Greek mythology to depict Bellerophon slaying the Chimaera. [*2]

M. Gaidoz attributes a similar origin, not only to the image, but also to the worship of the Virgin of the Seven Sorrows, or rather of the Seven Swords. He thinks that he discovers its prototype in certain Chaldaean cylinders in which a goddess is depicted in the middle of seven arrows or swords, which radiate doubtlessly from a quiver placed behind her back. The resemblance between the two images is remarkable. This is how the author explains this transmission: "An Assyrian cylinder, or some other engraved stone, reached Italy in the Middle Ages. ... The image of a woman could be taken for nothing else than that of the Virgin Mary. But what could be the meaning of those weapons which were seen in the figure, and seemed to transpierce her breast? Without a doubt they were swords; and what might they signify? Some ingenious ecclesiastic was not wanting who assumed that they were the symbol of sorrows.... The swords numbered seven; it was then only necessary to ascertain, and this was no difficult task, the seven principal sorrows in the life of the Virgin Mary." [*3]

But here is a still better example: the image, so common on Chaldaean cylinders, of the mythical

[p. 87]

hero, Idzhubar or Gilgames, [*1] seen from the front and flanked by two lions, which he holds at arm's length, was not only diffused amongst the Greeks

FIG. 35. ASSYRIAN CYLINDER.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xliv., fig. 10.)

and Hindus to symbolize their respective solar hero in the course of his exploits, it seems also, in our Middle Ages, to have suggested certain pictorial representations of Daniel in the lion's den.

FIG. 36. ON AN OLD CHRISTIAN STAFF.
 (MARTIN et CAHIER. Melanges d'archeologie, vol. ii., pl. xviii.)

[paragraph continues] In these the prophet is drawn full-face, standing with arms outstretched, in the classic attitude of prayer, between two rampant lions, which he seems to keep in awe as much by his gesture as by the effect of his prayer. In this manner might be explained the peculiar fact, pointed out by the Abbe Martigny, that Daniel is often represented

[p. 88]

between two lions, "whilst the den contains seven." [*1]

On a lintel of St. Gertrude's Church at Nivelles, in Belgium, there is a bas-relief representing Samson slaying the lion, which belongs to the oldest piece of carved stone still in situ in Belgium. The Biblical hero is there represented

FIG. 37. SAMSON KILLING THE LION.
 (Cathedral of Nivelles.)

dressed in the Roman costume, astride of the lion, whose jaws he seizes with his hands (fig. 37). A mere glance will permit one to find in this image a reminiscence of the scene, so often reproduced

FIG. 38. MITHRA SLAYING THE BULL.
 (From a bas-relief in the Louvre.)

on Mithraic bas-reliefs, where Mithras offers the bull in sacrifice (fig. 38).

The worship of Mithras was certainly practised

[p. 89]

in Belgium at the time of the Roman domination, for inscriptions, "Deo Invicio Mithrae," have been found in the Gallo-Roman cemetery at Juslenville. The Nivelles bas-relief, to be sure, is not prior to the eleventh century; but then it must be observed that at Nivelles, and in its vicinity, traces of Roman occupation have been discovered. The sculptor of St. Gertrude may very probably have been acquainted with a local Mithraic bas-relief, in which he saw an episode of Samson's history. It may, however, be equally admitted that the model came from without.

Mediaeval pictorial art, moreover, borrows frequently enough from Mithraic representations, wherein the sun and moon are depicted under the forms and with the respective attributes of the solar god and of the lunar goddess in the scene of the sacrifice. [*1]

A remarkable example is seen in the bas-reliefs of the baptistery of Parma. [*2]

The group of Mithras and the bull has received other adaptations again in the hands of Christian artists. M. Th. Roller has pointed out a singular instance in a Christian bas-relief of the third or fourth century. Christ is there represented in the form of Orpheus, playing on the lyre, with a Phrygian cap on the head, and the right leg reposing on the body of a lamb, which turns its head towards the musician. [*3]

[p. 90]

These alterations in meaning may sometimes be perfectly compatible with a knowledge of the primitive signification, for one is always prone to discover in everything one's favourite image or idea. It was in perfect good faith that the Neoplatonists believed they recognized the representations of their own doctrines in the symbols and in the myths of all contemporary religions. Did not the early Christians see the Cross in all figures exhibiting an intersection of lines, as an anchor, a mast and its yard, a standard, a plough, a man swimming, a bird flying, a person praying with outstretched arms, the Paschal Lamb on the spit, and even the human face, in which the line of the nose crosses that of the eyes? When the Serapeum at Alexandria was destroyed, the Christian writers of the time relate that a certain number of cruces ansatae were found in it. They themselves observe that in these figures was recognized the old Egyptian symbol of life; which avowal, however, does not prevent them from seeing in this emblem a prophetic allusion to the sign of the Redemption. Sozomen adds that this fact brought about many conversions amongst the pagans. [*1]

A legend, widely diffused throughout the ancient world, related that Zeus, wishing to know the centre of the earth, let fly at the same moment from the ends of the world, in the east and west, two eagles (other versions say two crows), which came and settled at the same time on the omphalos of Apollo in the temple at Delphi. [*2] It may be questioned if this tradition was not perhaps suggested by the desire to account for a representation of the omphalos, similar to the image of a temple found amongst the jewels collected by Dr. Schliemann at Mycenae. It is a sort of shrine,

[p. 91]

which stands between two doves facing one another.

The origins of this representation must, in their

Click to enlarge

FIG. 39. JEWEL FROM MYCENae.
 (SCHLIEMANN. Mycenes. Paris, 1879, fig. 423.)

turn, be sought for in the symbolism of the worship paid, in Asia Minor, to the Great Goddess of Nature, venerated by the Phoenician populations under the name of Astarte. The doves played a part in this worship, either as personifications of the goddess, or as sacred birds reared in the temples. [*1] Two doves appear on some stelai in

FIG. 40. PUNIC STELA.
 (Corpus inscript. semit., i., part iii., No. 183.)

[paragraph continues] Libya, and, later, on imperial coins of Cyprus; in the former they are facing one another on the opposite sides of one of those conical bethels

[p. 92]

which represented the goddess (fig. 40); in the latter they are back to back on the roof of a temple containing a Sacred Stone (fig. 41).

FIG. 41. COIN OF PAPHOS.
 (GUIGNAUT, vol. iv., pl. liv., fig. 206.)

This combination of figures might all the more easily relate to the omphalos, since the latter was a white stone, a real bethel, round at the top. I am not aware that it has ever been found represented between two crows or eagles, but Strabo informs us that near the Sacred Stone (ep' aytui), in the sanctuary at Delphi, there was an image of the two birds mentioned in the fable. [*1]

Let us now pass over a dozen centuries, and, from the shores of the Aegean Sea, direct our steps towards the valley of the Sambre. Coins of

FIG. 42

[p. 93]

the Principality of Liege, struck at Thuin under Bishop Otbert (1092-1119), offer to our view the well-known type of the Temple,--which Charlemagne borrowed from ancient Italy,--with this

FIG. 43. COIN OF THUIN.
 (DE CHESTRET. Numismatique de la province de Liege, pl. iii., No. 52.)

difference, that here the gable stands between two doves affrontee.

M. le baron de Chestret has drawn a parallel between this image and a legend relating to the siege of the monastery of Lobbes, in 955, by the Huns, who had invaded the territory of Thuin. The Lobbes chronicle relates that two pigeons, having escaped from the church, had flown three times round the barbarians' encampment, and that forthwith a violent shower of rain, by swelling their bows, had put the besiegers to rout. [*1] As Folcuin, the writer of the chronicle, became abbot of Lobbes in 965, it cannot be maintained that this narrative was prompted by Otbert's coin; but the legend will probably have contributed towards establishing in the coinage of Thuin a type whose antecedents, perhaps, date back, across classic antiquity, to the sacred dove-cots of Phoenicia. [*2]

It may also happen that the signification of a

[p. 94]

foreign symbol is intentionally modified in order to adapt it to an idea or a belief, till then devoid of all material expression, or confined to a few rudimentary figurations. When the Persians had taken possession of Mesopotamia, they converted to their own use almost the whole imagery of the conquered people, in order to give a concrete form to their own religious conceptions, which the absence of a national art left without well-defined plastic representations. The Assyrian genii, with a double pair of wings, provided a body for the seven superior spirits of Mazdeism, the Amshaspands. The Chaldaean demons, with their hideous and bestial forms, were employed to represent the devas, those Iranian personifications of all that is false, dark, and impure. Lastly, as we shall see in another chapter, Ahura Mazda appropriated the symbol of Ashur, the great god of the Assyrian pantheon, and the Iranian Holy Tree, whose sap averts death, borrowed its shape from the conventional Trees of Mesopotamian pictorial art.

In the same manner, when the Christians began to reproduce on the walls of the Catacombs the scenes of the Old Testament and the parables of the New, it was from classic, and even mythological art that  took their first models. Hermes' Criophoros furnished the type of the Good Shepherd. [*1] Orpheus taming the wild beasts became a symbol of Christ and of his preaching. The Christian clinging to the Cross, in order to overcome temptations, was represented by Ulysses bound to the mast of his ship, so as to resist the song of the Sirens. By an ingenious application of a myth, which paganism had already spiritualized,

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Psyche offered the image of the human soul united to Love, replaced by an angel. [*1] The religions of Gaul and of India have offered instances of similar assimilations from the day they came into contact with the symbolism of more advanced nations.

In general, there must be an analogy between the old and the new interpretation sufficient to justify the transition from the one to the other. On the monuments of Egypt and of Mesopotamia divinities or genii are frequently met with possessing a double pair of wings, one raised, the other lowered; the Phoenicians easily made therefrom a symbolical image of perpetual motion. [*2] Amongst the Egyptians, the Phoenix rising from its ashes represented the sun resuscitating every morning in the glow of dawn. Depicted on a pyre, and encircled by a halo of glory, this solar Bird became, amongst the Romans, the emblem of the imperial apotheoses, and then passed to the sarcophagi of the Christians, as a symbol of the Resurrection.

The connection, however, is not always so easy to trace, whether in the form or in the idea, especially when it is a question of metaphysical conceptions embodied, at a later date, in a symbol of naturalistic origin. So long as symbols remain the image of some object or perceptible phenomenon, the mental operation which produced them can always be reconstituted. But in the domain of abstract ideas the field of analogy is as vast as that of individual fancy, and the same image may be used to render the most dissimilar ideas. How could we ascertain the origin of so abstract a symbol as the representation of the world under the form of a serpent biting its tail, if the texts did not inform us that in the cosmogony of Egypt, of Chaldaea, of Greece, and of India, the

[p. 96]

earth was believed to be circumscribed by an ocean or celestial river, whose circular course is compared to a serpent?

We must observe that even in naturalistic religions one image may be applied to very different objects. The serpent, for instance, has also served to symbolize the lightning, solar rays, clouds, rivers, and even the course of the stars in the sky.

 

Symbols may even differ in appearance and yet be genealogically connected with one another. This leads us to examine the causes which may alter the form of symbolical representations.

There is a tendency, in the first place, to reduce or abbreviate the figure in order either to enclose it in a smaller space, or else to lessen the work of the artist, especially when it is a complicated image in frequent use. In all systems of writing where the characters first appeared under the form of hieroglyphs, the letter need only be glanced over in order to find the symbol. It is known that our vowel A was originally a bull's head, a bucrane, and that the latter, in its turn, represented the whole animal, in conformity with the popular rule that the part is equal to the whole in the matter of symbols, as well as of sacrifices. It is thus, again, that in the signs of the Zodiac the Lion is merely represented by its tail.

At other times, on the contrary, we have additions and embellishments suggested by aesthetic considerations. Such, in particular, was the fate of nearly all the symbols adopted by Greece, whose art, so powerfully original, never accepted foreign types without stamping them with profound and happy modifications. We will see an important example of this in the transformations of the Caduceus.

[p. 97]

The Thunderbolt is another symbol which lent itself to all the refinements of classic art; here, however, the germs of those improvements, like the origins of the symbol itself, must be sought for further towards the East. On bas-reliefs at Nimrud the Thunderbolt is represented in the left hand of a god holding an axe in his right; at Malthai it is brandished in each hand by the god Merodach struggling with the monster Tiamat, the mythical assailant of the moon. We may add that in these Mesopotamian sculptures its antecedents are recognized without difficulty; it appears there, indeed, as a double trident, or rather as a trident doubled in the manner of the blade in the two-edged

FIG. 44. ASSYRIAN THUNDERBOLT.
 (LAYARD. Monuments of Nineveh, 2nd series, pl. v.)

axe, or of the hammer in the Two-headed Mallet.

Almost all nations have represented the lightning by a weapon. Among the Chaldaeans it was depicted by a trident as well as by a pitch-fork and an axe. The Trident, with branches which zigzag like lightning, is frequently exhibited in the hands of the Assyro-Chaldaean gods. On a cylinder dating back to the oldest times of Chaldaean art the handle of a Trident held by the god of the storm lets fall a jet of water into the mouth of a deer.

The Assyrian artist who--with the intention, perhaps, of accentuating the power of the god--first doubled the Trident, or rather produced from

[p. 98]

it the trifid sheaf, of which Greek art was to make such good use, secured thereby for the old Mesopotamian symbol an advantage over all the

FIG. 45.
 (RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies, vol. ii., p. 251.)

other representations of lightning with which it was to compete.

The Greeks, like all the Indo-European nations, seem to have figured to themselves the light of the storm under the form of a bird of prey. When they had received the image of the Thunderbolt from Asia Minor, they placed it in the talons of the eagle, and made it the sceptre, and even the symbol, of Zeus; explaining, in return, according to their custom, this symbolical combination by a myth: it was, said they, the eagle that brought the Thunderbolt to Zeus, when the latter was preparing to fight the Titans. [*1]

Roman Italy transmitted the Thunderbolt to Gaul, where, in the latter centuries of paganism, it alternated with the Two-headed Hammer on Gallo-Roman monuments; it is even found on amulets of ancient Germany, Scandinavia, and Brittany.

In the East it penetrated into India in the track of Alexander. It had there to compete with other symbols having the same signification: "the sparrow-hawk with golden wings," and "the stone with four points," of which the Vedas speak,--the

[p. 99]

[paragraph continues] St. Andrew's Cross (itself perhaps a double fork) which forms the vajra, the redoubtable weapon of Indra, god of the stormy sky; [*1] the Drum and the Axe which figure in the hands of Siva; lastly, its own antecedent, the Trident, which the Hindus had already borrowed from the West, or else imagined themselves spontaneously.

Siva, who succeeded Zeus on the coins of the Indo-Scythic kings when the last glimmering of Greek civilization in north-west India had died out, holds in his hand sometimes the Thunderbolt, sometimes the Trident, [*2] and if the latter remains the essential weapon of the god in the later imagery of the Hindu sects, the Thunderbolt made none the less its way amongst the Buddhists, who transported it with their symbolism as far as China and Japan. Even at the present time it can

FIG. 46. DORDJ.
 (From a specimen belonging to the author.

be recognized there under the form of the dordj, a small bronze instrument shaped like a double sheaf, with six or eight branches, which, held between the thumb and forefinger, is used by the lamas and bonzes to bless the faithful, and to exorcise demons. [*3]

A legend which M. Gustave Le Bon found in Nepaul claims to justify the presence of the

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] Thunderbolt in the temples of the country by stating that Buddha had wrested it from the god Indra. [*1] The assertion is true in this sense, that Buddhism, after having precipitated from his supreme rank the Master of the Brahminical Olympus, made of his terrible and capricious instrument an ally of man in the struggle against the powers of evil. It is interesting to note the fact that with us, too, the antique and redoubtable attribute of the Master of the Thunder has become the emblem of lightning removed from the blind direction of natural forces and placed by science at the service of human industry. Are there many other symbols which can boast of such a long and fruitful career?

This happy disposition of Greek genius reacted even on symbols of strange religions wherever their form was not invariably regulated by the canons of a perennial tradition. M. Menant has pointed out the hand of Greece in the transformation of the winged bulls which kept watch of old at the entrances to the Assyrian palaces. Their function as gate-keepers or guardians, in condemning them to remain immovable, imposed upon them, in spite of their wings, rigid contours and massive forms, calculated to give at once an impression of repose and force. With the advent of the Persian religion, in which the bull was a mythical character invested with a wholly active function, as representing Gayomert, the first-born of creation, it was no longer deemed necessary to fasten his images to the ground; the bull moved its wings, started at a gallop into space, brandished a bow, and ended, under the Greek rule of the Seleucidae, by assuming, on cylinders, the well-known physiognomy of Sagittarius. [*2]

[p. 101]

Beside the improvements due to the artistic taste of their authors we must place the disfigurations brought about by the maladroitness or ignorance of the copyist, as may be remarked on so many Gallic coins, where Greek symbols have assumed the most singular forms.

Sometimes those corruptions tend to produce a new type, which, in passing through a whole series of intermediate forms, takes the place of the old. It is like those dissolving views where the outlines of the two succeeding pictures are blended in an image which is no longer the one, and is not as yet the other, but exhibits features borrowed from both.

Nothing is more curious than to follow the gradual stages of the degeneration which, on Gallic coins, has finally transformed into the letter E the bust of Apollo, [*1] and into the letter H, on coins of Valenciennes, the type of the Carlovingian temple formed of four columns placed on a basement and surmounted by a pediment. [*2]

FIG. 47. DEGENERATION OF THE Temple TYPE.

A metamorphosis of the same kind may be noticed in the carved work on paddles from New Ireland, which were exhibited in 1872 by General Pitt Rivers at the annual session of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. We see here a whole series of deformations, which at last

[p. 102]

change a human form into a crescent placed on the point of an arrow. Had the intermediate figures not been found, the connection between the two extremes would never have been admitted, nor even suspected.

FIG. 48. POLYNESIAN CARVINGS.
 (FLAMMARION. Etoiles et curiosites du ciel, p. 445.)

As a counterpart of the metamorphoses which thus convert a face into a sign or instrument we will see further on examples of symbols which, purely linear in the beginning, have gradually assumed a human physiognomy. [*1] These transformations may, in certain cases, be systematic and premeditated; but generally they originate in a desire to give an intelligible character to a shapeless symbol by approximating it to the image which it seems most to resemble.

When a foreign or antiquated symbol is formed of several images combined, it sometimes happens that one or more of its constituent parts are modified in order to better agree with the religious traditions, the aesthetic preferences, the national predilections, or even with the geographical peculiarities of its new environment. It is thus that, in the symbolism of Europe, the Lily has generally taken the place which the Orient assigned to the Lotus.

There are also symbolical combinations in which several superposed elements, dating back to different periods, can in some measure be distinguished. The most curious monuments to be studied in this

[p. 103]

connection are the perrons or perons which, in the Middle Ages, constituted the symbol of communal liberties in several cities of eastern Belgium. The

FIG. 49. THE PERRON OF LIEGE. (Revue de Liege, vol. vi. (1846), p. 86.)

most celebrated of those perrons is still standing, above a fountain, on the market-place at Liege;

FIG. 50. HERALDIC PERRON.
 (LOYENS. Recueil heraldique, passim

it consists of a white marble column placed on a square base with five steps, guarded by four lions. The capital is surmounted by the three Graces, who support a Crown encircling a Fir-cone with a small Cross on its point.

[p. 104]

In other towns of the same country, at Namur, for instance, the perron only comprised a column on a pedestal with three steps. [*1]

The perron of Liege has had a very chequered existence, which makes it all the dearer to its fellow-townsmen. Transported to Bruges by Charles the Bold in 1467, after the defeat of the citizens of Liege, and solemnly restored to the old episcopal city ten years later, twice blown down in a storm, in 1448 and in 1693, it figured as early as 1303 on the banner of the trades leagued together in defence of their privileges, as also on the gemel blazon of the two annual burgomasters, or temporary masters, of the city. [*2]

In still earlier times it is seen on coins of the bishop-princes from the end of the twelfth century. On one of them, dating back to Rodolphe de Zaeringen (1167-1191), it only appears in the form of a column surmounted by a ball, above which is

FIG. 51. COIN OF ROD. DE ZaeRINGEN

FIG. 52. COIN OF JEAN D'APS

(DE CHESTRET. Numismatique de la principaute de Liege, pl. vi., No. 119, and x., No. 192.)

a cross, and the inscription PERU VOC(OR) (fig. 51). On a coin of Jean d'Aps (1229-1238), however, the Fir-cone is plainly visible at the top of the column (fig. 52).

The meaning and origin of the perrons have been much discussed. [*3] M. Ch. Piot, general

[p. 105]

archivist of Belgium, has proved in a conclusive manner that they were, in the Middle Ages, "stones of justice," marking the place where the holders of municipal jurisdiction sat in the open air; and thus it is easily explained how they everywhere became the symbol of municipal life, as also of popular privileges. [*1] But this explanation leaves the question of their origin untouched. Moreover, why were these stones surmounted by a column, and why did this column itself support a Fir-cone and a Cross?

According to some, the perron might simply be a sort of Calvary, or even an elevated Cross, like that which figures on the farthings of Charlemagne, and on some coins of the bishop-princes; [*2] according to others, it might date from the Eburons, and represent an ancient druidical stone; [*3] there are those, again, who attribute it, together with the Fir-cone, to one or other of the Germanic races who successively occupied the basin of the Meuse; [*4] whilst some, lastly, would wish to make it a legacy of the Roman domination in Belgium. [*5]

For my own part I consider that the perron of Liege may be resolved into five elements belonging

[p. 106]

to as many different periods. Putting aside the lions and the Crown, which date from the Middle Ages, and the group of the Graces, which, in 1693, replaced three copper figures representing, it would appear, scoundrels embracing rods, there remain:

1. The column, which represents the common element of monuments of this kind, and which may date back, as M. Rahlenbeek thinks, to the Germanic tribes settled in western Belgium.--Tacitus bears witness to the presence of sacred columns amongst the Frisians who occupied the valley of the Lower Rhine, nor far, consequently, from the Meuse; he even calls them Pillars of Hercules; however, he hastens to recall to mind that many things are fathered upon Hercules which do not belong to him. [*1] The Saxons, that is to say the inhabitants of the right bank of the Rhine, venerated, on their side, wooden or stone pillars dedicated

FIG. 53. COLUMN OF HILDESHEIM.
 (KRATZ. Der Dom zu Hildesheim, 2nd part, pl. vii., fig. 2.)

to the god Irmin; such was the famous Irminsul demolished by the order of Charlemagne. A stone column dug up at Eresburg or Stadtbergen

[p. 107]

in Westphalia, under Louis the Debonnaire, and placed in the cathedral of Hildesheim, where it still serves as a candelabrum, exhibits a striking resemblance to the ancient representations of the perron of Liege.

M. Piot, again, has proved that people were sworn on the perron. Now we learn from the Saga of Gudrun that amongst the Scandinavians they swore "by the holy white stone." [*1] Moreover, there have been preserved until our own times, on the tumuli or haugs of the Scandinavian Peninsula, pillars of white stone to which the lower classes accord a certain veneration. One of these stones, now in the Bergen Museum, presents the similitude of a small pillar with an enlarged top three feet high and sixteen inches in diameter. [*2]

Were the pillars of the Germanic nations dedicated to the divinities of the sky, or of war? Did they exhibit a simulacrum of Thor, of Odin, or of a god Irmin? Had they a phallic acceptation, as M. Holmboe thinks with respect to the Scandinavian cippi, or did they provide a cosmogonical symbol, as might be inferred from a passage in Adam of Bremen to the effect that, the Saxons venerated in their Irminsul the image of "the universal pillar which supports all things"? [*3] All that can be said for the moment is that these pillars had a religious character, and that they had to play a part in the social life, so intimately connected, amongst all barbarians, with the religious life of the people.

2. The Fir-cone.--This is, according to M. Henaux, "the symbol of an existence united but distinct," and represents the union of the tribes

[p. 108]

leagued together against the dominion of Rome. [*1] We do not find, however, that the Fir-cone admitted of this interpretation in the symbolism of the ancient Germans, or even of the Gauls. To tell the truth, we possess very little information on the particulars of Germanic symbols and even forms of worship. To make up for this, however, we know that, in the Graeco-Roman paganism, the fruit of the pine discharged prophylactic, sepulchral, and phallic functions.--Amongst the Etruscans the Fir-cone occurs frequently in tombs and on urns, sometimes alone, sometimes on the top of a pillar. [*2] Does it there figure a representation of the flames on an altar, and does it consequently symbolize the persistency of life in death? The pillar, whole or broken, and often adorned with bas-reliefs, was a fairly common monument on Belgo-Roman tombs. [*3] But we nowhere find that it supported a Fir-cone, and nothing permits us to suppose that the perrons ever had a sepulchral acceptation.--Moreover, the Thyrsus of Bacchus, composed of a stalk crowned by the fruit of the pine, was a familiar emblem in classic paganism. [*4] An emblem of the same kind was borne by Sylvanus Dendrophorus, that old god of the Latin forests, assimilated at a later date, on so many Gallic monuments, to one of the principal divinities

[p. 109]

of the Celtic pantheon, if not its supreme god--the god with the Mallet:

Et teneram ab radice ferens, Sylvane, cupressum. [*1]

It may therefore be asked if the addition of the fir-cone to the perron of Liege is not due to the syncretic influence of Gallo-Roman art, which would thus have brought the Germanic column within the limits of classic paganism, as, at a later period, the Church introduced it into Christian society by surmounting it with a Cross. Perhaps also it was thus desired to keep alive in the monument a phallic signification, whilst correcting whatever too great coarseness this symbol might have had in its primitive form.

It is probable that the pyr of Augsburg, that gigantic Fir-cone, depicted, from time immemorial,

FIG. 54. THE PYR OF AUGSBURG.

on the arms, the coins, and the seals of that town, dates from the time of the Roman occupation. It has been found, indeed, at Augsburg itself, on a Roman monument, now in the museum of that town, and known as the altar of the duumviri. The pine-fruit is there sculptured at the top of a pillar ornamented with flower-work, which separates the statues of the two municipal magistrates, exactly as, at Liege, the perron figures between the coats of arms of the two annual burgomasters. [*2]

[p. 110]

It must be observed that the pyr rests on a capital; now, every capital supposes a column, that is to say, that we have here the remains of a veritable perron, which was never baptized by the apposition of a Cross, but was merely shortened by the suppression of the shaft, in order to be more easily introduced into armorial bearings and coins.

I have been assured, but have not been able to verify the fact, that in Rome itself, in front of the church of SS. Nereo et Achilleo, built on the ruins of a temple of Isis, there was still to be seen, some years ago, an antique column surmounted by a Fir-cone with a Cross on the top.

We have likewise the proof that the Fir-cone,

FIG. 55. BUCKLE FROM ENVERMEU.
 (COCHET. La Normandie souterraine, pl. xii., No. 4.)

FIG. 56. BUCKLE FROM EPRAVE.
 (A. BEQUET. Soc. arch. de Namur, vol. xv., p. 315.)

placed at the end of a stalk or pillar, figured amongst the objects held in veneration by the Franks, who occupied, in the fifth century, the East of Belgium and the North-east of France.

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] The Abbe Cochet and M. Alfred Bequet have separately found, the former in the Merovingian cemetery of Envermeu, near Dieppe, the latter in the cemetery of Eprave, not far from Namur, silver belt-buckles adorned with an identical figure, in which I have no hesitation in recognizing a prototype of the perrons. We have there, in the middle of a support or pedestal, which is placed between two peacocks facing one another, a long stalk, capped by a conical object, whose resemblance to the Fir-cone at once struck the Abbe Cochet, though at that moment he was little thinking of the perrons of Belgium (figs. 55, 56). [*1]

It is to be remarked that the two birds facing one another are also met with on the sides of the

FIG. 57. SEAL OF LIEGE ad legata.
 (LOYENS. Recueil heraldique des bourgmestres, p. 2.)

perron on the earliest coin of Liege, on which an attempt is made to represent this monument with the Fir-cone (fig. 52), and also on a seal which Loyens attributes to the year 1348 (fig. 57).

If the fact be insisted upon, that the stalk engraved in the Frankish image seems to be of wood, I will remark that the symbolical pillars of

[p. 112]

the ancient Germans were made of wood as well as of stone. This was particularly the case with the Irminsul, which the oldest chronicles define as the trunk of a tree erected in the open air. [*1]The Hessians of the eighth century, who lived on the Lower Rhine, still venerated, at the time when they were evangelized by St. Boniface, the trunk of a tree, which was to them the simulacrum of the god Thor. [*2]

Do not our May-Poles, often a mere stalk surrounded with ribbons, take us back to the time when Lucan sang of our forefathers:

              simulacraque moesta deorum
 Arte carent, caesisque extant informia truncis [*3]?

Lastly, old chroniclers relate that in the thirteenth century the destruction of the Irminsul by Charlemagne was still commemorated at Hildesheim on the Saturday following the Sunday of the Laetare, by planting in the ground, on the cathedral square, two poles six feet high, each surmounted by a wooden object one foot in height, and shaped like a pyramid or cone. The young people then endeavoured with sticks and stones to overthrow this object. Does not this tradition directly connect the Irminsul, or rather the Irminsuls, with the stake which, surmounted by a Cone, is presented to our view in the Frankish buckle, just as the stone column of the Hildesheim cathedral links them with the perrons of Belgium? The same custom, or rather the same popular sport, existed elsewhere too in Germany, at Halberstadt in particular; here, however, it was the canons

[p. 113]

who indulged in it on the Sunday of the Laetare itself. [*1]

We have, moreover, a more direct proof that the representation of the stalk, surmounted by a Fir-cone, and placed between animals facing one another, figured in Christian imagery from the eighth century of our era. The sculptures in question are taken, one from the parapet of the cathedral of Torcello, near Venice (fig. 58), and

FIG. 58. FROM THE CATHEDRAL OF TORCELLO.

FIG. 59. FROM THE ATHENS CATHEDRAL.

the other from a bas-relief on the Athens cathedral (fig. 59). Both of them are reproduced in the remarkable work of M. R. Cattaneo, L'architecture en Italie. [*2]

3. The Cross.--Tradition relates that the Christian missionaries everywhere overthrew, amongst the Belgians, the altars of Thor and of Wodan. But the fate of the column of Hildesheim shows us how monuments of this kind managed to escape destruction by placing themselves, so to speak, under the protection of the new faith. At Hildesheim, they placed a Virgin on the column, transformed into a candelabrum. At Liege, a Cross

[p. 114]

was placed on the perron, and the oaths which were taken on the "sacred whitestone" continued to be taken on the Cross which sanctified the ancient simulacrum. In Sweden also cippi are found, similar to the one I have mentioned above, on the top of which the Cross has been incised. [*1]

The Abbe Cochet thinks that the figures engraved on the Envermeu plate denote a Christian symbol, because we find in the Catacombs, and even in Roman architecture, the symbol of a bunch of grapes between two peacocks facing one another, depicting the soul quenching its thirst at the eternal fountain of life. Nothing, however, entitles us to distinguish a bunch of grapes in the object placed at the end of the stalk; moreover, its resemblance to the ordinary representation of the thyrsus is incontestable. Lastly, we have already seen in the present chapter that the custom of figuring sacred objects between two winged animals facing one another was spread throughout the whole Mediterranean basin long before the birth of Christian art. It is especially on the side of sacred stones and trees that they are met with, as I shall have an opportunity of pointing out in the following chapter. Now, in so far as it was a cosmogonical column, related to the Scandinavian Yggdrasill, the Irminsul is just as much connected with the tradition of the Universal Pillar as with that of the Tree of the World, both of which seem to have received their first plastic expression amongst the Assyro-Chaldaeans.

Curiously enough, the Tree of Life between two peacocks facing one another is even found in the symbolism of modern India (fig. 60).

[p. 115]

It will be observed that here each of the two peacocks holds a serpent in its beak. Now the peacock was held amongst the ancients to kill serpents, and this also may be one of the reasons

Click to enlarge

FIG. 60. CLOTH FROM MASULIPATAM.
 (Sir G. BIRDWOOD. The Industrial Arts of India. 1880.

which brought about its introduction into Christian symbolism. [*1]

It is evident that, at least in its outlines, all this iconography takes us backwards, far beyond Christianity, into the very midst of antique symbolism.

Lastly, it is proper to remark that traces of Christianity are entirely wanting in the cemeteries

[p. 116]

of Envermeu and Eprave, as well as in nearly all the Frankish cemeteries of that period.

Thus, to sum up, the perron of Liege includes in harmonious order the legacies and, so to speak, the witnesses, of all the civilizations which have succeeded one another in this part of Belgium. In this respect it is more than a symbol of municipal liberty; it is the embodiment of the very history of the nation. [*1]

[p. 117]

Footnotes

^85:1 H. GAIDOZ. Le symbolisme de la roue, p. 113.

^85:2 G. LAFAYE. Histoire des divinites d'Alexandrie hors de l'Egypte. Paris, 1884, p. 259.

^86:1 CLERMONT-GANNEAU. Horus et saint George, in the Revue archeologique of 1873, fig. 13.

^86:2 P. DECHARME. Mythologie de la Grece antique. Paris, 1886, fig. 161.

^86:3 Melusine. The number for November-December, 1892.

^87:1 According to a recent communication from Mr. Th. J. Pinches (Babylonian and Oriental Record of October, 1890), Gilgames would seem to be the definite pronunciation of this name, which has been read in such different ways in the cuneiform texts.

^88:1 MARTIGNY. Dictionnaire des antiquites chretiennes. Paris, 1865, p. 201.--See also DE GAUMONT. Melanges d'archeologie religieuse. Paris, 5th edition, p. 68.

^89:1 Cf. especially the bas-reliefs on the baptistery at Parma. (Revue archeologique. Paris, 1853, vol. x., pl. 216.)

^89:2 In the Strasburg Cathedral there is a statue representing an individual clothed in the skin of a lion and holding in his hand a club. It was long thought to be an ancient statue to which the Christian edifice had extended its hospitality. M. Albert Dumont has shown that it was a Mediaeval work, suggested probably by images of the Gallo-Roman Hercules, like those bronze ones which have been found in the neighbourhood of Strasburg. (Revue archeologique, 1870-71, vol. xxii., p. 246.)

^89:3 TH. ROLLER. Catacombes, vol. ii., pl. iv., No. 1.

^90:1 SOZOMEN. Hist. eccles., vii., 15, p. 725 B.

^90:2 STRABO. Liv. ix., ch. iii.

^91:1 FRANcOIS LENORMANT, in the Gazette archeologique of 1878, p. 75 et seq.

^92:1 Since the publication of the French edition of this work Sir George Birdwood has pointed out to me two representations of the omphalos where the Sacred Stone is found with two doves on its sides; one (fig. 42a) is taken from a coin of Cyzicus (Numismatic Review, vol. vii. (3rd series), pl. i., No. 23), the other from a marble bas-relief found at Sparta (Mittheilungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts in Athen, 1889, vol. xii., pl. 12).

^93:1 DE CHESTRET. Numismatique de la province de Liege. Brussels, 1888, p. 54.

^93:2 The same subject seems to have passed into India, if we are to judge from the doves and other birds found facing one another on the roofs of the palaces represented in the Buddhist bas-reliefs of Boro-Budur. (LEEMANS. Boro Boedoer op het eiland Java. Leyden, 1893. Atlas, pl. lxvi., fig. 102; cxliv., fig. 22, etc.)

^94:1 The origin of this type is found, perhaps, among the Phoenician people, where it was merely meant to represent the believer, or the sacrificer, bringing the sheep or the ram destined for the sacrifice. (Cf. PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iii., figs. 307, 308, and 402.)

^95:1 TH. ROLLER. Les catacombes de Rome. Paris, vol. ii., pp. 370-372.

^95:2 Sanchoniathonis Fragmenta, ed. Orelli, p. 38.

^98:1 GUBERNATIS. Zoological Mythology. London, 1872, vol. ii., p. 196.

^99:1 In the Vedas Indra's weapon is defined as "the stone with four points which brings the rain" (Rig. Veda, 4, 22, 1-2). Now the vajra of Indra had so exactly the form of a St. Andrew's cross that the term vajrarupa, "vajra-shaped," is the equivalent of our expression "in the form of the letter X." (Cf. Dictionnaire de Saint-Petersbourg, 6, 630.)

^99:2 BARCLAY V. HEAD. Catalogue of Indian Coins in the British Museum. London, 1886, p. 147 et seq.

^99:3 The dordj appears already on the bas-reliefs of Sanchi.

^100:1 GUSTAVE LE BON. Voyage au Nepaul in the Tour du Monde, 1886, li., p. 266.

^100:2 J. MENANT. Pierres gravies de la Haute-Asie, vol. ii., p.191.

^101:1 C. A. SERRURE. La numismatique et l'archeologie gauloise, in the Annales de la Societe d'archeologie de Bruxelles, vol. iv., p. 58.

^101:2 CH. ROBERT. Lettre a M. R. Chalon, in the Revue belge de numismatique of 1859, p. 133 et seq. It must be observed that the letter H is the first in Hannonia (Hainault).

^102:1 See chaps. v. and vi.

^104:1 JULES BORGNET. L'Hotel de ville et le Perron de Namur, in the Messager des sciences historiques. Ghent, 1846, p. 235.

^104:2 LOYENS. Recueil heraldique des bourgmestres de la noble cite de Liege. Liege, 1720.

^104:3 The name itself means simply "stone" (from petronem). It [p. 105] is generally used in the sense of a stone with steps, a stone staircase. Yet, in the vicinity of Verdes, in France, there are several artificial mounds, composed of heaps of stones, which are named perrons or perroux, and which have given rise to many legends. (Une visite a Verdes, by M. Ludovic Guignard (from the Bulletin de la Societe Dunoise. Chateaudun, 1891.)

^105:1 CH. PIOT. Observations sur le perron de Liege, in the Revue belge de numismatique, vol. iii., p. 369 et seq.

^105:2 BARON DE CHESTRET. Le perron liegeois, in the Reports of the Institut archeologique liegeois, vol. xviii. (1885), p. 175 et seq.

^105:3 HeNAUX. Le Peron de Liege, in the Revue de Liege, vol. vi. (1846), p. 86 et seq.

^105:4 CH. RAHLENBEEK. Le Perron de Liege, in the Revue de Belgique, vol. lxv. (1890), p. 31 et seq.

^105:5 EUG. DOGNeE. Liege, in the Collection nationale, Brussels, 1 vol. ill., pp. 24-27.

^106:1 De mor. German., xxiv.

^107:1 "At enom hvita helga Steini" (Godrunar-Harmr, str. 47). (In Edda Saemundar Hinns Froda, Stockholm, 1818, p. 237.)

^107:2 HOLMBOE. Traces de Bouddhisme en Norvege, fig. 10.

^107:3 Gesta Hammenburgensis Ecclesiae pontificum, Hamburg, 1706, lib. i., ch. vi.

^108:1 HENAUX. Loc. cit., p. 91.

^108:2 G. DENNIS. The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria. London, 1848, vol. ii., pp. 157, 193, and 492.--Cf. JOS. MICALI. Monuments antiques. Paris, 1824, tab. xxxvi.

^108:3 L. VAN DER KINDERE. Introduction a l'histoire des institutions de la Belgique au moyen age. Brussels, 1890, p. 86.

^108:4 It must be also taken into consideration that the burning altar often represented, as is seen at Mycenae (see below, fig. 74), by a cylindrical pyre surmounted by a triangular-shaped flame, was accounted the centre and palladium of the city in the most ancient republics of antiquity. (Cf. FUSTEL DE COULANGES. La cite antique.)--But this tradition does not seem to have spread beyond Greece and Italy.

^109:1 Georg., i., 20.

^109:2 VON RAISER. Die romischen Alterthumer zu Augsburg. Augsburg, 1820, pl. xxi.

^111:1 Abbe COCHET. La Normandie souterraine. Paris, 1855, p. 344--A. BEQUET. Nos fouilles en 1880, in the Annales de la Societe archeologique de Namur, vol. xv., p. 315.

^112:1 "Truncum quoque ligni non parvae magnitudinis in altum erectum sub divo colebant patria eum lingua Irminsul appelantes, quod Latine dicitur universalis columna quasi sustinens omnia." (Op. cit., liv. i., ch. vi.)

^112:2 "Robur Jovis sive Thori deastri." (ECKART. Commentarii de rebus Franciae orientalis. Wurzburg, 1729, p. 344.)

^112:3 Pharsalia, iii, 412.

^113:1 ECKART. Op. cit., p. 221.--MEIBOM. DE IRMINSULA SAXONICA, p. 20.

^113:2 Translated into French by M. Lemonnier. Venice, 1891, figs. 19 and 165.

^114:1 LILIEGREN. Nord Fomlemningar, ii., No. xci.--Cf. CARTAILHAC. La France prehistorique. Paris, 1889, p. 317: "Many unhewn pillars in the departments of the Yonne, Cotes du Nord, Finisterre, Morbihan, Indre, Creuse, Puy-de-Dome, Saone-et-Loire, etc., bear Crosses and even Madonnas."

^115:1 MACCARIUS. Hagioglypta. Paris, 1856, p. 205.

^116:1 My dissertation upon the origins of the perron has had the privilege of reviving, in Belgium, the controversies which this subject seems never to exhaust. We must instance, in particular, the recent works of MM. Leon Van der Kindere, Leon Naveau, and Eugene Monseur.

M. Naveau has no hesitation in adopting the theory of M. the Abbe Louis, that the perron of Liege was, from the beginning, a real Calvary, with a purely religious signification. Liege, which, as he points out, was at one time a mere village, only became an important city from the time of St. Lambert, its first bishop and veritable founder. Now, he asks, is it credible that a bishop would have chosen a pagan symbol as an emblem of his city? (Le Perron Liegeois, from the Bulletin de l'Institut archeologique Liegeois. Liege, 1892.)

M. L. Van der Kindere admits, on his side, that the perron was in all times an elevated Cross, but he adds that this Cross had essentially a secular and administrative import. It was the symbol of the Weichbildrecht, that is to say, of the right granted to the towns to establish a market under the protection of the imperial authority, and it was thus it came to symbolize the whole of the municipal liberties. In reference to this, he recalls to mind the Rolandsaulen, those columns serving as a support to the image of a warrior, bearing the name of Roland, which, from the thirteenth century onwards, are noticed in many towns in northern Germany. He considers that these statues might have replaced the Cross as a symbolical representation of the imperial power. (Notes sur les Perrons, in le Bulletin de l'Academie royale de Belgique. Brussels, 1892, vol. xxi. (3rd series), p. 497.)

According to M. Monseur, whose opinion I am rather inclined to accept, perrons, Rolandsaulen and Irminsaulen, would be forms, differing according to time and place, of the post, sometimes adorned with a shield, which the ancient Germans used to erect in their public meetings, and which were consecrated to the patron god of those assemblies, probably Tiews, whose name, the Germanic equivalent of Zeus, is [p. 117] met with in the word Tuesday. This god bears the epithet of "god of the assembly" (thingsaz, i.e., Zeus agoraios), a surname which has been pointed out in an inscription in England. This post was probably erected on a stone; whence the expression, met with in old Alsatian texts, to have "post and stone in a village," meaning, to have jurisdiction there. At a later date these posts had the Cross placed on them in Belgium, as in Germany they were surmounted by the statue of the hero whom the "chansons de geste" represented as the paladin above all others, and whose name, besides, probably offered a certain consonance with Hrodo, like Irmin, one of the names of the god Tiews. (Supplement litteraire de l'Independance belge of the 3rd of May, 1891.)

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

SYMBOLISM AND MYTHOLOGY OF THE TREE.

I. The Sacred Tree and its acolytes.--The Tree in the art and symbolism of Mesopotamia.--The Tree between two animals, or two monsters; adoption of this theme by the Persians, Phoenicians, Greeks, Hindus, Arabs, and Christians.--The Tree between two human personages; its migrations into Persia, India, and the extreme East.--Characteristic features of the images derived from these two themes.--The variety of certain details does not preclude relationship between symbolical combinations.--Substitution of sacred objects for the Tree between its acolytes.

II. Interpretation of the Sacred Tree amongst the Semites.--The Sacred Tree does not merely represent a plant venerated for its uses.--Simulacra of the Goddess of Nature; the asherim.--The representation of the artificial fertilization of the palm-tree became, in Assyria, the symbol of fecundation in general.--Myths and symbols relating to the Tree of Life.--The Cosmogonical Tree in the cuneiform texts.--The Tree of Knowledge.--The Calendar Plant or Lunar Tree.

III. The Paradisaical Trees of the Aryans.--Mythical Trees of the Hindus.--The Tree of Knowledge amongst the Buddhists, and its connection with the Cosmic Tree.--Contests for the fruit of the Tree.--Analogous myths amongst the Persians, Greeks, and Scandinavians.--How far this similarity of traditions denotes a common source.--Logical coincidences in the applications of vegetable symbolism.--Enrichment and approximation of mythologies by the mutual exchange of myths and symbols.

  

I. THE SACRED TREE AND ITS ACOLYTES.

THE Tree is one of the oldest and most widely diffused subjects in Semitic pictorial art, especially in Mesopotamia. [*1] It first appears, on Chaldaean

[p. 119]

cylinders, as a stem divided at the base, surmounted by a fork, or a crescent, and cut, mid-way,

FIG. 61. RUDIMENTARY FORMS OF THE SACRED TREE [*1]

by one or more cross-bars, which sometimes bear a fruit at each extremity.

FIG. 62. VARIETIES OF SACRED TREES [*2]

This rudimentary image frequently changes into

[p. 120]

the palm, the pomegranate, the cypress, the vine, etc. (fig. 62).

On the monuments of Nimrud and Khorsabad, beginning with the tenth century before our era, the

Click to enlarge

FIG. 63. CONVENTIONAL TREES OF ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEFS.

Tree becomes still more complex; it would sometimes seem to be composed of fragments belonging to different kinds of plants. The stem, which suggests a richly ornamented Ionic column, is crowned by a palmette; the base is concealed

[p. 121]

behind a bunch of slender loaves, which, in some cases, recall our fleur-de-lis (fig. 62e), or else it rests upon a pair of fluted horns, which recur again at the top and even in the middle of the stem (fig. 63). On both sides branches spread out symmetrically, bearing conical fruits (fig. 63b), or fan-shaped leaves (fig. 63c), at their extremities. Sometimes the ends of these branches are connected by straps which form a net-work of the most pleasing effect. [*1]

Whatever the ornamental value of this figure may be, it is certain that it has, above all, a religious

Click to enlarge

FIG. 64. THE ACOLYTES OF THE SACRED TREE.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xlix., fig. 9.

signification. It is invariably associated with religious subjects, among the intaglios of the cylinders, the sculptures of the bas-reliefs, and the embroidery of the royal and sacerdotal garments. Above it is frequently suspended the Winged Circle, personifying the supreme divinity, Assur at Nineveh, Bel or Ilu at Babylon. Lastly, it nearly

[p. 122]

always stands between two personages facing each other, who are sometimes priests or kings in an attitude of adoration, sometimes monstrous creatures, such as are so often met with in Assyro-Chaldaean imagery, lions, sphinx, griffins, unicorns, winged bulls, men, or genii, with the head of an eagle, and so forth.

Hence we have two types, or symbolical combinations, whose migrations we can easily follow.

A. The Tree between two animals facing each other makes it first appearance on the oldest

Click to enlarge

FIG. 65. (From the Catalogue of the de Clercq collection, vol. i., pl. ii., 15, and pl. vii., 61.)

cylinders of Chaldaea. In the de Clercq collection it is seen on engraved stones which are attributed, one to the archaic art of Chaldaea, the other to the school that flourished, according to M. J. Menant, in the city of Agadi at the time of Sargon I., some four thousand years before our era. [*1]

[]

Click to enlarge
Plate IV

EXPLANATION OF PLATE IV.

Figure a is a bas-relief of Nineveh, reproduced from LAYARD (Monuments of Nineveh, 2nd series, pl. xlv., fig. 3).

Figure b is taken from a Phoenician bowl discovered at Caerium by M. de Cesnola, and reproduced by M. CLERMONT-GANNEAU (L'Imagerie phenicienne. Paris, 1880, pl. iv.).

Figure c comes from a Persian cylinder inscribed with Aramean characters, the property of M. Schlumberger, and reproduced by M. PH. BERGER (Gazette archeologique for 1888, p. 143).

Figure d belongs to a bowl which was found, together with products of Sassanian art, near the White Sea (J. R. ASPELIN. Antiquites du Nord Finno-Ougrien. Helsingfors, fig. 610).

Figure e is copied from a capital of the temple of Athene at Priene (O. RAYET et A. THOMAS. Milet et le golfe Latinique. Paris, 1887, pl. xlix., No. 5).

Figure f reproduces the ornamentation of an archaic vase of Athens belonging to the British Museum (RAYET et COLLIGNON. Histoire de la ceramique grecque, fig. 25).

Figure g comes from the sculptures on the baptistery at Cividale (LE MONNIER. L'Architecture in Italie. Venice, 1891, fig. 36).

Figure h comes from the bas-reliefs of Bharhut, probably anterior to our era (A. CUNNINGHAM. The Stupa of Bharhut, pl. vi.).

Figure i is copied from a Tanjore carpet at the India Museum in London (SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD. The Industrial Arts of India. London, 1880, p. 53).

Figure j is taken from a tympanum of the church at Marigny, in the Calvados department (DE CAUMONT. Rudiments d'archeologie. Architecture religieuse. Paris, 5th edition, p. 269).

[p. 123]

However this may be, it was only at the time of the Assyrian domination that it received its definite and so highly artistic shape. While the Tree becomes larger and more conspicuous, the two animals, no longer embracing or crossing one another, assume a more natural and strictly symmetrical attitude (see pl. iv., fig. a).

From Mesopotamia this subject passed on the one hand among the Phoenicians and into the whole of Western Asia, on the other among the Persians after the fall of Babylon.

The latter confined themselves to copying the Assyrian type on their seals, their jewels, their cloths, and their bas-reliefs, until the end of the empire of the Sassanidae, in the seventh century of our era (pl. iv., figs. c and d).

From Persia it passed into India, doubtlessly during the period immediately preceding the invasion of Alexander. The presence of the Tree between two lions facing one another among the Buddhist sculptures of Bharhut is even one of the indications that help to prove the influence of Iranian art on the most ancient monuments of Hindu architecture (pl. iv., fig. h). [*1]

In the bas-reliefs of Kanheri, where the symbols of Buddhism are mingled with the reminiscences of an earlier form of worship, the Sacred Tree is sculptured as an object of veneration between two elephants facing one another, whilst in other bas-reliefs it is transformed, flanked by the same two elephants, into the Lotus-flower which forms the Throne of Buddha. [*2] Lastly, after the extinction of Buddhism in India, it was resumed by the

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] Brahmanical sects, which confined themselves to replacing Buddha on his Lotus Throne (still between the two elephants), by Parbati, the spouse of Vishnu. [*1] Moreover, we again meet with the Tree--in which Sir George Birdwood does not hesitate to recognize the Tree of Life--between two animals facing one another on the cloths, the carpets, the vases, and the jewels of contemporary India. [*2] In this last case, however, it is not always easy to discriminate whether we are in the presence of a survival of pre-Islamitic symbolism, or of a reaction of Sassanian art introduced into India by the Islamic invasions (cf. fig. 60 and pl. iv., fig. i).

The Phoenicians borrowed it from Mesopotamia

Click to enlarge

FIG. 66. STELE FROM CYPRUS.
 (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, Vol. iii., fig. 152.)

more than a thousand years anterior to our era, developing its artificial appearance until all semblance of its arboreal origin has well-nigh vanished, to be replaced by an interlacing of spirals and strap-like curves (pl. iv., fig. b).

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Some of those combinations, in which winged sphinxes cling to the spirals, betray a singular medley of Egyptian influences, whilst at the same time already suggesting the elegant modifications of Greek art. [*1]

This type, as conventional as it is aesthetic, occurs wherever Phoenician influence was felt, more especially among the archaic pottery of Corinth and of Athens (pl. iv., fig. f). Perhaps it had already penetrated directly into Greece through Asia Minor, for it is seen on an amphora, discovered by General de Cesnola at Curium, which MM. Rayet and Collignon place among the vases with geometric decorations belonging to an

FIG. 67. VASE FROM CURIUM. (CESNOLA. Cyprus, chap. i., p. 55.)

FIG. 67. VASE FROM CURIUM.
 (CESNOLA. Cyprus, chap. i., p. 55.)

earlier time than the period of Phoenician influence. The Tree preserves here a more natural appearance; it is placed between two quadrupeds standing on their hind legs and overlooking the stem. This brings us back to the Chaldaean prototype of our fig. 65.

If it did not furnish the Greeks with the first idea of the palmette and the honeysuckle ornament, it certainly suggested the decoration of certain capitals, such as those of the temple of Apollo at Didyme, and of Athene Polias at Priene (pl. iv., fig. e). [*2]

[p. 126]

Greece, however, seems only to have made use of it by way of exception. If it penetrated into Italy, and even into Gaul, along with the other products of Oriental imagery, it did not become an ordinary motive of classic art. We may draw attention to its presence, by the way, in a decorative painting at Corneto, [*1] and on a Gallic coin found near Amiens, and attributed to the commencement of our era.

Following in the footsteps of M. Hucher, I had at first taken the object engraved on this coin between

FIG. 68. GALLIC COIN.
 (HUCHER. L'art gaulois, vol. ii., p. 36.)

two quadrupeds to be a cup or drinking vessel. But my attention has been directed to some intaglios of Cyprus, and even of Chaldaea, where the tree assumes the form of a staff supporting a semicircle, as in the figure 61d given above. M. Hucher, with his usual perspicacity, thinks that the subject engraved on this coin belongs "to the same train of thought as that which in antiquity brought face to face the lions of Mycenae on the gates of that town, and the lions of the Arab or Sassanian fabric of Mans on the shroud of St. Bertin, or even, in the thirteenth century, the doves with serpents' tails on the capitals of the cathedral at Mans." It is strange to note the presence of the same theme, dealt with in an identical manner, on a fibula discovered

[p. 127]

near Geneva, which M. Blavignac considers to be of Christian origin. [*1]

However, it is by another way that it was introduced into Christian symbolism. It was, in fact, taken directly from the Persians by the Byzantines about the seventh century of our era. The influence of Sassanian art had made itself felt in the Byzantine Empire from the time of the death of Theodosus, if not earlier. "The Byzantines," says M. Charles Bayet, "did not invent all the ornamental combinations from which they got such pleasing effects; in this instance again they borrowed them from the East, and on the monuments of Persia models are found from which they drew their inspirations." [*2] The same writer proves that in the sixth and seventh centuries the apartments of the rich, and even the treasures of the churches, were filled with stuffs which came from Persia, or which reproduced the subjects of Persian art. [*3] It is related that even Justinian had employed a Persian architect to decorate several buildings in Constantinople. [*4] Under these circumstances, how could the Byzantines help adopting one of the most pleasing and widely diffused Sassanian themes of decoration, which lent itself both to the refinements of ornamentation and to the fancies of the symbolical imagination? This is, moreover, the way by which the whole fantastic fauna of the East entered Europe, to form the Christian symbolic menagery of the Middle Ages. [*5]

[p. 128]

From the Grecian provinces it was introduced into Italy, where it is often found in religious architecture between the seventh and the eleventh centuries in Sicily, at Ravenna, and especially at Venice (see pl. iv., fig. g, and also fig. 58). Here it was even taken up and reproduced by the Renaissance, as may be seen at Santa Maria del Miracoli, at the Scuola of San Marco, etc. [*1]

Finally, it crossed the Alps with Roman art. M. de Caumont was one of the first to draw attention to its presence amongst the sculptures of the Roman period, in particular on a tympanum of the church at Marigny, in the Calvados department. It is here sculptured between two lions, which hold the stem with their fore-paws, and bite at the extremities of the middle branches (pl. iv., fig. j). [*2]

What a strange fate for this antique symbol, which, after being used for several thousand years in the long since vanished worships of Higher Asia, came thus to be stranded, in the western extremity of Europe, on the sanctuary of a religion possessing also amongst its oldest traditions the reminiscence of the Paradisaical Trees of Mesopotamia! [*3]

[]

Click to enlarge
Plate V

EXPLANATION OF PLATE V.

Figure a is taken from an Assyrian cylinder (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. lxi., fig. 6).

Figure b, from the ornamentation of a Phoenician bowl (CLERMONT GANNEAU. L'Imagerie phenicienne, pl. vi.).

Figure c, from an imperial coin of Myra in Lycia (COLLIGNON. Mythologie figuree de la Grece. Paris, Bibliotheque des Beaux-Arts, p. 10).

Figure d, from a Persian seal (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xliv., xlvi., No. 3).

Figure e, from the sculptures in the caves of Kanerki (FERGUSON and BURGESS. Cave Temples of India, pl. x., fig. 35).

Figure f, from the bas-reliefs in the cave of Karli (MOOR. Hindu Pantheon, pl. lxxii.).

Figure g, from a wooden group in the Musee Guimet.

Figure h, from a Chaldean cylinder (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xvi., fig. 4).

Figures i and j, from coins of the Javanese temples (MILLIES. Monnaies de l'Archipel Indien, pl. vi., fig. 50, and pl. ix., fig. 67).

Figure k, from a Maya manuscript known by the name of the Fejervary Codex (Publications of the Bureau of Ethnography. Washington, 1882, vol. iii., p. 32).

Figure l, from the ornamentation of a modern Syrian copper dish inscribed with cufic characters, presented by the Count Goblet d'Alviella to Sir George Birdwood.

Figure m, from the bas-reliefs of the cathedral at Monreale (D. B. GRAVINAT. Il duomo di Monreale. Palermo, 1859, pl. xv., H).

[p. 129]

B. The image of the Tree between two human (or semi-human) personages invariably facing one another followed at first almost the same route as the type whose migrations I have just described. The two themes are sometimes combined, as we see, in Assyria itself, on the cylinder reproduced above (fig. 64). Modified considerably by Greek art, like all symbols which made use of the human figure (pl. v., fig. c, and below, figs. 69 and 83), it remained more faithful to its earliest type in Phoenicia (pl. v., fig. b), in Persia (pl. v., fig. d), and even in India, where the two Assyrian eagle-headed genii (pl. v., fig. a), which advance towards the Tree holding the symbolical Cone, became the two naga-rajahs, or "snake-kings,"--their heads entwined with cobras--who support the stem of the Buddhist Lotus (pl. v., fig. e). In the grottoes of Karli this stem, which serves as a support to the Throne of the Master, stands erect both between two of those naga-rajahs and two deer facing one another (pl. v., fig. f).

These sculptures date back to a period which cannot be prior to the reign of Asoka, i.e., the middle of the third century B.C., nor much later than the beginning of our era. It is interesting to again come across them, at an interval, perhaps, of two thousand years, in Japanese wooden groups of the seventeenth century belonging to the Guimet Museum. In one of them the naga-rajahs bear a genuine dragon on their shoulders; this substitution, together with some differences in the costume and the figure of these personages, is almost the only liberty which the native art took with the old Buddhist subject, long since forgotten in its original home (pl. v., fig. g).

From India it reached, in company with Buddhism, the island of Java, where we meet with it upon those curious medals of temples which the natives, although converted centuries ago to

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] Islamism, continue to wear by way of talismans. It occurs there, amongst other Buddhist symbols, between two figures with human bodies and beasts' or birds' heads,--which is surely the Mesopotamian conception in all its integrity (pl. v., figs. i and j).

It is also found in China on Taoist medals, recalling the coins of the Javanese temples. [*1] Here, however, the disposition of the Tree, as also the costume of the personages, refer to quite a different type, whether it be that we are here in the presence of a corruption of Javanese coins, or that these, in imitating the Taoist coins, cast, so to speak, the subject of the latter in a mould provided by the Buddhist symbols of India.

From the Indian Archipelago--or from Eastern Asia--it may have even reached the New World, if we are to judge from the resemblance of the scene depicted on the Javanese medals to certain images found in manuscripts connected with the ancient civilization of Central America.

We have seen that the Cross was used, in the symbolism of the ancient inhabitants of America, to represent the winds which bring the rain. These crosses sometimes assume a tree-like form, and are then composed of a stem bearing two horizontal branches, with a bird perched on the fork, as in the famous stele of Palenque. [*2] Moreover, this tree is sometimes placed between two personages facing one another, with a sort of wreath of feathers on their heads, who cannot but. recall the monstrous aspect of the beings depicted on both sides of the Tree upon the medals of Javanese temples. The reproduction which I

[p. 131]

here give (pl. v., fig. k) from the Fejervary Codex [*1] shows up this parallel all the more, since it is placed close to medals of Java and underneath a Chaldaean cylinder which might be almost made the prototype of all these images (pl. v., fig. h).--We have here certainly fresh evidence in favour of the theory which already relies upon so many symbolical and ornamental similarities in order to discover, in the pre-Columbian civilization of America, the traces of intercourse with Japan, China, or the Indian Archipelago.

Finally, by a singular case of atavism, this subject, which already adorned the Chaldaean cylinders of five or six thousand years ago, reappears in our own times in the decoration of the copper vases or plates, known as mosouli, which are still manufactured in Syria, on the banks of the Euphrates and the Tigris (pl. v., fig. l). There is still the palm-tree between its two acolytes,--henceforth dressed as fellahin,--who are engaged in plucking the two large fruits, or rather conventional clusters, suspended side by side beneath the crown.

On the other hand, it was quite adapted to furnish the first Christian artists with a model of the scene of the Temptation; all that was needed was to give a different sex to the two acolytes (pl. v., fig. m). Already in the art of the Catacombs it frequently occurs with this application. [*2]

The cabinet of antiquities at the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris possesses a cameo which has likewise been held to represent the scene of the Temptation, although it depicts the quarrel between Poseidon and Athene under the sacred olive-tree,

[p. 132]

in the presence of the serpent Erichthonios. [*1] What makes the case very interesting is, not only that we have here engraved upon the stone the Hebrew text of Genesis III. 6, but that we also find at work those touching-up processes which were sometimes made use of in order to

Click to enlarge

FIG. 69. ANTIQUE CAMEO.
 (BABELON. Cabinet des Medailles, pl. xxvi.)

adapt a pre-existent image to the expression of a new tradition.

The olive-tree has been changed into an apple-tree. Neptune's Trident and Minerva's Spear have been scraped out. The attempt has even been

[p. 133]

made to transform into some sort of a head-dress the helmet, inappropriate enough, to be sure, on the head of our first mother, and in her companion's hand has been placed a round object, which may pass for an apple.

To be sure, the occurrence of the representation of a tree between two animals or personages, even when facing one another, is not in itself sufficient for one to infer that it is connected with the types described above. Yet, in the examples I have given, the original identity of the inspiration may be verified, not only by a general resemblance spread throughout the whole image,--we might call it a family likeness,--but also by the presence of certain features, its ineffacable characteristics, so to speak, by which it may everywhere be recognized.

In the first place, there is the symmetry in the expression and attitude of the two acolytes, often also in the form of the Tree and the arrangement of the branches. Then we have the presence, often unaccountable, of a pair of volutes between which the stem rises. These two spirals sometimes represent branches, or petals, of flowers (pl. iv., figs. a, b, c, e, g, i, j,; pl. v., figs. a, d, h, i, l), sometimes curved horns (figs. 63, 64; pl. iv., figs. a, b, e, f, g, i, j; pl. v., figs. a, b, f, i, k). We may, perhaps, attribute their origin either to the conventional representation of the clusters which adorn the image of the Chaldaean Palm-tree, or to the introduction of the horns which were amongst the Assyrians a distinguishing sign of the divinity.

Finally, a detail which seems to be equally characteristic of the Sacred Tree in the most different countries is the appearance of serpents, which sometimes twine themselves round the stem (figs. 60, 69, 83; pl. iv., fig. d; pl. v., figs. c, e, f, g, m), and sometimes figure merely in the

[p. 134]

background of the image (fig. 59, and pl. v., fig. h).

It must be observed that it is not the identity of the species of plants which constitutes the essential feature of the symbol through all its local modifications, but rather the constant reappearance of its hieratic accessories.

Each nation seems, indeed, to have introduced into this symbolical combination the tree which it deemed the most valuable. Thus we see depicted in turn the date-palm in Chaldaea, the vine or a cone-bearing plant in Assyria, the lotus in Phoenicia, and the fig-tree in India. [*1]

Moreover, following in the footsteps of the Assyrians, who had inserted into this Tree features which were quite extraneous to the vegetable kingdom, some creeds replaced the plant itself by other sacred objects.

The Phrygians placed the representation of a pillar, a phallus, or an urn, between winged sphinxes,

FIG. 70. TOMB AT KUMBET.
 (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'Art, vol. V., fig. 84.)

lions, or bulls, facing each other, as is still to be seen on the pediments of the tombs hewn in the rocks of Phrygia. As M. Perrot observes: "Though one element is substituted for another,

[p. 135]

the group preserves none the less the same character." [*1]

On a cylinder, which M. Menant considers of

FIG. 71. HITTITE CYLINDER.
 (De Clercq collection, vol. i. of Catalogue, pl. xxviii., No. 289.)

[paragraph continues] Hittite origin, the arborescent stalk becomes a Winged Globe.

The Pelopides of Mycenae, and, later, the Persians, put in its stead a pyre or fire-altar. [*2]

FIG. 72. PERSIAN CYLINDER.
 (CH. LENORMANT, in the Melanges d'archeologie, vol. iii., pp. 130 and 131.)

[paragraph continues] The group which formerly surmounted the celebrated gate of Mycenae certainly represented an object of this nature between lions facing one another (fig. 73).

The Buddhists introduced their principal "jewels" into the image, as may be seen in the following reproduction of a small portable altar, where the object, portrayed between two animals in a crouching attitude, represents perhaps the

[p. 136]

astronomical emblem of the nine planets, the

FIG. 73. GATE OF MYCENae.
 (SCHLIEMANN. Mycenes.)

nava-ratna, borrowed by Buddhist symbolism from the Hindus (fig. 74).

FIG. 74. TIBETAN SYMBOL.
 (HODGSON. Journ. of the Roy. Asiatic Soc., vol. xviii., 1st series, pl. i., No. 18.)

In Chinese and, perhaps, Japanese art, the "great jewel" becomes a pearl, frequently depicted between two dragons facing one another, with partly-open jaws. We may, perhaps, find a curious application of this symbol in the customs of the Chinese. M. de Groodt relates that in the festival of lanterns they lead about a dragon made of cloth and bamboo, before whose mouth they wave a round lantern like a ball or pearl of fire,--whether this scene represents the conflict of the celestial bodies with the devouring dragon, in keeping with the Chinese conception of eclipses,

[p. 137]

or the vain efforts of falsehood to swallow up truth. [*1]

We have seen above that the Greeks, in imitation of the Phoenicians, represented between

FIG. 75a. BAS-RELIEF ON A SARCOPHAGUS.
 (MILLIN. Voyage dans le Midi, pi. lxv.)

FIG. 75b. CHRISTIAN SCULPTURE OF THE THIRD CENTURY.
 (ROLLER. Catacombes, vol. i., p. 53.)

two birds the bethel of the Cyprian Aphrodite and the omphalos of the Delphic Apollo, thus creating a new theme less extravagant and fantastic. The Christians, in their turn, from the time of the Catacombs, placed two figures on the sides of their principal emblems,--not only of the Cross, which is

[p. 138]

also called "a Tree of Life," but also of the Chrism, the labarum, the rouelle, the Crown, the bunch of Grapes, the eucharistic Cup, and so forth. [*1] Sometimes these figures are lambs, and sometimes peacocks, or doves (fig. 75, a and b).

Among the wooden ornaments of Romoaldus' episcopal throne in San Sabino at Canossa, we even find the mystic candelabrum thus sculptured between two griffins:

FIG. 76. WOODEN SCULPTURE AT CANOSSA.
 (H. W. SCHULTZ. Kunst des Mittelalters in Italien, pl. vi., fig. 1.

Then chivalry placed its coats of arms between the two creatures facing one another,--lions, leopards, unicorns, griffins, giants, etc. Charles Lenormant was not mistaken in saying, with respect to the filiation of these types: "When the use of armorial bearings began to develop in the West, Europe was deluged with the manufactured articles of Asia, and the first lions drawn on escutcheons were certainly copied from Persian and Arabian tissues. These tissues themselves dated back, from one imitation to another, to the models from which, perhaps, over a thousand years before Christ, the author of the bas-reliefs of Mycenae, drew his inspiration." [*2]

The same tendency is still at work. When, more than half-a-century ago, the Royal Institute of British Architects wished to have armes parlantes,

[p. 139]

it chose a Corinthian column, on the sides of which it placed two British lions facing each other.

Click to enlarge

FIG. 77. SEAL OF THE R. Inst. of British Architects.

Some time ago, while on a visit to the fine estate, well-known in the country round Liege under the name of the Rond-Chene, I observed, sculptured on a mantelpiece of recent construction, an oak of pyramidal form with a heraldic griffin on either side. On inquiring whether these were not the old armorial bearings of the domain, I was told that it was merely an artistic conceit, suggested by the name of the locality. I could not give a better instance of how the sculptor, or engraver, even whilst yielding to quite a different inspiration, upholds, nevertheless, a tradition unbroken for thirty centuries, and obeys, more or less consciously, a law which may be formulated thus: When an artist wants to bring into prominence, as a symbol, the isolated image of an object which lends itself to a symmetrical representation, particularly a tree or pillar, he places on either side two creatures facing one another,--giving rise sometimes, in return, to a myth or legend in order to account for the combination.

Footnotes

^118:1 JOACHIN MENANT. Les pierres gravees de la Haute-Asie. Paris, 1883-86, vol. i., figs. 41, 43, 71, 86, 704, 115, 120, 121, [p. 119] and 142; vol. ii., figs. 11, 13, 17, 18, 19, 36, 41, 54 to 61, 85, 110, 208, 213, etc.

^119:1 a is taken from a Chaldaean cylinder (J. MENANT, Pierres gravees, vol. i., fig. 71); b, from a cylinder of Nineveh (LAYARD, Monuments of Nineveh, 2nd series, pl. ix., No. 9); c, from a Chaldean cylinder (J. MENANT, Pierres gravees, vol. i., fig. 115); d, from an Assyrian cylinder (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite, vol. ii., fig. 342).

^119:2 a (MENANT, Pierres gravees, vol. i., fig. 86); b (LAJARD, Mithra, pl. xxxix., fig. 8); c (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, Histoire de l'art, vol. ii., fig. 235); d (Seal of Sennacherib, MENANT, Pierres gravees, vol. ii., fig. 85).

^121:1 LAYARD. Monuments of Nineveh, 1st series, pl. 6, 7, 8, 9, 25, 39, 44.--G. RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World. London, 1862-67, vol. ii., pp. 236, 237.--See also passim in the Atlas, appended by Felix Lajard to his Introduction a l'etude du culte de Mithra.

^122:1 The object engraved between the two monsters in fig. 65a is, according to the Catalogue of the de Clercq collection, a candelabrum. I think that we must rather see in this a tree of the kind reproduced above (fig. 62c), from a bas-relief in the Louvre. Moreover, the Tree, the Candelabrum, and the Column, are images which merge into one another with the greatest ease (cf. below, fig. 76). The two objects have not only a resemblance of form, but also of idea, on which matter I cannot do better than refer the reader to the chapter entitled The [p. 123] Jewel Bearing Tree in Mr. W. R. Lethaby's recent work, Architecture, Mysticism, and Myth.

^123:1 A. CUNNINGHAM. The Ships of Bharhut. London, 1879, pl. vi. and vii.

^123:2 FERGUSSON and BURGESS. Cave Temples of India. London, 1880, p. 350.

^124:1 MOOR. Hindu Pantheon, pl. 30.

^124:2 SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD. Industrial Arts of India. London, 1880, p. 350.

^125:1 SARA YORKE STEVENSON. On certain Symbols of some Potsherds from Daphnae and Naucratis. Philadelphia, 1892, p. 13 et seq.

^125:2 O. RAYET and A. THOMAS. Milet et le golfe Latinique. Paris, 1877, pl. xvii., No. 9, and pl. xlix., No. 5.

^126:1 J. MARTHA. Archeologie Etrusque et Romaine. Paris, fig. 8.

^127:1 J. D. BLAVIGNAC. Histoire de l'architecture sacree a Geneve. Paris, Atlas, pl. ii., fig. 2.

^127:2 L'Art Byzantin. Paris, p. 60.

^127:3 Id., chap. iii.

^127:4 BATISSIER, quoted by E. SOLDI. Les Arts meconnus. Paris, 1881, p. 252.

^127:5 The Tree between two lions facing one another appears already on an ivory casket which Millin attributes to an early period of the Byzantine Empire, and which is now in the [p. 128] cathedral of Sens. (Voyage dans les Departements du Midi. Paris, 1807, pl. x. of Atlas.)

^128:1 BACHELIN DEFLORENNE. L'Art, la Decoration et l'Ornement des Tissus. Paris, pl. iv. and xiii.

^128:2 It is generally the griffin which is chosen in preference, perhaps because it symbolizes vigilance.

^128:3 The Arabs adopted it in their turn, when they had overthrown the Sassanian dynasty, but divesting it of all religious signification. Through their agency it reached Europe towards the beginning of the Middle Ages, together with the stuffs which are still extant in private and public collections, in treasures of churches, and so forth. (See Anciennes etoffes in the Melanges d'archeologie of MM. Ch. Cahier and A. Martin, vol. i., pl. 43; vol. ii., pl. 12 and 16; vol. iii., pl. 20 and 23; vol. iv., pl. 24 and 25.) It is also to be seen on a golden vase, adorned with enamelled partition work, which belongs to the church of Saint-Martin-en-Valais, and which is said to have been sent to Charlemagne by the Caliph Haroun Al Rashid.

^130:1 Specimens of these medals are to be found in the department of medals in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris.

^130:2 A bird perched on the fork of the Sacred Tree is likewise seen on certain Persian cylinders. (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. LIVc fig. 6.)

^131:1 CYRUS THOMAS. Notes on certain Maya and Mexican Manuscripts, in the publications of the Bureau of Ethnology. Washington, 1881-82, vol. iii., p. 32.

^131:2 GARUCCI. Storia del' Arte christiana, tab. xxiii., 1.

^132:1 BABELON. Le Cabinet des Medailles d la Bibliotheque nationale. Paris, 1888, p. 79.

^134:1 M. Didron observes, in his Manuel d'iconographie chretienne (Paris, 1845, p. 80), that each Christian nation chose the plant which it preferred to represent the Tree of Temptation; the fig and orange-trees in Greece, the vine in Burgundy and Champagne, the cherry-tree in the Isle of France, and the apple-tree in Picardy.

^135:1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Op. cit., vol. v., p. 220.

^135:2 See a painted vase in the Blacas collection. (Mem. de l'Acad. des inscr. et bel.-lett., vol. xvii., pl. viii.)

^137:1 Les fetes annuelles a Emoui, in vol. xi. of the Annales du Musee Guimet. Paris, 1886, p. 369.

^138:1 ROLLER. Catacombes, vol. i., pl. xi., figs. 3, 4, 29 to 34, etc.

^138:2 Melanges d'archeologie, by MM. Martin and Cahier, vol. iii., p. 138.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 140]

  

II. SIGNIFICATION OF THE SACRED TREE AMONGST THE SEMITES.

We have just seen that the adoption of a complex symbol, such as the Assyrian image of the Sacred Tree, does not necessarily imply the acceptance of the myths with which it is connected in its original home. But if distrust is wise when it is a question of interpreting the earliest meaning of these images by means of the beliefs which they represent amongst nations unconnected with the Assyrians, such as the Hindus, the Greeks, the Christians, and the ancient inhabitants of America, this is no longer the case when we have to deal with nations belonging to the same race, or possessing at least a common fund of mythological traditions, as, for instance, almost all the inhabitants of Anterior Asia, from the Tigris to the Mediterranean; though, even then, we have to ascertain whether the interpretation which certain branches of the Semitic race give to their Sacred Trees meets with any confirmation in the texts of Mesopotamia properly so called.--We might afterwards, perhaps, go a step further, and find out, amongst some at least of the nations belonging to other races, whether, in their own traditions, there are not points of contact which justify or explain the assimilation of the Assyrian symbol.

The first question to be inquired into is as to whether we are not in the presence of a mere case of tree-worship. Nearly all nations, and the Semites in particular, venerated the trees which impressed them by the singularity of their forms, the vastness of their proportions, their great age, and especially by the usefulness of their fruits. The first beings, according to the Phoenician traditions, "consecrated the plants which grew on the earth; they made gods of them, and worshipped

[p. 141]

the very things on which they lived, offering up to them libations and sacrifices." [*1]

M. Bonavia, a botanist who has subjected to a minute examination the flora of the Mesopotamian monuments, maintains that the sacred tree of Assyria is merely an amalgamation of the plants formerly venerated in that country by reason of their uses; the palm for its dates, the vine for its juice, the pine-tree and the cedar for their timber and firewood, the pomegranate for its services in the production of tannin and in the preparation of sherberts. As for the horns grafted on the stem, they would represent the horns of animals,--oxen, wild-goats, ibex, and so forth,--which doubtless were suspended from the branches to ward off the evil eye. [*2]

I would be the first to admit that purely utilitarian considerations of this kind had originally suggested to the Mesopotamians the worship of certain trees which were afterwards used to represent the Sacred Tree. Yet the boldly conventional form of the latter,--the nature of its hieratic accessories, starting with the symbolical horns of the divinity,--its frequent association with the figure of the supreme God,--the prominence everywhere accorded, in public worship, to its representations,--already imply that it not only exhibits the image of a plant venerated for its natural qualities, but that it must be something more; either the vegetable symbol of a divine power, like the asherah mentioned in the Bible, or the simulacrum of a mythical plant like the Winged Oak, on which--according to a Phoenician tradition quoted by Pherecydes of Syros--the supreme God had woven the earth, the starry firmament, and the ocean.

Let us therefore carefully consider what share

[p. 142]

conceptions of this kind may have had in the mythology of the Semitic nations.

In the first place, these peoples frequently represented by a tree the female personification of Nature, who, under various names, and even with different attributes, seems above all to have embodied in their opinion the conceptions of life, of fecundity, and of universal renovation: Istar, Mylitta, Anat, Astarte, Tanit, and others.--At Heliopolis, where the worship of the Great Goddess prevailed, coins present to our view a cypress of pyramidical form, planted beneath the peristyle of a temple, in the very place where other medals have either a Conical Stone, the well-known representation of Astarte, or else the image, or bust, of the Goddess herself. [*1]

Movers informs us that the Venus of Lebanon bore the local name of the Cypress. [*2] At Rome there is an altar of the Palmyrene which exhibits on one of its sides the image of a solar god, and on the other a cypress of pyramidical form, whose foliage admits a child carrying a ram upon its shoulders. [*3] M. Lajard quotes in this instance the story related of Apuleius, who, wishing to paint the son of Venus in his mother's lap, depicted him in the foliage of a cypress. [*4] To the same class of images belongs the pine in which Cybele imprisons the body of Atys till the spring-time. This tree has been thought to be the simulacrum of the solar god; it seems to me more logical to seek therein the symbol of the Matrix in which Atys awaits his annual resuscitation.

We are all acquainted with the legend of Myrrha,

[p. 143]

another Asiatic variety of Artemis-Aphrodite. Myrrha, bearing Adonis, was transformed into a tree, and, according to a version recorded by Hyginus, was set free by the stroke of an axe. Now, on an imperial coin of Myra, in Lycia, a tree is seen whose fork supports the image of a goddess (pl. v., fig. c). On either side is a wood-cutter with a raised axe. Whatever the meaning of this scene may have been in the local mythology of the period, it is difficult not to refer it to the Oriental representations of the Sacred Tree, in so far as it was a simulacrum of the Goddess.

In Palestine, the Bible tells us, they venerated, beside the stelai or hammanim symbolizing Baal, simulacra of Ashtaroth, representing this goddess of the fruitful and nourishing earth under the form of a tree, or rather stake, begirt with drapery and bandelets. These are the asherim which the Hebrews, in spite of the upbraidings of the prophets of Yahveh, did not cease to "construct" and "plant," in imitation of the former inhabitants of the country, from the time when the twelve tribes settled in the land of Canaan [*1] till the day on which the King Josiah burnt, near the Kedron, the asherah set up by Manasseh in the temple of Jerusalem itself. [*2]

The asherah must then have been a simulacrum, which, like our May-Poles laden with conventional attributes, was at once artificially constructed and planted in the ground. The Sacred Tree of the Mesopotamian monuments exhibits this feature more than once. From the earliest times of Chaldaean engraving, it occurs, as I have above mentioned, under the form of a staff placed on a support and crowned by two branches. On a cylinder found by M. de Sarzec at Telloh, two long strings, plaited like whip-cord, are even seen

[p. 144]

descending from the fork of the tree. According to M. J. Menant, all that it has been possible to find out from the archaic inscription on this cylinder is that it relates to a goddess invoked by a prince who proclaims himself her servant. [*1]

FIG. 78. CHALDaeAN CYLINDER.
 (HEUZEY. La Masse d'armes. Paris, 1887, p. 15.)

On other cylinders, reproducing scenes of adoration, or of sacrifice, the rudimentary tree sometimes accompanies and sometimes replaces the image of a naked woman with her heels touching and hands turned towards her breasts. Now, this hieratic type is incontestably the representation of Istar, not the chaste and warlike Istar who was worshipped at Nineveh, but the voluptuous and procreative Istar venerated in particular at Babylon, and more or less related to the goddess of the asherim. [*2]

This might justify the hypothesis of M. Francois Lenormant, who not only sought an equivalent of the asherah in the Sacred Tree of Mesopotamia, but who also descried,--in the combination so often reproduced in Assyria of the Winged Circle suspended over the Sacred Tree,--the old cosmogonical

[p. 145]

pair of Assur and his companion, the creative heaven and the productive earth. [*1]

It ought to be noticed that the representations of the Sacred Tree in art become particularly frequent under the Sargonidae. According to Mr. Boscawen, the symbolical image of the Tree between the two genii is not found prior to the ninth century before our era; [*2] and, with rare exceptions, is met with on Assyrian, not on Babylonian monuments. Now it was especially at the time of the Sargonidae or at least during the second Assyrian empire, that Istar was placed beside Assur as a divinity of the first rank.

There remains to be seen what could have given the Semites the idea of representing by a tree their Great Goddess of Nature. I will here call attention to the interesting essay which Mr. Edw. B. Tylor published in the Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology of June, 1890, under the title of Winged Figures of the Assyrian and other ancient Monuments. The learned Oxford professor points out that in by far the greater number of cases the Sacred Tree of the Assyrian monuments exhibits the form of the palm, and also that the two genii seem to hold towards the tree the point of a conical object, with a reticulated surface, exactly similar to the inflorescence of the male palm. On a bas-relief in the Louvre one of the genii is even seen putting this object into one of the palmettes at the end of the branches.

We have therefore here a representation of the fertilization of the palm by the artificial transference of the pollen to the clusters of the female or date-bearing tree, a process which was known to

[p. 146]

the Mesopotamians, as passages from Herodotus and Theophrastus formally prove. [*1]

Others have maintained that this object was the cone of a pine or cedar, a fruit well known for

Click to enlarge
FIG. 79. ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEF. (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'Art antique, vol. ii., f. 8.)

FIG. 79. ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEF.
 (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'Art antique, vol. ii., f. 8.)

its prophylactic reputation amongst the Assyrians. In adopting this theory, M. Bonavia adds that the fir-cone doubtlessly performed the function of an aspergillum. The genii would have it to besprinkle the Tree with the lustral water taken from the receptacle which they carried in the other hand, a receptacle which M. Bonavia takes to be

[p. 147]

a metal bucket, and Mr. Tylor a wicker basket. We would thus be in the presence of a true scene of exorcism such as are described in the magic texts of the period. Water, consecrated by certain formulae, figures indeed with many nations among the procedures employed to put demons to flight. [*1]

M. Bonavia, besides, adduces the testimony of an Oriental, alleging that certain sects use to this day a fir-cone for their sacred sprinklings. [*2]

Nevertheless, the monuments seem to decide in favour of Mr. Tylor, who places side by side the Cone represented in the hand of the genii and

Click to enlarge

FIG. 80. INFLORESCENCE OF THE MALE DATE-PALM.

the inflorescence of the male date-palm copied from nature (fig. 80).

As a complete representation of the scene already become mythical, Mr. Tylor reproduces a bas-relief on which--in front of the two genii who advance towards the Tree with the inflorescence in one hand--we find two personages kneeling in an attitude of invocation, and holding the end of

[p. 148]

an undulating ribbon which falls from the Winged Disc depicted above the tree.

These personages have generally been taken to be praying, and the two ribbons to be the symbol of the tie which unites the god to his worshippers.

Click to enlarge

FIG. 81. ASSYRIAN BAS-RELIEF.
 (LAYARD. Monuments of Nineveh, pl. 59A.)

[paragraph continues] Mr. Tylor sees therein two cords by which the deities guide or maintain the solar Globe above the palm-tree in order to hasten the ripening of the dates, whilst the two customary genii prepare to accomplish their fertilizing mission.

The representation of the Sacred Tree, in which the traces of a deep and mysterious symbolism have so often been sought, would therefore only have the practical import of a scene drawn from everyday life. As for the intervention of superhuman personages in an operation generally accomplished by the hand of man, this would be merely a proof of the importance which the Mesopotamians attached to the cultivation of their palms and the fertilization of their fruits--at most an historical myth, attributing to gods the invention of one of the processes which have most contributed towards securing these results.--Is this not what seems to be designated by the presence of the inflorescence in the hand of a personage dressed in the skin of a fish, Dagon or Oannes, the amphibious god who is held to have

[p. 149]

instructed the Chaldaeans in agriculture, as also in literature, the arts, and the other elements of civilization?

I consider that Mr. Tylor has thoroughly grasped the primitive and somewhat material meaning of the subject handled in his essay. I have, however, already had occasion to show that, amongst the Assyrians, this subject had above all a symbolical acceptation. It must be remembered that they could not attach to the cultivation of the date-palm the same importance as the inhabitants of Lower Chaldaea. In fact, though the palm grows in Assyria, the date does not ripen there. They must therefore have seen in this figured representation something else and something more than the artificial fertilization of the palm.

Mr. Tylor himself suggests, by way of hypothesis, that the genii facing one another might either represent the fertilizing winds, or the divinities whose fertilizing influence was typified by the artificial fecundation of the palm. This operation would therefore have become the symbol of natural fertilization, or rather of fertilization brought about by what we call natural agents, and which the Mesopotamians looked upon as personifications of the divine forces of Nature.

May we not go further, and inquire if this process might not have supplied a symbol of fertilization in general, a symbolical representation of the mysterious operation everywhere performed, under the most different forms, by the fertilizing forces of Nature?

The Tree thus represented is--as we have seen--far from being always a palm; sometimes it is a vegetable species which does not admit of this method of fertilization. Moreover, there are monuments on which the genii are seen holding the Cone, not towards a tree, but towards the face

[p. 150]

of a king or some other personage. The object in question must here have a vivifying, or at least a prophylactic import, like the cedar or fir-cone. "Take the fruit of the cedar"--we read in one of the passages on which Francois Lenormant hinged his assumption that the genii held a fruit of this tree in one hand--"and hold it to the face of the sick person; the cedar is the tree that produces the pure charm and drives away the unfriendly demons, spreaders of snares." [*1]

On an archivolt of Khorsabad two winged genii are seen holding the inflorescence in the direction of a Rosette. According to Mr. Tylor,

Click to enlarge

FIG. 82. BAS-RELIEF OF KHORSABAD.
 (V. PLACE. Nimroud et l'Assyrie, vol. iii. pl. 15.)

this Rosette would be nothing else than the crown of a palm-tree seen from below or above. But, in general, the Rosette--whether derived from the rose, the lotus, or any other flower--forms an essentially solar symbol, and the genii who here advance towards it can have no other function--if this scene has a symbolical import--than to revive the power of the sun, to fertilize the calyx from which he issues forth at each succeeding dawn, or perhaps to gather his vivifying emanations for the replenishment of their sacred instrument. It is noteworthy that they hold the latter exactly as the gods of Egypt sometimes handle the Key of Life.

[p. 151]

In short, the Assyrians seem to have drawn from the sexual relations of plants, or, properly speaking, of the palm, the same symbolism, relating to the renewal and communication of life, as did other nations from human sexuality. It is, moreover, quite conceivable that the inflorescence of the date-palm may have performed the symbolical function which elsewhere devolved upon the phallus, as the pre-eminent emblem of the fertilizing force. As for the palm, it naturally became, in this order of images, the symbol of generative nature, or, to be more exact, of the Universal Matrix so plainly personified amongst the Mesopotamians, and even the Semites generally, by the great astral, or terrestrial goddess, represented in the asherah.

Yet the two genii with the inflorescence are not the only acolytes who appear, in Assyria, round the Tree. We have seen (pl. v.) that the latter are often two monsters--griffins, unicorns, or sphinxes--represented for quite a different purpose. On a cylinder reproduced above (fig. 64) both genii stand erect on a sphinx which places a foot on one of the lower branches of the Tree, and puts forward its head as if to bite at one of the pomegranates at the end of the branches. This change of attitude would seem to correspond with a variation of the myth; the monsters approach the Tree as if they intended to pluck a fruit or a flower, and this idea becomes still more accentuated if we pass to the neighbouring nations, such as the Phoenicians and Persians, who took from the Assyrians the type of their Sacred Tree, but without either the two winged genii, or the inflorescence of the male palm. Now, we know that the Persians possessed the tradition of a Tree of Life, the haoma, whose sap conferred immortality. We find also, amongst the Western Semites, the belief in a Sacred Tree whose fruit

[p. 152]

had the same power. It will be remembered that the Book of Genesis places in the Garden of Eden two Paradisaical Trees, "the Tree of Life in the midst of the garden, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil." [*1] When the first human pair, following the treacherous advice of the serpent, had tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge in spite of the explicit command of the Creator, the latter drove out the guilty ones from the Garden of Eden, saying: "Behold; the man is become as one of us to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever;" [*2] therefore He drove them out, and placed at the east of the Garden of Eden kerubim with the flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the Tree of Life.

It is now no longer possible to interpret the traditions of the Hebrew people without connecting them with the beliefs of the other Semitic nations. Have we not learnt from the version of the Deluge, discovered some years ago in the cuneiform writings, how the Israelitish nation preserved certain Chaldaean myths, whilst transfiguring them by doing away with their polytheistic elements and by introducing a moral factor? The Bible itself dates its oldest traditions from Chaldaea, particularly the narratives referring to the Garden of Eden and its Paradisaical Trees. We will not here enter into the question as to whether the traditional Eden should be located in Mesopotamia or further towards the north-east. But the kerubim who guard its entrance certainly seem to be a creation of the mind revealed in the art and the creeds of Mesopotamia. They have nothing in common with the chubby cherubs of the Christian imagery; they bear a far stronger resemblance to the monstrous genii who guard the approaches to the Assyrian palaces; their name

[p. 153]

in the Bible itself alternates with shor, "a bull," and numerous indications lead us to assume that they were either winged bulls with the face of a man, [*1] or winged genii with the head of an eagle. [*2] In the description of the Temple which Ezekiel has left us, he says that the ceiling was "made with kerubim and palm-trees, so that a palm-tree was between a kerub and a kerub." [*3] This is exactly the position of the Sacred Tree between its acolytes on the monuments of Mesopotamia.

Moreover, certain cuneiform texts seem to prove that the Assyro-Chaldaeans were acquainted with a "Tree of Life." Whether it was thus styled because it served as a simulacrum of the Goddess of Life, or whether it represented this divinity by reason of its own mythical function, the fact is none the less certain, according to Mr. Sayce, that the "divine Lady of Eden," or Edin, was termed in Northern Babylonia "the goddess of the Tree of Life," [*4] and Babylon, before receiving from the Semites the name of Bab Ilu, "Gate of God," was called, in the old language of the country, Tin-tir-ki, or Dintir-ra, which most Assyriologists translate as "the place of the Tree (or Grove) of Life." [*5]

As for the fruits depicted on the Sacred Tree, whether they be clusters of dates, or bunches of grapes, they are naturally adapted to a Tree of Life, since they yield some of those fermented liquors which in ordinary language still bear the name of eau de vie [*6]

[p. 154]

Sometimes they unquestionably represent pomegranates. Now the pomegranate, which contains hundreds of seeds, has at all times been considered an emblem of fertility, of abundance, and of life. All Semitic nations have used it, as a symbol, on the most different kinds of religious monuments, from the pillars of Solomon's temple [*1] to the stelai dedicated to the divinities of Libya. [*2] The Tree of Life depicted amongst the bas-reliefs of the Parma baptistery bears pomegranates for its fruit, [*3] and it is also a pomegranate which, according to a tradition related by M. de Gubernatis, was the fruit that Eve offered Adam. [*4]

It must be remarked that, on some Assyrian bas-reliefs, the climbing plant interlacing the sacred tree bears a strong likeness to the Asclepias acida. [*5] Now, as we shall see further on, this is the very shrub which supplied the Hindus and the Persians with their elixir of life.

Finally it is the Lotus-flower, which, contrary to all the rules of botany, sometimes blossoms upon the Sacred Tree and is plucked or smelt by the two acolytes.

We have seen how this flower, which discloses itself every morning to the sun's rays, evoked ideas of resurrection and immortality amongst all the ancient nations of the East. When, therefore,

[p. 155]

we find it on the Sacred Tree of the Phoenicians or the Assyrians, we have every reason to believe that it there represents a "flower of life." This divine flower, like the fruit of the Tree of Life, will doubtlessly have figured in myths whose text has not come down to us, but whose existence is sufficiently revealed by the monuments. In any case, the meaning of this symbolical efflorescence seems to be plainly enough indicated in a scene engraved upon a bowl of Phoenician origin, which M. de Cesnola discovered at Amathus in the island of Cyprus. The Sacred Tree here stands, in its most artificial form, between two personages clad in the Assyrian manner, who with the one hand pluck a Lotus-blossom from its branches, and in the other hold a crux ansata (see above, pl. v., fig. b). The Phoenicians, whose symbols were almost all derived from Egypt on the one side and Mesopotamia on the other, must have known what they were about in thus connecting the Sacred Tree with the Lotus-flower and the Key of Life. It would have been difficult to better express the equivalence of these two symbols. [*1]

It is evident that, in the absence of texts serving as a direct commentary on the representations of the Sacred Tree amongst the Semites, other hypotheses again may be formulated upon its original or derived meaning.

Thus the Chaldaeans must be included amongst the nations who saw in the universe a tree whose summit was the sky, and whose foot or trunk was the earth. [*2]

[p. 156]

To be sure, this somewhat puerile conception of the universe seems to have been early thrown into the shade, in Mesopotamia, by the more subtle cosmogonical system which, according to Diodorus, made of the earth a boat floating upside down on the watery abyss. [*1] The boat in question was one of those, shaped like a bowl or cauldron, which are portrayed in the bas-reliefs of Mesopotamia, and are still used at the present day in the basin of the Euphrates. The hollow interior formed the region of darkness, the domain of the dead and of the terrestrial spirits; at the top stood an immense mountain whose summit served as a pivot to the firmament, and from whose sides flowed the principal rivers.

This "Mountain of the World," or axis of the universe, became the object of quite an especial veneration. The Assyrians located it in the high chains of mountains north-east of Mesopotamia. The Chaldaeans named after it some of the great staged temples which they built in the plains of their country. [*2] It must be observed, however, that some hymns address it in terms which are perfectly applicable to a huge tree: "O thou who givest shade, Lord who casteth thy shadow over the land, great mount, father of the god Mul!" [*3] Another hymn terms it a "mighty mountain whose head rivals the heavens and whose foundations rest on the pure deep." [*4]

Texts, moreover, prove in a decisive manner that the notion of the Cosmogonical Tree had endured into the traditions, at least, of certain local mythologies. A bilingual hymn of Eridu, that ancient centre of civilization which, at the dawn of

[p. 157]

history, flourished on the borders of the Persian Gulf, mentions a dense tree that grew on a holy spot. "Its root (or fruit) of white crystal stretched towards the deep. ... Its seat was the (central) place of the earth; its foliage was the couch of Zikum the (primaeval) mother. Into the heart of its holy house which spreads its shade like a forest hath no man entered; there (is the home of) the mighty mother who passes across the sky; (in) the midst of it was Tammuz." [*1]

This passage seems to connect the Cosmogonical Tree with the Great Goddess of Nature. Whether the latter be regarded as a celestial, telluric, or lunar divinity, Tammuz. the sun, is at once her spouse and child. A cylinder, which M. Menant attributes to the ancient art of Chaldaea, shows us the goddess beside the Sacred Tree, with an infant seated in her lap. [*2] Perhaps we ought to see in this the prototype of similar representations wherein Isis, Tanit, and other mother goddesses appear, each with her son, the young solar god.

Another reference to the Cosmogonical Tree occurs in a passage concerning the exploits of Izdhubar or Gilgames, the Chaldaean Hercules. This mythical personage having reached the "gates of the Ocean" encounters a forest of trees "resembling the trees of the gods" which bore "fruits of emerald and crystal." Marvellous birds live amongst the branches; they build "nests of precious stones." The hero strikes one of these birds in order to pluck "a large crystal fruit," and then he wishes to withdraw; but he finds the door

[p. 158]

of the garden closed by one of the female guardians who live "in the direction of the Ocean." The rest of the passage is missing. These details, however, suffice for us to infer that here again the subject in question is a celestial tree, bearing, for fruits, the planets, the stars, and all the "jewels" of the firmament. [*1] One cannot but be struck by the strange similarities which this story offers to the legend of Herakles carrying off the golden apples from the garden of the Hesperides, "in the direction of the night, beyond the ocean stream." [*2]

Might not the Sacred Tree have likewise served to portray, amongst the Chaldaeans, an equivalent of the tree designated, in the Bible, as giving the knowledge of good and evil? M. Sayce does not seem unwilling to admit this comparison. He gives prominence to the fact that the name of the god Ea was written upon the heart of the cedar. Now not only was Ea the god of wisdom, but the possession of his sacred names communicated his own knowledge to him who pronounced them. [*3] A passage explicitly associates with the cedar "the revelation of the oracles of heaven and earth." [*4]

Moreover, the scene of the Temptation is believed to have been discovered on a cylinder in the British Museum. Two personages, in whom Mr. G. Smith thought he recognized a man and a woman, stretch forth a hand towards a tree from which hang two large fruits; behind the woman a serpent erects itself on its tail (see above, pl. v., fig. h). [*5] M. J. Menant, however, maintains that both personages belong to the stronger sex; in any case, he adds, nothing authorizes us, in face of

[p. 159]

the silence of the texts, to discern in this scene the Scriptural account of the "original sin." [*1] At the same time--whilst pointing out that subjects of this kind may lend themselves to innumerable interpretations--he calls attention to another cylinder which might still better be compared with the Biblical narrative. It is the representation of a garden where trees and birds are visible; in the middle stands a palm, whose fruits two personages are engaged in plucking, whilst a third, himself holding a separate fruit, seems to address them. [*2]

The comparison attempted by M. Baudissin between the Tree of Knowledge and the Prophetic Trees whose office was to reveal the future seems to be less exposed to criticism. [*3] The Chaldaeo-Assyrians, in the manner of all the Semitic nations, practised phyllomancy, i.e., the art of divination by the rustling of leaves, which was held to be the voice of the divinity. [*4] Now, endeavours to gain a foreknowledge of the decrees of the divine will are often considered an encroachment upon the celestial power, a rash act, or even a sacrilege, which calls for punishment.

Cuneiform tablets, commented upon by Mr. Sayce, tell the story of a god Zu who, covetous of the supreme rank, abstracted the "tablets of fate" as well as the attributes of Bel, and having made good his escape in a storm, began to divulge the knowledge of the future. After consulting the principal gods, Bel, to punish him, contented himself with changing him into a bird of prey and exiling him, like another Prometheus, upon a distant mountain. According to Mr. Sayce, Zu is

[p. 160]

none other than "the bird of the storm," common to so many mythologies, which, in the rolling of the thunder, discloses to mankind the secrets of the future, the knowledge of good and evil. [*1] It might almost be said that this legend lies mid-way between the Scriptural account of "the original sin" and the Aryan traditions, which we are about to investigate, regarding the theft of fire and ambrosia from the branches of the Cosmogonical Tree.

Finally, Professor Terrien de la Couperie, having noticed that the Sacred Tree of Mesopotamia frequently exhibits the same number of branches (7, 14, 15 or 30), thinks he finds therein an accordance with the days of the lunar month. He instances, in this connection, a Chinese tradition, prior to our era, which tells of a wonderful plant that appeared on both sides of the staircase of the imperial palace, during the reign of Yao. [*2] On this plant a pod grew every day of the month till the fifteenth; then one fell every day till the thirtieth; if the month had only twenty-nine days, a pod withered without falling off. It is not difficult to descry in this plant a lunar tree; the Chinese themselves termed it the Calendar Plant, lik-kiep.

We must wait for more decisive proofs before admitting that the Sacred Tree of the Assyrians permitted of a similar interpretation on account of the number of the branches, which does not always agree--indeed quite the contrary--with the subdivisions of the lunar month. We have, however, evidence that the Calendar Plant was not unknown to the Semites, and that it occurred amongst them in connection with the Tree of Life. The Apocalypse (xxii., 2), places in the midst of the celestial Jerusalem "the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month:

[p. 161]

Click to enlarge

PLATE VI.--MIGRATIONS OF THE EASTERN TYPE OF THE SACRED TREE.

and whose leaves were for the healing of the nations."

Moreover, M. Terrien de la Couperie has shown that the belief in a Tree of Life existed amongst the Chinese. Traditions mention seven wonderful trees which grew on the slopes of the Kuen-Lun mountains. One of them, which was of jade, conferred immortality by its fruit.  The question--which I do not pretend to decide--is as to whether this tradition crossed directly from Mesopotamia into China, some forty centuries before our era, or whether it reached that country either by way of Persia or of India at a less distant period.

Footnotes

^141:1 EUSEBIUS. Praeparatio Evangelica, i. 9.

^141:2 E. BONAVIA. The Sacred Trees of the Assyrian Monuments, in the Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. iii., pp. 1-6.

^142:1 F. LAJARD, in the Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres. Paris, 1854, vol. xx., 2nd part, pl. vi.

^142:2 MOVERS. Die Phonicier, vol. i., ch. xv.

^142:3 Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, vol. xx., pl. i., fig. 2.

^142:4 Ibid., vol. xx., p. 221.

^143:1 Judges iii., 7.

^143:2 2 Kings xxi., 3, and xiii., 6 and 7.

^144:1 J. MENANT. Les pierres gravees de la Haut-Asie, vol. i., p. 220.

^144:2 ID., ibid., vol. i., pp. 170 et seq.

^145:1 F. LENORMANT. Les origines de l'histoire. Paris, 1880, vol. i., p. 88.

^145:2 Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. iv., No. 4, p. 95.--Yet in the Louvre there is a specimen found in the palace of Ashur-bani-pal (tenth century B.C.).

^146:1 "Palm-trees," says Herodotus in his description of Chaldaea, "grow in great numbers in the whole of the flat country; most of them bear a fruit which supplies the inhabitants with bread, wine, and honey. They are cultivated like the fig-tree, particularly in the following respect: The natives tie the fruit of the male palm, as the Greeks call it, to the branches of the date-bearing palm, in order to let the gall-fly enter the dates and ripen them and prevent the fruit from falling off. (Hist., liv. i., 193.--See also THEOPHRASTUS. Hist. plant., ii., c. 2, 6, and 7, 4.)

^147:1 M. F. LENORMANT quotes the following passage from the Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia, vol. iv., pl. 16, 2: "Take a vase, put water into it, place therein white cedar-wood, introduce the charm which comes from Eridu, and perfect thus potently the virtue of the enchanted waters." (Origins de l'Histoire, vol. i., p. 84, note.)

^147:2 Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. iv., No. 4, p. 96.

^150:1 Origines de l'histoire. Paris, 1880, vol. i., pp. 83-84.)

^152:1 Gen. ii., 9.

^152:2 Gen. iii., 22-24.

^153:1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite, vol. iv., p. 305.--Regarding the word kerub = bull, cf. LENORMANT. Orig. de l'hist., vol. i., p. 112.

^153:2 Ezekiel defines the kerubim as beings with a double pair of wings, having beneath their wings a man's hand.

^153:3 Ezekiel xli., 8.

^153:4 A. H. SAYCE. The Religions of the Ancient Babylonians. London, 1887, p. 200.

^153:5 F. LENORMANT. Origines de l'histoire, vol. i., p. 76.

^153:6 In the Assyrian language the vine was called karanu, [p. 154] which means, according to M. Terrien de la Couperie, the Tree of the Drink of Life. (Babylonian and Oriental Record. October, 1890, p. 247.)

^154:1 Kings vii., 18-20.

^154:2 PH. BERGER. Representations figurees des steles puniques, in the Gazette archeologique for 1877, p. 27.

^154:3 M. LOPEZ, in the Revue archeologique for 1853, vol. xx., p. 289.--Here again the Tree, embraced by a dragon, stands between two animals facing one another.

^154:4 Mythologie des plantes, vol. ii. p. 167.

^154:5 Sir George Birdwood, who understands the subject in his two-fold capacity of naturalist and archaeologist, bears witness to this resemblance in the most explicit terms (Industrial Arts of India, part ii. p. 430).

^155:1 In Egypt itself, on a monument of the sixth dynasty, the Atlas of Lepsius shows us a queen with the Key of Life in one hand, and in the other a lotus whose calyx she holds to her nose.

^155:2 M. W. MANSELL points out that the term gis, a tree, occurs in a lexicographical tablet amongst the figurative expressions which serve to designate heaven (Gazette archeologique, 1878, p. 134.)

^156:1 DIOD. SICUL. Hist., Vol. ii., 31.

^156:2 SAYCE. Op. cit., p. 405 et seq.

^156:3 Quoted by DE GUBERNATIS. Mythologie des plantes, vol. i., p. 45.

^156:4 SAYCE. O. cit., p. 362.

^157:1 SAYCE. Op. cit., p. 238.--M. F. Lenormant has published a slightly different translation of this passage (Origines de l'histoire, vol. ii., p. 104). But the variations do not bear upon the cosmogonical character of the Tree. M. Terrien de la Couperie considers that the plant in question is not so much a tree as a stem similar to the stakes which support the tents (Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. iv. No. 10, p. 221).

^157:2 J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. i., fig. 204.

^158:1 G. W. MANSELL. Un episode de l'epopee chaldeennes, in the Gazette archeologique for 1879.

^158:2 HESIOD. Theogony, v. 274-275.

^158:3 A. H. SAYCE. Op. cit., p. 133 et seq.

^158:4 Id., p. 242.

^158:5 G. SMITH. Chaldean account of Genesis. London, p. 91.

^159:1 J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. i., pp. 189-191.

^159:2 J. MENANT, Pierres gravees, vol. i., fig. 121.

^159:3 W. BAUDISSIN. Studien zur semitischen Religiongeschichte, vol. iii., p. 227.

^159:4 F. LENORMANT. La divination chez les Chaldeens. Paris, 1875, p. 85.

^160:1 SAYCE. Op. cit., pp. 294-300.

^160:2 The Calendar Plant of China, in the Babylonian and Oriental Record for September, 1890, p. 218.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THE PARADISAIC TREES OF THE ARYANS.

Not only do the different species of mythical trees which we have just met with amongst the Semites occur amongst the Indo-Europeans, and the Hindus in particular, but nowhere can the ties which link the Tree of the Universe to the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge be more clearly perceived than amongst the traditions of the latter nation.

The Vedas make mention of the tree whose foot is the earth, and whose summit is heaven. [*2]

Sometimes it is the tree of the starry firmament whose fruits are precious stones, at other times it is the tree of the cloudy sky whose roots or branches shoot out over the canopy of heaven, like those sheaves of long and fine-spun clouds which, in the popular meteorology of our country, have been named Trees of Abraham. Amongst its branches it holds imprisoned the fire of the lightning.

[p. 162]

Through its leaves it distills the elixir of life, the celestial soma or amrita, i.e., the vivifying waters "which Mitra and Varuna, the two kings with the beautiful hands, watch amidst the clouds." [*1] It also forms the way to the other side of the atmospheric ocean, beyond the river which possesses or procures everlasting youth. [*2] Under its dense branches, Yama, the king of the dead, "drinking with the gods, entices our elders by playing on the flute." [*3]

It is finally the Tree of Knowledge. Its sap begets poetic and religious inspiration. [*4] In approaching its foliage, man remembers his previous existences. [*5] From its top resounds in sonorous rolling the celestial voice, vac, which reveals the will of the gods, the divine messenger, engendered in the waters of the clouds. [*6]

This latter aspect of the Sacred Tree is developed especially amongst the Buddhists. M. Senart has shown, in his learned and able Essai sur la legende du Bouddha, how the sacred fig-tree (Urostigma religiosum) under which Buddha attained perfect illumination, in spite of the exertions of Mara and his demons, is directly connected with the Cosmic Tree of Indo-European mythologies, which produces ambrosia, and dispenses salvation. [*7] But to the disciples of the new faith who loathed life and longed for extinction, the old Celestial Tree which led to immortality became

[p. 163]

merely the buddhidruma, the Tree of Wisdom, a symbol both of the truths which lead to nirvana and of the Master who discovered and taught them. [*1] The Royal Asiatic Society continued in the same vein when, in its turn, it chose as emblem, with the well-devised motto, tot areores quoi rami, one of the Sacred Trees of the Buddhists, the banyan-tree (Urostigma indicum), whose branches take root on touching the ground, and become so many fresh stems.

Thus, eternal life, productive power, perfect happiness, supreme knowledge, all these divine attributes are in India the gifts of the Tree which represents the Universe. Vedic and post-Vedic traditions tell us the story of the rivalries which occur between the devas and asuras for the possession of this Tree or its produce. The Vedas relate that the Tree of the soma was guarded by gandharvas, kinds of centaurs in whom is generally seen the personification of the winds or clouds. A swift sparrow-hawk with golden wings, Agni, took flight one day from the summit, carrying with it the broken end of a branch. Hit by the arrow of a gandharva it let fall a feather and a claw. These produced the plants which recall the bird of prey by their pennated leaves or sharp thorns, as well as those whose sap supplies the terrestrial soma, the intoxicating liquor of Vedic India.

[p. 164]

It is unnecessary, after Kuhn's Herabkunft des Feuers and des Goettertranks, to dwell upon the purport of those traditions which go towards explaining at once the shape of the universe, the phenomena of the storm, the production of fire, the fertilization of the ground by rain, and, lastly, the virtues of certain plants.

In a different reading, the amrita was in the possession of the asuras who alone at that time were immortal. Indra, the god of the stormy sky, succeeded in abstracting it, and thus it is that the devas obtained in their turn the privilege of immortality. [*1]

According to the Mahabharata it is a genius half eagle and half man, which, after subduing several monstrous animals on the borders of a lake, takes advantage of the negligence of the dwarfs who guard the Sacred Tree to break off and carry away the branch of the soma. [*2]

The Persians placed on the borders of a lake two trees, each of which was guarded by a gandhrawa. One of these trees is the white haoma or homa, which, according to the Yasna, wards off death and confers "spiritual knowledge;" [*3] the other, according to the Bundehesh, is the Tree of All Seeds, which is also called the Eagle-tree. According to the version of the myth recorded by Kuhn, when one of these birds flies away, a thousand branches grow on the tree, and as soon as it returns to the nest it breaks a thousand branches, and causes a thousand seeds to fall. [*4] The sap of the haoma, however, is not only the fertilizing rain; like the soma of India, it is also

[p. 165]

the fermented liquor which was obtained by pounding the twigs of an asclepiad, or some allied plant, and which, considered as the drink of the gods, played an important part in the sacrificial rites of the two nations.

The Greeks seem likewise to have been acquainted with a Tree of Heaven. This was the oak whose hollow trunk sheltered the Dioscuri from their enemies, and from which hung the golden fleece "on the shores of the Ocean, there where the sun's beams are imprisoned in a chamber of gold." [*1] Perhaps we ought to include in the same category of mythical trees the Oak of Dodona, in whose foliage was heard the prophetic voice of the master of the thunder.

The juice of the grape, personified in Bacchus, that Greek equivalent of the god Soma, grants also a knowledge of the future: "This god is a prophet," says Euripides; "for, when he forces his way into the body, he makes those whom he maddens foretell the future." [*2]

The name ambrosia, which the Greeks gave to the food of the Olympians, corresponds phonetically with the amrita. But the Aryans of Greece, faithful to their custom of referring everything to man, and inspired, perhaps, by a Phrygian myth, in preserving the old Indo-European tradition changed the theft of the liquor into the abduction of the cup-bearer; and it was Ganymede whom they made Zeus, transformed into an eagle, carry off "in the midst of a divine whirlwind." We may add that it is doves which, in the Odyssey, bring ambrosia to Zeus. [*3]

The Greeks, again, more than any other branch of the Aryan race, developed the myth of the hero

[p. 166]

overtaken by the divine wrath for having communicated to mankind the use of fire and the possession of knowledge. Prometheus was considered not only to have stolen the fire from Zeus by lighting his torch either at the wheel of the sun or at Vulcan's forge, but also to have modelled the first man from clay and then infused into him the spark of life. Without adding comments which no text would justify, we may yet draw attention here to a small monument reproduced by M. Decharme in his Mythologie de la Grece antique. [*1] Prometheus is there represented as engaged in moulding the first man, with the help of Minerva, behind whom stands a tree encircled by a serpent.

Lastly, we find again in Greece a third cycle of mythical tales which refer us still more directly to the Hindu tradition of the Sacred Tree; this is the expedition of Hercules to the garden of the Hesperides, whence he carries off the Golden Apples guarded by dragons. Whether these Apples represent the luminous rays or the healing waters, another reading of the myth records that Hercules handed them over to Minerva, who put them back in the place where they must always remain, "for they are immortal." [*2] It is noteworthy that, on a Greek vase reproduced by Guigniaut, the Tree round which the dragon is coiled is depicted between two Hesperides, one of whom gathers the fruit for Hercules whilst the other diverts the attention of the dragon by offering it a jar--which scene may be more or less connected with oriental representations of the Tree of Life, adapted to the requirements of Hellenic taste and Hellenic mythology (fig. 83).

The Edda of Scandinavian mythology exhibits a perfect type of a cosmogonical tree: this is the

[p. 167]

ash Yggdrasill, the most beautiful of trees, which has three roots. One spreads out towards the upper spring, Urdur, where the Ases hold council and where the Nornes, whilst settling the duration

FIG. 83. THE DRAGON AND THE HESPERIDES.
 (GUIGNIAUT. Religions de l'antiquite, vol. iv., pl. 181.)

of the lives of men, pour water from the spring over the Tree in order to secure for it an endless sap and verdure. The second root stretches towards the land of the giants of the Frost; under this root springs the well of Mimir the first man and king of the dead; in this well all knowledge and all wisdom dwell; Odin himself, in order to quench his thirst with its waters, had to leave one of his eyes in pledge. As for the third, it descends to Nifleim, the Scandinavian Hades, where it is ever gnawed at by a dragon. On the highest bough of the stem an eagle perches whilst other animals occupy the lower branches. Finally, Odin spent nine nights under its shade before discovering the runes, [*1] an act which recalls the great meditation of Buddha under the sacred fig-tree.

Other passages in the Edda show us the contests for the possession of the hydromel, the liquor

[p. 168]

which is at once the drink of the gods and the source of poetry. It was carried off by Odin, who, in the form of a serpent, surreptitiously entered the den of the giant who was its guardian. Another myth which alludes more directly to life-imparting fruits is the legend of the goddess Idhunn who kept in a box the Apples of Immortality. This was the fruit which, on approaching old age, the gods partook of in order to renew their youth. Enticed into a neighbouring forest by the faithless Loki, Idhunn was abducted, together with her treasure, by a giant disguised as an eagle. But the gods, feeling themselves growing old, obliged Loki to transform himself into a hawk and go and bring back Idhunn and her Apples during the absence of their abductor. [*1]

As regards the Slavonic peoples, MM. Mannhardt and de Gubernatis have recorded more than one legend bearing witness to their belief in a cosmogonical tree. Such is, amongst the Russians, the Oak-tree of the island Bujan, on which the sun retires to rest every evening and from which it rises every morning; watched by a dragon, it is inhabited by the Virgin of the Dawn, just as is the oak of Eridu by Tammuz and his mother. [*2]

[p. 169]

In brief, both Semites and Aryans were acquainted with the Tree of Heaven, the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge. The first has for fruit the igneous or luminous bodies of space; the second produces a liquor which secures eternal youth; the third confers foreknowledge and even omniscience. This valuable produce is the object of mythical rivalries between superhuman beings, the gods, genii, and fabulous animals, on the one hand, who have the treasure in their possession or in their keeping, and the divinity, the demon, or the hero, on the other, who strive to get possession of it. Curious similarities crop up in the different accounts of this conflict, which sometimes ends in the victory of the assailant, and sometimes in his defeat or exemplary chastisement.

Do such coincidences suffice to justify the assumption that all these traditions have one and the same origin or even that they represent an old stock of folk-lore bequeathed to the Aryans and Semites by their common ancestors?

More than thirty years ago, Frederic Baudry recapitulating, in the Revue germanique, Kuhn's work upon the myths relating to the origin of fire and nectar, drew attention, incidentally, to the tradition of the Paradisaic Trees as evidence "of a pre-historic communication between the Semites and Aryans, taking us back to the remotest times, before the fixation of languages and grammars." [*1] Francois Lenormant, going further still, saw therein an indication of the community of origin between the two races. [*2]

[p. 170]

First of all I will point out the fact that the original unity of a tradition by no means implies the relationship of the nations amongst which it is found. The researches conducted in our own times, regarding the migration of fables, have shown with what ease a tale brought into being on the banks of the Ganges or the Nile may have made its way to the islands of Japan, the shores of the Atlantic, or the plains of southern Africa among nations differing widely in race and language. Of course, if the resemblance of the traditions is strengthened by the identity of the names they contain, especially when the people who hold them in common belong to the same linguistic group, we may admit that the formation of these beliefs preceded the separation of the different branches. Such, in particular, is the conclusion to be drawn from the connections noticed, amongst certain Aryan nations, between the names soma and haoma, amrita and ambrosia, gandharva, gandhrawa, and kentauros.

Nothing similar, however, exists between the Semites and Indo-Europeans amongst the words used by the two races to respectively designate either the Tree of Life and its produce or the personages concerned in its legend. Baudry, it is true, gets out of the difficulty by supposing that the communication might have taken place before the fixation of languages and grammars. This is a desperate effort to justify one assumption by another. The etymological independence which we find here, suggests, on the contrary, that the tradition of the Paradisaic Trees either crossed, at some period, from one race to another, or else that it sprang up separately in each of the two centres.

At first sight it may seem unlikely that myths which correspond so well in detail were produced simultaneously in several places. Yet there is not, in all these tales, a single peculiarity whose presence

[p. 171]

cannot be connected with the most ordinary processes of mythical reasoning, and that cannot be found, at least in a fragmentary state, amongst a number of nations related neither to the Aryans nor to the Semites.

The idea of referring to the form of a tree the apparent conformation of the universe is one of the most natural methods of reasoning which can occur to the savage mind.

The Mbocobis of Paraguay still say that when they die they will climb up the Tree which unites heaven and earth. [*1] To the Maoris heaven and earth formerly clave together; it was a Divine Tree, the Father of the Forests, which rent them asunder by placing itself between them. [*2] The Khasias of India take the stars to be men who scaled heaven by climbing up a Tree, and were obliged to remain in the branches, their companions, who had stopped on earth, having cut down the trunk. [*3]

We will leave out the Khasias, who may have come into contact with the mythology of the Hindus. But will anyone maintain that the traditions of Paraguay, or of New Zealand, are connected with those of the Semites or Aryans? As well might we pretend that old La Fontaine and Virgil before him were inspired by the cuneiform texts or the Vedic poems when they described the mighty oak:

De qui la tete au ciel etait voisine
 Et dont les pieds touchaient a l'empire des morts.

The Tree of Life is no more difficult to account for than the Cosmogonical Tree. Is not a plant one

[p. 172]

of the symbols most capable of expressing the abstract idea of life? Whilst an animal evokes, above all, complex ideas of motion, strength and passion, the functions of the plant are concentrated, so to speak, in life, not alone in life subject to the conditions of birth and death, but also in life liable to periodical successions of inactivity in winter, and of re-animation in spring.

What more natural and obvious symbol could there be than the "Gardens of Adonis," those pots of early flowers which were made to blossom, and then left to wither under the rays of the sun, in order to recall the death of the young god? [*1] The Tahitans symbolize death by the Casuarina, a leafless tree, allied to our horse-tails, which they plant upon graves. [*2] Is it not from the vegetable kingdom that we ourselves borrow our metaphors when we speak of a life "blooming," or cut down in its flower?

Rose, elle a vecu ce que vivent les roses,
            L'espace d'un matin.

We know what lofty precepts the mysteries of Greece drew from the constantly recurring phenomena of vegetation. [*3] Egyptian monuments reproduce a sarcophagus from which an acacia emerges with the motto: "Osiris springs forth," as if to call the god to witness that life comes from death. [*4] It was especially trees with evergreen foliage, such as the pine, the cedar, and the cypress, which were employed to represent the hope in an eternal life beyond the tomb. M. Lajard has brought together some singular examples in his researches Sur le Culte du Cypres,

[p. 173]

a worship which occurs, with this symbolical meaning, amongst the Greeks, the Etruscans, the Romans, the Phoenicians, the Arabs, the Persians, the Hindus, and the Chinese, without taking into consideration the nations of the New World. [*1]

The plant, however, has not only the faculty of typifying life. The power of communicating and of renewing life can also be attributed to it. By means of its grains or fruits it provides mankind with fresh strength; by its fermented juice it increases our vitality tenfold; finally, it furnishes remedies, or simples, to which is ascribed the faculty of restoring the sick to health, and of recalling the dying to life.

Now these qualities are met with precisely in most of the vegetable species from which the Aryans and Semites derived the outlines of their Sacred Trees. There is the oak, whose acorns the western Aryans gathered for food in the primeval forests. There is the asclepiad, from which the eastern Aryans got their elixir of life. Then there are the cone-bearing plants, whose prophylactic reputation amongst the Semites of Babylonia is proved by numerous texts. Above all there is the palm-tree, whose fruits still form a considerable part of the food of the people inhabiting the Lower Euphrates, and whose fermented juice produces an intoxicating liquor well known to the Arabs. There is even the vine, which, according to M. Lenormant, was termed, in the ancient language of Chaldaea, ges-tin, literally "wood of life," [*2] whilst the goddess of the Tree of Life, named "the Lady of Eden" in the North of Mesopotamia, is called in the South "the Lady of the Vine." [*3]

Lastly rain, which revives Nature periodically,

[p. 174]

appears among nearly all nations as a seed of life. When therefore the configuration of the universe is referred to the type of the tree, it is natural enough to look upon rain as the sap which flows from its trunk or branches. In the island of Ferro, in the Canaries, a tradition of the Guanches told of a wonderful Tree whose top is surrounded by clouds, and whose branches let fall every morning, before sunrise, the water necessary for quenching the thirst of the natives. [*1]

Here we see the Tree of Life become connected with an allied class of myths which we find fully developed amongst the Aryans: the belief, namely, in the existence of a spring, river, or lake which prolongs or renews life. This tradition was not wanting in Chaldaea either; the poem of the descent of Istar into Hades places in the gloomy realm of Allat, queen of the dead, a fountain of life which could revive the dead, were its approaches not jealously watched by the anounas or spirits of the earth. Istar herself must immerse herself therein before returning to the light of day and taking her place again amongst the gods. [*2]

This fresh analogy between the Aryan and Semitic traditions, however, seems to me to be rather an assumption in favour of their original independence. On both sides, to be sure, there is the notion of natural waters which renew life upon earth; but whilst in India, and even among the nations of Europe, the annual re-awakening of Nature is chiefly brought about by the rains which fall from the Celestial Tree, in Chaldaea--as all travellers in that country bear witness--the fertility of the soil, and even the existence of the civilization, are dependent not upon the celestial

[p. 175]

waters but upon rivers, wells, and canals, which some sixty centuries ago made of this land, now a desolate and pestiferous waste, a vast and luxuriant garden. [*1]

There is therefore nothing to preclude the supposition that the Aryans and Semites might have separately imagined their Tree of the Universe, and even their Tree of Life, under the more or less rudimentary forms belonging to the traditions still to be observed amongst a number of uncivilized or savage peoples. The borrowal, or rather mutual infiltration of the two mythologies, had only to deal with the details and episodes which everywhere spontaneously clustered round this common nucleus, and which, spreading in the neighbourhood, without disappearing from their respective cradles, ended not in obliterating but in enriching and assimilating the original tradition of each race. [*2]

Let it be granted, for instance, that both races vaguely pictured to themselves heaven under the form of a tree. If one race likened the heavenly bodies to the tree's fruits, can we wonder at the other doing the same, as soon as they became acquainted with this development of the myth

[p. 176]

amongst their neighbours? Let us assume that the Chaldaeans learnt from the Indo-Iranians, or vice versa, or yet again both from a third people, the art of making intoxicating liquors with the juice of certain plants: does it not appear likely that the myths suggested by this invention in its original home were transmitted along with the art itself? Thus it is that Christian infiltrations, by blending with the old stock of local traditions, unquestionably contributed in such a degree towards forming the legends recorded in the Edda of the Scandinavians and the Kalevala of the Finns, that it is now no longer possible for us to ascertain the proper share which either of those elements had in the formation of these legends.

Comparative archaeology shows clearly how these exchanges are brought about, when it enables us to see how the Mesopotamian type of the Sacred Tree was adopted by the Persians to represent their Tree of Immortality, by the Buddhists to typify their Tree of Wisdom; and by the Christians to symbolize their Tree of Temptation.

Each race, each religion has its independent type, which it preserves and develops in accordance with the spirit of its own traditions, approximating it, however, by the addition of extraneous details and accessories, to the equivalent image adopted in the plastic art of its neighbours. Thus the current which makes the Lotus of Egypt blossom on the Paradisaic Tree of India has its counter-current which causes the Asclepias acida of the Hindu Kush to climb upon the Sacred Tree of Assyria. Art and mythology comply, in this respect, with the usual processes of civilization, which is not the fruit of a single tree, but has always been developed by grafts and cuttings between the most favoured branches of the human race.

Footnotes

^161:1 Babyl. and Oriental Record for June, 1888, pp. 149-159.

^161:2 "Which is the forest," asks the Vedic poet, "which is the tree wherein they have hewn heaven and earth?" (Rig-Veda, x., 81, 4.)

^162:1 Rig-Veda, i., 71, 9. In the Vishnu Purana (i., 9), the amrita and the Tree of Paradise (the parijata) are generated in succession by the churning of the sea of milk, i.e., of the primordial or atmospheric ocean.

^162:2 A. DE GUBERNATIS. Mythologie des plantes, vol. i., p. 178.

^162:3 Rig-Veda, x., 135.

^162:4 E. SENART. Journal Asiatique for 1874, vol. iii., p. 289.

^162:5 Id., ibid., p. 305.

^162:6 J. DARMESTETER. Essais orientaux. Paris, 1883, p. 179.

^162:7 E. SENART. Essai sur la legende du Bouddha, in the Journal Asiatique for 1875, vol. iv., p. 102.

^163:1 See the description of the Tree of Brahma, as the Tree of Knowledge, in the Anugita (Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii., pp. 370-371). A Buddhist legend, recorded by Mr. Hardy, tells of an immense Tree, adorned with four boughs, from which great rivers flow unceasingly; it bears golden pips which are carried down to the sea. "This description," M. Senart adds (loc. cit.), "may convince the most sceptical that the tree bo must not be separated from the Cosmic Tree of Indo-European mythologies." It may be added that these details especially remind one of the Tree of Life with its wonderful fruits, planted in the middle of that Garden of Eden from which flowed four great rivers.

^164:1 A fragment quoted by Weber in his Indische Studien, vol. iii., p. 466.

^164:2 Mahabharata, i., 1345.

^164:3 Yasna, ch. ix. and x. (Trans. by M. de Harlez. Paris, 1876, vol. ii.)

^164:4 Revue germanique, 1861, vol. xiv., p. 375.

^165:1 Minnerme (fragm. 11), quoted by M. P. DECHARME, Mythologie de la Grece antique. Paris, 1886, p. 607.

^165:2 Bacchae, iii., 265.

^165:3 Odyss., xii., 62.

^166:1 Mythologie de la Grece antique, fig. 82.

^166:2 ibid., p. 533.

^167:1 R. B. ANDERSON. Mythologie scandinave, trans. by Jules Leclercq. Paris, 1886, p. 34 et seq.

^168:1 ANDERSON, p. 124.

^168:2 A legend, given by M. de Gubernatis, relates that the Tree of Adam reaches to hell by its roots and to heaven by its branches; in its top lives the infant Jesus (Mythologie des plantes, vol. i., p. 18).--For traces of the belief in a Tree of Knowledge in Celtic folk lore, see JOHN RHYS Celtic Heathendom (London, 1888, p. 557) The Finns and Esths possess on their side, several legends relating to a cosmogonical tree. The Lapps are acquainted with an Oak or Tree of God which covers the heavens with its golden branches; it is uprooted by a dwarf, who afterwards transforms himself into a giant. The Esthonian legend develops this myth still further. The divine tree is here a Tree of Plenty; from its trunk come houses, cradles, and tables. The chief of these dwellings has the moon for a window; the sun and stars dance on the roof (DE GUBERNATIS. Mythologie des plantes, vol. ii., p. 76).--As regards the tree with fruits of precious stones, consult the interesting little [p. 169] volume in which M. Lethaby recently endeavoured to prove that the religious architecture, and even all the symbolism of the early civilizations, have a cosmogonical bearing, i.e., tend to reproduce the image of the universe according to the conceptions of the period (Architecture, Mysticism and Myth, London, 1892, chap. v.).

^169:1 Revue germanique for 1861, vol. xiv., p. 385.

^169:2 Origines de l'histoire, vol. i., chap. ix.

^171:1 E. B. TYLOR. Early History of Mankind. London, 1878, p. 358.

^171:2 A. REVILLE. Religions des peuples non civilises. Paris, 1883, vol. ii., p. 28.

^171:3 E. B. TYLOR. Primitive Civilization, vol. i. of French translation, p. 333.

^172:1 C. P. TIELE. Histoire des Religions de l'Egypte et des peuples semitiques, p. 292 in French translation. Paris, 1882.

^172:2 LETOURNEAU. Sociologie. Paris, 1880, p. 217.

^172:3 See preface, page <page 2>.

^172:4 TIELE. Religions de l'Egypte et des peuples semitiques, p. 83.

^173:1 F. LAJARD, in the Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, vol. xx., second part.

^173:2 F. LENORMANT. Orig., vol. ii., p. 254.

^173:3 SAYCE. Op. cit., p. 240, note.

^174:1 RAMUSCO. Historia delle Indie occidentali, quoted by de Gubernatis, Mythologie des plantes, i., 36.

^174:2 SAYCE. Op. cit., p. 221 et seq.

^175:1 In other countries this fountain of perpetual youth might again be accounted for in another way. We find, indeed, a similar tradition existing amongst the Malays, certain Polynesians, and the inhabitants of the Antilles; le., amongst insular peoples who see, every evening, the dying sun vanish in the sea to arise from it in the morning, endowed with fresh life. The Maoris, according to Tylor (Civilisation primitive, ii., 383), imagine that the sun descends every evening to the bottom of a cave, where he bathes in the Wai Ora Tane (water of life), returning, at dawn, to the upper world.

^175:2 This seems, on the whole, to be what M. Tiele means when he suggests that the myth of the elixir of life originated doubtlessly in a non-Aryan race, although he discovers points of contact in similar myths belonging incontestably to the Aryans (Manuel de l'histoire des Religions, translation of M. Maurice Vernes, 2nd. ed., pp. 153, 154).

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 177]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

ON THE TRANSMUTATION OF SYMBOLS.

Theory of the blending of symbolic forms.--Fusion of equivalent symbols.--Production of intermediate types.--Axe and Drum.--Wheel and Rosette.--Chrism, Wheel, and crux ansata--Transformations of the triscele--Symbols which have had an influence upon the representation of the conical bethels among the Semites.--Permutations between the triangle, Winged Globe, crux ansata, human profile, table of offerings, cuneiform Star, and Sacred Tree.

WHILST inquiring into the cause of the changes occurring in the forms of symbols, sufficient importance is not always attached to the attraction which certain figures exercise upon one another. We might almost state it as a law that, when two symbols express the same or approximate ideas, they display a tendency to amalgamate, and even to combine in such a manner as to produce an intermediate type.

Through not taking into consideration that a symbol may thus unite with several figures differing greatly in origin and even in appearance, many archaeologists have wasted their time in debating upon the origins of a sign or image which both sides were right in connecting with different antecedents--like those knights in the legend who broke a lance over the colour of a shield of two hues, one of the adversaries having only seen the front and the other the back.

When the necessity of seeking known or extremely simple antecedents in complex figures is not lost sight of, the study of symbols often results

[p. 178]

in the most singular verifications, especially in countries like India, where all the manifestations of art have a symbolical import. One should note in Moor's Hindu Pantheon how the Disk, the Conch, the Lotus, the Flame, the Axe, and so forth, frequently assume each other's forms--each of these symbols going part of the way to meet the others. Take, for example, two of the attributes which oftenest figure in the hands of Siva, the Axe and the Drum, and see them merge into one another:

FIG. 84. HINDU SYMBOLS.
 (MOOR. Hindu Pantheon, pl. vii., xiv., xvi., xlvii.)

Sir George Birdwood, one of the authors most conversant with the industrial arts of India, records how the principal decorative and symbolical types of India combine and interchange, regardless even of the distinction between the animal and vegetable kingdom. An identical phenomenon may be noticed in Phoenician art. There is a symbol inscribed on Cyprian pottery and Syrian coins which recalls at the same time the Winged Disk of Asia Minor, the Sacred Tree of Assyria, the trisula of the Buddhists, the Bee of Ephesus, and certain patterns of the Greek Thunderbolt (see below, fig. 114).

Are these mere coincidences? To answer this question we must seek, in each particular case, not

[p. 179]

only the antecedents of the figures which impress us by their complexity, but also the communications which may have taken place between their prototypes, and, if need be, we must reconstitute the successive stages of these symbolic transmutations.

Let us take, for instance, the image of the Wheel. This figure, which offers the twofold advantage of possessing a circular form, and suggesting the idea of motion, is one of the commonest symbolical representations of the sun.

Now different nations, amongst whom the sun is likewise symbolised by an expanded flower, have attempted to blend the two images. Thus it is that in Buddhist bas-reliefs we find Wheels whose spokes are replaced by petals of the Lotus-flower, while in the island of Cyprus some coins bear Roses whose leaves are hemmed in by bent spokes, or are even arranged in the form of a wheel.

In the same way the solar rouelle--that amulet par excellence of the Gauls--readily became the monogram of Christ, either in the form of the combined initials I and Kh (Iesous Khristos)

FIG. 85. ROUELLE AND CHRISM.
 (ROLLER. Catacombes, vol. ii., pl. xliii. and lxxxvii.)

[paragraph continues] (fig. 85a), or Kh and R (KhRistos) (fig. 85b). In the latter case it is only necessary to add a loop to the top of one spoke to get the commonest type of the Chrism, which M. Gaidoz has accurately defined

[p. 180]

as "a six-rayed wheel without the rim, and with a loop at the top of the middle spoke." [*1]

Thus, again, in Egypt the Chrism was combined with the Key of Life through a whole series of modifications which have been found in inscriptions on the island of Philae dating from the first Christians of Nubia, who were anxious to make the sacred sign of their new faith correspond with the principal emblem of their former religion.

FIG. 86. EGYPTIAN CHRISMS OF PHILae. [*2]

We have seen how, amongst the Gauls, the steeds of the solar quadriga had combined with the arms of the gammadion in such a manner as to produce the complex figure of four horses' busts radiating round a disk. [*3] The transformations of the triscele exhibit no less singular instances of similar combinations, whilst permitting us to ascertain, so to speak, the different stages of the operation.

The sun, which, as I have had occasion to point out, was often typified in Asia Minor by a disk from which radiated three legs united at the thighs, was likewise symbolised there by different animals, such as the lion, the wild boar, the dragon, the eagle, and the cock. Now some Asiatic coins exhibit the cock beside the triscele (fig. 87); on

[p. 181]

others, the triscele is superposed upon, or rather stuck to the body of, a bird, or a lion, without the aspect of the latter being changed on that account

FIG. 87. COIN OF ASPENDUS.
 (HUNTER, pl. vii., No. 15.)

[paragraph continues] (fig. 88); elsewhere, finally, the two parallel symbols, first placed near and then upon each other,

FIG. 88. COIN OF ASPENDUS.
 (HUNTER, pl. vii., No. 16.)

literally blend together, the three legs of the triscele being transformed into cocks' heads, or

FIG. 89. LYCIAN COIN.
 (BARCLAY V. HEAD, pl. iii., No. 35.)

monsters' busts, which revolve in the same direction round a central point (fig. 89).

One's thoughts turn involuntarily to those figures drawn, in different positions, or with different

[p. 182]

faces, on cardboard disks, which are spun quickly in the hand to produce the illusion of a single image animated by a motion of its own.

On some coins of Magna Graecia and of Sicily the triscele is composed of three Crescents ranged round a Disk. Certain archaeologists have concluded from this that the triscele had a lunar significance. It is quite admissible that the triscele, as a symbol of astronomical movement, was sometimes used--like the tetrascele and gammadion.--to typify the circular course, or even the phases of the moon. The Gobineau collection possesses a Persian cylinder exhibiting a triscele formed of three monsters, which seem about to swallow as many Crescents.

FIG. 90. LUNAR TRISKELION.
 (Revue archeologique, vol. xvii., 1874, pl. iv., No. 56.)

Are we, however, to infer from this, as Mr. Robert Brown does, that the triscele originated in the intentional grouping together of three Crescents? [*1] At first sight, this hypothesis would seem to find its confirmation in the comparison of certain coins which establish an actual transition from the triscele to symbols that are undeniably lunar.

But these coins belong unquestionably to a later period than the oldest Lycian coins, on which, as I have above shown, the triscele has a solar import. Instead of exhibiting the antecedents

[p. 183]

of the triscele, the witnesses, and the stages of its independent development, is it not more likely that they represent lunar symbols gradually modified by the plastic attraction of the triscele; or, to put it plainer, that little by little

FIG. 91. TRISCeLE AND CRESCENTS. [*1]

they so arranged their component parts as to assume the form of the triscele whilst preserving their original meaning?

This adaptation of the triscele to the lunar movements is the more easily explained since the ancients seem especially to have distinguished in the queen of the night her three phases of crescent, half-moon, and full-moon, whence the Hecate triformis, depicted with three faces. [*2]

If it be desired to find the antecedents of the triscele they must rather be sought for, like those of the tetrascele, in the figure of the Disk which projects three curved rays indicating motion. [*3] Under this form it is already met with amongst the "whorls" of Hissarlik. At Mycenae it may be referred to the following type:

[p. 184]

FIG. 92. TRISCeLE FROM MYCENae.

It is easy to understand how a figure of this kind may have sometimes assumed the form of three crescents, and sometimes that of three legs, according to the vagaries of art, or the dictates of symbolism.

 

Another symbol, whose history gives perhaps a still better explanation of how an image may undergo in its development the influence of several distinct symbols, and react in its turn on the form of these latter through a real phenomenon of transmutation, is to be found in those conical stones whose figurative representation plays such an important part in the graphic arts of the western Semites. We know that they were simulacra of the Great Goddess, at once telluric and lunar, who was worshipped under different names by all the Semitic nations. Tacitus informs us that Aphrodite was represented at Paphos by a stone of this kind, shaped like a pyramid. [*1] His description, corroborated by other ancient writers, is illustrated, so to speak, on coins of Paphos, Byblos, Sidon, and other places, which exhibit several kinds of conical stones erected in the midst of the sanctuary.

[p. 185]

On other monuments--coins, slabs, and amulets--the same symbol is found by itself with

FIG. 93. SACRED STONE OF BYBLOS.
 (Corpus inscript. semitic, vol. i., fasc. i., pl. vi.)

changes of form in which is revealed the influence, the attraction, of figures belonging to another class of images.

M. Renan reproduces, in his Mission de Phenicie, the following symbol taken from a stone which was found near Damascus:

FIG. 94. STONE OF DAMASCUS.
 (RENAN. Mission de Phenicie, p. 351.)

"This sign," M. Renan adds, "is common on Phoenician monuments; it seems to come from the image of a person praying, a figure no less frequent on the top of Phoenician stelai."

We shall see that the supposed "persons praying" are merely a slightly altered form of the Sacred Cone. The relation of the sign on the Damascus stone to the simulacrum of Paphos is not to be questioned; it is even visible in the two small circles on either side of the triangle. [*1] On the other hand we at once recognize the general similarity of this figure to certain ornithomorphic Globes of Asia Minor, with their triangular

[p. 186]

tails, outstretched wings, and rectilinear horns (see next chapter).

The secret of this twofold resemblance is discovered in the engraving of a Moabite cylinder

FIG. 95. MOABITE CYLINDER.
 (DE VOGUe. Mil. d'archeol. orient., p. 89.)

published by M. de Vogue, and attributed by M. J. Menant to the beginnings of Phoenician art.

We have here unquestionably in their separate state the two symbols which are combined on the stone of Damascus, i.e., the Cone and the Winged Globe, one suspended over the other, with the same pair of small circles which flank the sides of the Cone.

Another combination which occurs fairly often on monuments of Phoenician origin exhibits on the point of the bethel, or rather of its triangular representation, a horizontal cross-bar, on the middle of which rests a Disk, or a handle.

FIG. 96. ANSATED CONES [*1]

It seems to me difficult to call in question the resemblance of the Cone thus modified to the

[p. 187]

[paragraph continues] Egyptian symbol of the crux ansata or Key of Life. Widen the foot of the latter somewhat, or contract the base of the former, and the resulting images will be identical.

To such a degree, indeed, do these figures resemble one another, that it is impossible to determine to which of the two symbols belong

FIG. 97. KEY OF LIFE.
 (LEPSIUS. Denkmaler, Abth., ii., Bl. 86.)

certain intermediate figures, such as, for instance, the representation of the object erected behind the principal person on the famous seal of Abibal, father of Hiram (fig. 96 d). The narrowness of its base recalls the Key of Life, but the Disk, encircled by the Crescent, which takes the place of the handle, as well as the position of the object on the ground, suggest rather a modification of the Sacred Cone.

How is this resemblance of forms to be accounted for if not by the attraction which one of the two symbols will have exercised upon the other? Now the Key of Life was certainly not formed under the influence of the Sacred Cone, if we may judge from their relative ages. There were cruces ansatae upon the monuments of Egypt long before the Phoenicians had learnt to manipulate the chisel, perhaps even before the Semites had reached the shores of the Mediterranean.

The crux ansata has alternately been taken for a Nilometer (Plucke), a key for regulating the inundations of the Nile (Zoega), a vase placed on an altar (Ungarelli), a perversion of the Winged Globe (Lajard), a phallus (Jablonski), and the sort of apron

[p. 188]

which the Egyptians wound round themselves by way of a waist-band (Sayce). Regarding its meaning, however, there is no diversity of opinion.

In the hieroglyphic writings it forms an ideogram, which renders the sound anx, and means to live, living. [*1] On inscribed monuments it seems to be used by the gods as an instrument for awakening the dead to a new life. A bas-relief of the twelfth dynasty, which shows the goddess Anuke-t holding the Key of Life to the nostrils of King Usertesen III., is accompanied by this inscription: "I give unto thee life, stability, and purity, like Ra for ever."

It follows from this that, amongst the Egyptians, the crux ansata represented life, conceived of in its widest and most abstract meaning. [*2] But is not the dispensation of life precisely one of the essential attributes of the Great Goddess, Virgin and Mother, destructive and prolific by turns, who appears amongst all Semitic nations as the highest personification of Nature under her twofold aspect, cruel and beneficent?

Plautus does nothing more than render the Phoenician conception of Astarte when, in the fourth act of Mercator, he defines her as:

Diva Astarte hominum deorumque vis, vita, salus: rursus eadem quae est,
 Pernicies, mors, interitus, mare, tellus, coelum, sidera.

Among the Assyro-Babylonians Nanat-Anaita

[p. 189]

is called the "strength of the living;" [*1] Zarpanit is termed the "generatrix; " [*2] Allat guards jealously, in the world below, the Well of Life, which could revive the dead. [*3] An inscription on a Mesopotamian cylinder, accompanying the image of a goddess, probably Istar, runs thus: "O thou who art adorable, who givest salvation, life, and justice, vivify my name." [*4] Lastly, although Tanit, the Virgo Coelestis of Carthage, assimilated to Juno by the Romans, is generally held to represent the virgin and austere side of Astarte's nature, it is probable that she combined the double character of her Semitic sisters. [*5] On a stele of Carthage she is depicted on a triangular pediment with a child on one arm; and the geometric figure which serves as her symbol is frequently associated with Lotuses, [*6] which are flowers of Life, symbolical representations of the universal matrix.

In these circumstances the Sacred Cone must necessarily receive, among the Semites, the same import as the crux ansata among the Egyptians, in the capacity of a symbol of life, or even as a talisman of high power, exclusive of the phallic signification of which its triangular form admitted. [*7]

[p. 190]

On the other hand, as  shown by the monuments, the crux ansata, together with the principal symbols of Egypt, was not long in spreading first among the Phoenicians, and then through the rest of the Semitic world. It has been found on bas-reliefs, tombs, pottery, gems, and coins in the whole region which stretches from Sardinia to Susiana, including the coast of Africa, Cyprus, Palestine, and Mesopotamia. Everywhere, seemingly, it had a religious, or prophylactic, meaning; perhaps it is a sign similar to the tau with which were marked, in Ezekiel's vision, the foreheads of the just who will be spared. [*1] On some monuments the divine, or sacerdotal, personages hold it in one hand, as in Egypt; [*2] or, again, as we have seen (pl. v., fig. b), it is associated with the Sacred Tree and the Lotus-flower.

Thus, between the two symbols, there was a frequent proximity; a similarity of meaning, and perhaps of use; and, lastly, the possibility of passing from one to the other without material alteration in their respective features. Is anything more needed to explain why the Phoenicians, possessing these two signs to express the idea of life as a supernatural dispensation, sought to blend the two figures in a third which preserved the essentials of its double antecedent? It would, indeed, have been singular if they had not done so.

Have we not seen, at a later period, how the Christians of Egypt in their turn adopted the crux ansata, not only to replace the Greek or Latin form of the Cross, but also to portray the monogram of Christ, which the Greeks had transmitted to them? The latter identification implies a much more perceptible alteration of these two signs than

[p. 191]

was the modification necessary for amalgamating the crux ansata with the symbol of Astarte. [*1]

It is proper to mention a coincidence which, though quite accidental, may have also helped to bring together the Sacred Cone and the Key of Life. The Egyptian monuments sometimes exhibit in front of the image of the divinity invoked thereon an isosceles triangle placed above a crux ansata These two superposed signs, which read ti anx, render the prayer: "Bestow life." [*2] Now it was the fulfilment of this very prayer which, among the Semites, devolved upon Astarte and her rivals.

The fact, perhaps, will be pointed out that the Phoenicians were not able to read the hieroglyphs. This assertion must not be made in too positive a manner, for, after all, it was in the Egyptian writing that the very characters of the Phoenician alphabet originated. Moreover, in this, as in similar cases, there were not wanting interpreters, sailors, traders, soldiers, and travellers of every class, to explain to the inhabitants of the Mediterranean littoral the meaning of the graphic legends which were diffused with the scarabs, gems, and amulets of Egypt throughout the whole Eastern and Semitic world. Local imagination did the rest, and in this manner popular symbolism was enriched by a new type. [*3]

It is rather singular that this influence of the crux ansata upon the figurative representations of Sacred Cone is met with even amongst the Greeks. The great goddesses of the Asiatic littoral were early introduced into the Greek Pantheon, under their double form of divinities virgin and warlike,

[p. 192]

such as Artemis, or voluptuous and prolific like Aphrodite. With their forms of worship came also their symbols, particularly the Conical Stone which already had its equivalent in the rude cippi of the Pelasgic simulacra. [*1] Under the influence of Greek genius the Sacred Cone was not long in developing in a direction which made it approach the human profile. Among the terra-cottas of Boeotia we find a species of cone with the outlines of a head and the rudiments of arms, which represents a goddess, Aphrodite, or Harmonia.

This is unquestionably the transition from the Sacred Cone to the human form. M. Francois Lenormant, however, adduces, as more ancient, a specimen where we merely see the Cone with its rudiments of arms. [*2] It may be questioned if these

FIG. 98. EPHESIAN ARTEMIS.
 (P. DECHARME. Mythologie de la Grece antique, fig. 145.)

are really arms, and even if these shapeless stumps were not prior to any desire to recognize in this image the human figure. I would be all the more inclined to seek herein the trace of a modification due to the influence of the crux ansata, since

[p. 193]

another type of the classic Pantheon carries us back still more directly to the image of the Egyptian symbol. This is the Ephesian Artemis who, with her head encircled by a halo, her fore-arms projecting from either side of the body, and her lower members wedged into a case, most strikingly recalls, so to speak, an anthropomorphized Key of Life (fig. 98). The resemblance, perhaps, is still stronger on some coins of Cyzicus, where the

FIG. 99. COIN OF CYZICUS.
 (Revue de Numismatique, 1892, vol. ii., pl. ii., fig. 4.)

goddess appeared with chains hanging from the arms (fig. 99).

Strange as this comparison may appear at first sight, it finds its counterpart in an amulet belonging, to be sure, to the latter times of paganism, which was discovered amongst the ruins of the Serapeum at Alexandria.

FIG. 100.
 (The Antiquary, 1881, p. 98.)

We have here, very probably, no longer a representation of the nourishing Artemis, modified by the intervention of the Key of Life, but a crux ansata altered by coming in contact with the

[p. 194]

simulacra of the Ephesian Artemis, or some allied goddess. [*1]

The influence of the Key of Life is again visible in the following image of a Hermes consecrated

FIG. 101.
 (Mem. de l'Acad. des inscr. et bel.-let., vol. xvii., 2nd. part, pl. ix., fig. 12.)

to the Chthonian Mercury, god of fertility and of life.

M. Raoul Rochette draws attention to another stele of the same shape in an inscription of Thessaly concerning funeral games. [*2]

 

The combination of the crux ansata with the Sacred Cone seems to have penetrated as far as India, if this conclusion may be drawn from an enigmatical figure to be seen amongst the symbols carved, at Amaravati, on the feet of Buddha (fig. 102 a).

To be sure, the Disk, or oval handle, which surmounts the Cone, is replaced, in the Buddhist symbol, by a triangular handle, or the section of a second cone inverted. But this difference is another presumption in favour of our thesis. In fact, it is precisely this substitution of a triangular

[p. 195]

for an oval handle which characterizes the crux ansata of India, or at least the figure connected by Indian scholars with the Egyptian symbol of the

FIG. 102. [*1]

[paragraph continues] Key of Life (fig. 102 b), which reached India by way of Syria and Persia.

The symbol of Astarte, thus modified by the influence of the Key of Life, seems to have continued its development amongst the Semitic nations in a twofold direction.

On the one hand, upon the stelai of Carthage, consecrated to Tanit, the two extremities of the cross-bar which stretches out between the handle

FIG. 103.
 (Corpus inscr. semitic, fasc. iv. (1889), tab. lii., fig. 138.)

and the Cone are generally turned upwards at right angles.

On the other hand, it must be noted, that in Cyprus and Asia Minor the base of the triangle completely disappears (fig. 104).

We can hardly find out, in these figures, the outlines of the original Cone. Yet the most competent writers who have expressed an opinion on this subject, MM. Lenormant, Berger, Tyler,

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] Perrot, and others, have had no hesitation in recognizing therein the symbol of Astarte-Tanit. Here, however, there was one Egyptologist who

FIG. 104. [*1]

lost patience. M. Eug. Revillout, the learned professor of the Ecole du Louvre, points out that these figures were merely the reproduction, more or less altered, of an Egyptian character, the sign sa, which means "protection" (fig. 105 a). Similarly, if he is to be believed, the so-called "Sacred Cone with arms and a head" would be nothing but "an Egyptian altar of a common shape," a table of offerings (fig. 105 b).

FIG. 105. [*2]

I am of opinion that M. Revillout is not mistaken; still those whom he accuses of being at

[p. 197]

fault are none the less right. It is certainly the Great Goddess who is symbolized by the ansated Cones, at least, when they appear on stelai with inscriptions dedicated to Tanit, when on coins, they accompany the head of Astarte, or when they combine either with the lunar Crescent, or with the Disk encircled by the Crescent (fig. 104 c). On a stele of Libya a Disk between two upright horns surmounts the Cone (fig. 107), in exactly the same manner as, in a bronze of Syria reproduced by MM. Perrot et Chipiez, it forms the head-dress of an image of Astarte. [*1] On the other hand, why should we refuse to admit that the Semitic artist, when he reproduced the old simulacrum of the Phoenician Goddess, already altered by what it had borrowed from the Key of Life, may have clung still more closely to the imitation of symbols emanating from Egypt?

M. Revillout, observing that the figure f in our illustration No. 104 is placed, in the field of a Hittite cylinder, at the feet of a goddess "with prominent ears and an enormous body," does not fail to add that, "in this description every Egyptologist will at once recognize the goddess Taouer or Thoueris, with the body of a hippopotamus, with the head of the same animal, or of a lioness, and having in front of her feet--as was the prevalent custom--the sign sa."

Far be it from me to call this in question. Since, however, neither the Hittites nor the Phoenicians worshipped, so far as I am aware, the goddess Tauer, it is probable that the author of the cylinder wished to represent one or other of the great Asiatic goddesses--in association with their usual symbol--under forms taken from the Egyptian imagery; as in other instances, the Phoenician artists derived the features, and even the costume

[p. 198]

of their Astarte from the Egyptian type of Hathor. [*1]

Thus the worshippers of Tanit were able, without the slightest misgiving, to bend upwards the two branches of their ansated triangle in order to make it resemble the image exhibited by the Egyptian altar. We must not, therefore, unreservedly accept an explanation which makes us invariably see, in the Carthaginian development of the ansated Cone, an attempt to depict Tanit under the human form. It was in this manner doubtlessly that the shapeless simulacra by which the Greeks were long content to symbolize their gods began to draw nearer to the human body in appearance; and I am far from denying that the Semites did not occasionally attempt to develop the representations of their Sacred Cone in the direction of the human figure, or, on the other hand, to lend to the images of their great goddesses features which recalled the symbolic Cone. An intention of this kind is plainly disclosed in one of those singular figures engraved on the

FIG. 106.
 (Gazette archeologique for 1879, pl. 21).

silver frontlet, found at Batna, which M. Renan has described and discussed in the Gazette archeologique.

This, however, is an exception, and in most existing specimens the emblem of Tanit remains a geometric figure which can in no way be likened to the human profile even when rudely outlined.

On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent

[p. 199]

the Conical Stone, whilst representing Tanit, from serving itself as an altar at the same time as a simulacrum,--like the Phoenician bethel and the Arabian ansab. At least, it is quite possible that its figurative representation may have absorbed the image of the altar on which it stood in the sanctuary. Has it been noticed that on some Libyan stelai the symbol of Tanit seems to be made up of two distinct parts: the Cone properly

FIG. 107. (GENESIUS. Monumenta, tab. 17.)

so called with its usual appendages, and a kind of stand or pedestal?

In most cases the sculptor will not have gone to such a length, but will have contented himself with turning up the two extremities of the cross-bar in such a manner as to produce the so-called fore-arms which recall the two vases of the Egyptian altar. On a stele of Carthage these two extremities are replaced by two Caducei, perhaps with a view to symbolize the two male divinities who composed, with Tanit, the great divine Triad of the Carthaginians. [*1]

 

I will also draw attention to the fact that the symbol of the Sacred Cone, after being confounded with the Key of Life, and then transformed into an altar, seems to have again united with the crux ansata. Indeed, on a hematite cylinder of Hittite

[p. 200]

origin, now in the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, a personage is seen who holds the object depicted below (fig. 108 a).

This sign is unquestionably held like a Key of Life, and we may add that it exhibits the essential features of the latter. Moreover, it also includes

FIG. 108.

the outlines of what might be called the symbol of the ansated table. Finally, it may be questioned if it is not likewise influenced by yet a third figure. In his memoir, which dates from the year 1847, M. Lajard had already grasped its resemblance to the cuneiform sign which frequently accompanies the names of the divinities in the archaic inscriptions of Mesopotamia (fig. 108 b). [*1]

The parallel is all the more ingenious as at that time, now almost half a century ago, they did not know the exact meaning of this character, which has since been found to be an ideogram of the divinity amongst the Assyrians. It is quite likely that, through its constant association with the names of the gods, this sign may have acquired, even beyond Mesopotamia, a general symbolic or talismanic import, and that, consequently, there was a wish to detect its likeness in the object destined to represent the Key of Life, and recall the Sacred Cone, or at least its latest modification. When engaged in investigating the pre-Hellenic

[p. 201]

arts, or forms of worship, of Asia Minor we must never forget that the recently discovered Hittite civilization was the complex product of an intermixture between the influences of Egypt and those of Mesopotamia, engrafted perhaps on an old Semitic stock, and, at all events, impregnated with Phoenician elements.

It ought, however, to be remarked that a figure identical with the cuneiform sign given above, is found amongst the characters of Cyprian writing, which characters are considered to be more or less related to the Hittite hieroglyphs; this is the letter which renders the sound of the vowel a [*1], and which, on a coin of Cyprus, reproduced by the Duc de Luynes, actually appears near the ansated table.

FIG. 109.
 (DE LUYNES. Numismatique cypriote, pl. v., fig. 12.)

Lastly we have seen that Istar-Astarte had also as a simulacrum an actual, or conventional, tree, often represented between personages facing one another. It seems as if a conical stone and a plant, even conventional, might be indefinitely placed in juxtaposition without their respective representations being prompted to borrow each other's forms. Yet this is what occurred in Syria, if we may judge from this amulet, of recent manufacture perhaps, but certainly of a very ancient pattern (fig. 110 a).

This image belongs undeniably to the symbolism of the Sacred Tree. On the other hand the triangular shape which the central object (plant, fruit

[p. 202]

or leaf) approaches in appearance, the handle or elongated disk surmounting its top, the two small cross-bars which give the finishing touch to its resemblance to a cross, and especially an ansated

FIG. 110. SYRIAN AMULET.

cross,--all these features agree no less certainly with some Phoenician representations of the simulacrum of Astarte (fig. 110 b).

That this symbol should have come down to the Syrian of our days has nothing to surprise us, when we hear from a recent notice sent by a French military surgeon, Doctor Vercouvre, to the Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, that a still more authentic form of the same sign is to be found among the modern inhabitants of Tunisia. [*1] He traces back the marks which tattoo the face and hands of the aborigines to one and the same type, "a doll with outstretched arms," and he adds: "It is a reproduction of the anthropomorphic figure with outstretched arms, which, among the antique monuments of Phoenicia and Carthage, represent what is called by archaeologists the

[p. 203]

symbol of the Punic trinity,"--viz., our old ansated Cone with the extremities of the cross-bar turned upwards (see fig. 103). [*1]

The line separating the animal from the vegetable kingdom is not drawn so hard and fast in symbolism as it is in nature. Viewing the unceremonious manner in which such dissimilar objects as the Conical Stone, the solar Disk, the bird, the horns, the crux ansata, the table of offerings, the human profile, the cuneiform star, and the sacred plant come to borrow their respective forms and to blend one with another as in a transformation scene, we must perforce conclude that no hybrid combination is unacceptable to symbolism, when an amalgamation of ideas, or beliefs, is to be strengthened through blending the images by which they are expressed.

Footnotes

^180:1 Le dieu gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de la roue. Paris, 1886, p. 77.

^180:2 a, Greek chrism; b, c, d, monograms of Christ at Philae (LETRONNE. La croix ansee a-t-elle ete employee pour exprimer le monogramme du Christ? in the Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, vol. xvi., pl. i., fig. 47, 48, 49); e. key of life.

^180:3 See above, fig. 28, <page 57>.

^182:1 R. BROWN, junior. The Unicorn, a mythological investigation, London, 1881, p. 66.

^183:1 a, R. BROWN, fig. 73 (coin of Metapontum); b, HUNTER, pl. 22, fig. 13 (coin of Croton); c, ID., pl. 36, fig. 22 (coin of Megarsus).

^183:2 "She was depicted with three faces," says Cleomedes, "because the ancients observed the moon under her three aspects of bicornous, half, and full" (cf. MONTFAUCON, i., pl. i., p. 252).

^183:3 See above, chap. ii.,  section 3.

^184:1 Tacitus, speaking of the simulacrum placed in the sanctuary of Paphos, says: Simulacrum deae ... continuos orbis latiore initio tenuem in ambitu metae modo exsurgens (Hist., ii., 3).--Similar cones of stone have been discovered in the ruins of the Gigantea, in the island of Malta, as also about the site of the temple of Tanit at Carthage (cf. FR. LENORMANT, in the Gazette archeologique for 1876, p. 130).

^185:1 See above, the stone of Paphos (fig. 41, <page 92>).

^186:1 a, On a coin of Paphos. Corpus inscript. semitic, vol. i., fasciculus i., p. 6; b, on a coin of Carthage (BARCLAY V. HEAD. Coins in the British Museum, pl. xxxv., No. 38); c, on intaglios of Sardinia (J. MENANT. Pierres gravees de la Haute-Asia, vol. ii., Paris, 1886, pp. 256 and 258); d, on a Phoenician seal (Idem., p. 234).

^188:1 EM. COEMANS. Manuel de langue egyptienne, Ghent, 1887, 1st part, p. 46.

^188:2 Perhaps it represented symbolically the vital germ, the spark of life; indeed, on some monuments, it appears to be hurled from the divine hand towards the nostrils of the dead person, and, in a bas-relief of the New Empire, Horus and Toth are seen to pour from a jar over the head of King Amenophis II., Keys of Life interlaced in the form of a chain (CHAMPOLLION. Monuments de l'Egypte et de la Nubie, vol. i., pl. xlv., fol. I).

^189:1 DE VOGUe, in the Journal Asiatique for 1867 (vol. x., 6th series), p. 222.

^189:2 G. MASPERO. Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient. Paris, 1886, p. 141.

^189:3 A. H. SAYCE. Religion of the ancient Babylonians. London, 1887, p. 221 et seq.

^189:4 J. MENANT. Op. cit., vol. i., p. 196.

^189:5 PH. BERGER. Representations figurees des steles puniques, in the Gazette archeoligique for 1876, p. 123.

^189:6 BERGER. Idem., p. 124.

^189:7 M. Renan has pointed out, amongst inscriptions of Gebal, and of Sidon, in the vicinity of Tyre, numbers of inverted isosceles triangles which he believes to have been connected with the worship of Astarte. It is the same image that M. Schliemann noticed on the vulva of the Trojan Venus (RENAN. Mission de Phenicie. Paris, 1864, pp. 523, 649-653.--SCHLIEMANN). Ilios, fig. 226.

^190:1 EZEK. ix., 4-6.

^190:2 RAOUL ROCHETTE. Sur la croix ansee asiatique, in the Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, vol. xvii., p. 375 et seq., pl. xvii., 2nd part.

^191:1 See above, fig. 86, p. 180.

^191:2 EUG. ReVILLOUT, in the Gazette archeologique for 1888, p. 3.

^191:3 It is noteworthy that our astronomical sign of the planet Venus is a veritable crux ansata.

^192:1 MAX COLLIGNON. Mythologie figuree de la Grece antique, p. to et seq.

^192:2 FR. LENORMANT, in the Gazette archeologique for 1876, p. 68.

^194:1 Perhaps the influence of the Sacred Cone might also be discovered, as Herr Hugo von Lomnitz has already pointed out, in certain images of the Virgin, derived from the popular art of Spain and Sicily, where the body, enveloped in a robe which widens towards the foot, forms a veritable triangle surmounted by a head and flanked by two small arms bent horizontally.

^194:2 Raoul, ROCHETTE. Sur la croix ansee asiatique. Loc. cit., pl. ix., fig. 11.

^195:1 a, See frontispiece; b, on a silver ingot (EDW. THOMAS, in the Numismatic Chronicle, vol. iv. (new series), pl. xi.).

^196:1 a, On a coin of Cilicia (GENESIUS. Scripturae Phoeniciae Monumenta, tab. xxxvii.).

b, On a coin of Cyprus (DE LUYNES, Numismatique et Inscriptions cypriotes. Paris, 1852, p. v., fig. 12).

c, On a votive stele of Carthage (PH. BERGER, in the Gaz. archeol. for 1876, p. 125).

d, On a Hittite seal (PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Op. cit., vol. iv., fig. 384).

e and f, On a Hittite cylinder (TYLER, Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. i., No. 10, p. 151, London, 1887).

^196:2 EUG. REVILLOUT. Sur un pretendu sceau hittite, in the Gazette archeologique for 1888, p. 1 et seq.

^197:1 Vol. iii., fig. 26.

^198:1 Corpus inscript. semitic, vol. i., fasc. i. (1881), p. 2.

^199:1 GENESIUS, tab. 47.

^200:1 LAJARD. Origin et signification de la croix ansee, in the Memoires de l'Academie des inscriptions et belles-lettres, vol. xvii., 1st part, p. 361.

^201:1 M. BReAL. Dechiffrement des Inscriptions cypriotes, in the Journal des savants, 1877, p. 560.

^202:1 Acad. des inscriptions et belles-lettres. Proceedings of Dec. 9th, 1892.

^203:1 Dr. Vercouvre's interpretation has been confirmed, at a subsequent meeting of the Academy, by M. Philippe Berger, who has shown, moreover, how this old symbol has become, in some cases, a flower and a cross. (Cf. Revue de l'histoire des Religions, 1893, t. xxvii., p. 382.)

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

THE WINGED GLOBE, THE CADUCEUS, AND THE TRISULA.

I. The Winged Globe outside Egypt.--The Winged Globe of the Egyptians; a combination of the Disk, the sparrow-hawk, the goat, and the serpent.--Meaning of this symbol.--Its migration into Phoenicia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Persia.--Modification of its forms.--Its later combinations with the human image, the Sacred Bird, the Sacred Tree, and the conical bethel.--Its influence upon some symbolic figures of Greece and of India, the Aureole, the Thunderbolt, the chakra, etc.--Winged Globes of the New World.

II. The antecedents of the Caduceus.--Homeric description of the Caduceus.--Transformations of the Greek Caduceus.--The Caduceus of the Phoenicians and the Hittites.--Assyrian ensigns, prototypes of the labarum.--The Caduceus in its relations with the Winged Globe and the asherah.--Hindu Caducei.

III. The transformations of the trisula.--Definition, antiquity, and different interpretations of the trisula.--Its connection with the Trident and the Wheel.--Its blending with the Caduceus.--Its interchanges with the Winged Globe, the Scarab, the Lotus, the lingam, the idol of Jaganath, and the Tree of Buddha.--The trisula in the bas-reliefs of Boro-Budur.--The trisula in Europe.--Summing up.

  

I. THE WINGED GLOBE OUTSIDE EGYPT.

THERE are certainly not many features common to the different representations which the ancient Egyptians made of the sun when they depicted it, according to the locality, in the form of a radiating disk, of a goat, of a ram, of a sparrow-hawk, or of a scarab. Notwithstanding, they hit upon a means of contracting all these figures into one.

[p. 205]

Round the Disk, now a Globe, they twisted symmetrically two uraeus snakes, with heads erect and sometimes wearing the crown. Behind the uraei this Globe received the outstretched wings of the sparrow-hawk, on its top the undulating

FIG. 111. WINGED GLOBE OF EGYPT.
 (LEPSIUS. Denkmaler, vol. iii., pl. 3 b.)

horns of the goat spread out; and from this fantastic mixture came those Winged Globes, which, while attaining their highest perfection under the eighteenth dynasty, formed, during the whole period of Egyptian art, so original and graceful a subject of ornamentation upon the pylons and the lintels of the temples."

It has been said, with good reason, that the Winged Globe is the Egyptian symbol par excellence. [*1] According to an inscription at Edfu it was Toth himself who caused it to be placed above the entrances to all the temples in order to commemorate the victory won by Horus over Set, i.e., by the principle of light and good over that of darkness and evil. [*2]

Did the Egyptians imagine that the sun--or the soul of the sun--really assumed the form of a globe flanked by serpents, furnished with wings and surmounted by horns? Or, after having depicted the orb under its natural form, did they add uraei to symbolize its sovereignty, horns to

[p. 206]

recall its strength, and wings to indicate its faculty of translation through space?

Perhaps it is here unnecessary to choose between the two systems which divide the opinions of Egyptologists. A third interpretation, which to me seems to better account for the formation of the Winged Globe, makes it the result of a conscious and intentional combination of various personifications of the sun. M. Maspero, who is one of the most competent and persuasive defenders of the theory that the Egyptians began by believing the beast-like or fantastic creatures depicted upon their monuments to be real, admits himself that the priests may have invented composite figures with the fixed intention of expressing the union of distinct symbols and ideas. [*1]

When the founding of a national monarchy in Egypt brought about the establishment of a common Pantheon, the gods, whose attributes or signification offered the greatest similarity, were related to each other, either as members of the same family, or as different forms of the same being. Is it unreasonable to assume that this movement of unification between local personifications of the same divinity found its expression in the blending of the images by which they were represented?

 

It is only necessary to turn over the leaves of the handsome volumes published by MM. Perrot and Chipiez on the Histoire de l'art clans l'antiquite, or to cast a glance upon the first few of the plates appended by Lajard to his Introduction d l'etude du culte de Mithra, to be convinced that the Winged Globe was also one of the most widely spread and most venerated symbols in the whole of Western Asia.

Phoenicia exhibits it frequently on stelai, bas-reliefs,

[p. 207]

cylinders, gems, paterae, and bowls. Frequently too, in that country, as in Egypt, the Winged Globe adorns the lintels of the temples. One of the most curious instances, quoted by M. Renan in his Mission de Phenicie, is furnished by the lintel of a Christian church built at Edde, near Gebal, from the materials of an ancient temple. The Globe and the uraei have been cut into for the reception of a red cross; below are inscriptions which the learned Academician attributes to the worship of Adonis. [*1]

The Winged Globe of the Phoenicians is found wherever their art was introduced, in Carthage, Cyprus, Sardinia, Sicily, and among different peoples of Palestine. It has even been pointed out on Israelitish seals of the oldest epoch, [*2] and nothing prevents us from supposing that--like the serpent, the golden bull or calf, and the idolatrous images denounced by the prophets--it served, perhaps, to furnish a figured representation of Yahveh.

M. Renan, in his Histoire du peuple d'Israel, goes still further when he thinks he discovers the two uraeus masses of the Egyptian symbol in the urim-tummin, or the two urim, described in Exodus, rather obscurely, as a mechanical means of consulting the divine will. "Perhaps the uraei of the Winged Globes," he suggests, "one meaning yes and the other no, were moved by a spring hidden behind the Disk." [*3] Of course I leave to the eminent writer the whole responsibility of this theory, which is difficult to verify unless one be both an Egyptologist and a Hebraist. At all events nothing proves that the Israelites brought

[p. 208]

directly from Egypt the type of their Winged Globe; the latter rather reproduces the forms of Phoenician art, as is admitted, moreover, by M. Renan.

To be sure, the Winged Globes of Phoenicia often strive to reproduce the classic type of Egypt, always, however, with variations which enable us to easily distinguish them. Sometimes the uraei seem to come out from the lower part of the Globe, so that the superior appendages may as

FIG. 112. WINGED GLOBE OF PHOENICIA.
 (RENAN. Mission de Phenicie, pl. xxxii.)

well depict serpents' tails as goats' horns, like those of Egypt.

Sometimes these appendages are replaced by a tuft of feathers which, perhaps, represents a sheaf

FIG. 113. WINGLESS PHOENICIAN GLOBE WITH URaeI.
 (RENAN. Mission de Phenicie, pl. lv.)

of rays, particularly when it occurs again below the Globe in the shape of a tail.

Sometimes, again, the wings are bent downwards as in some archaic types of the Egyptian symbol. [*1] Lastly, in some instances, the Winged Globe assumes rather the forms which we shall meet with in Asia Minor and in Mesopotamia. [*2]

[p. 209]

It is somewhat difficult, in the absence of positive documents, to determine the precise meaning which the Phoenicians ascribed to this symbol. It may be that we should see therein a solar representation. Yet, from what we know of the Phoenicians, their religion referred less to the direct worship of the orb than to the worship of the mythic personages who incarnated the principal aspects of the solar power. [*1]

The Phoenicians often combined the Winged

Click to enlarge

FIG. 114. VASE OF CITIUM.
 (Perrot et Chipiez, vol. iii., fig. 518.)

[paragraph continues] Globe with other equivalent symbols. It is one of these combinations which I think I detect in a somewhat singular figure painted on a vase found at Citium, in the island of Cyprus, by General Cesnola (fig. 114).

With regard to this image, the learned authors of l'Art dans l'antiquite ask: "Should it be

[p. 210]

called a pillar, stele, or palmette? [*1] To judge from its most striking features--the medial leaves, the terminal fleuron, the two pairs of volutes cutting the figure in opposite directions, lastly and especially its position between two animals facing one another which, standing on their hind legs, appear to be striving to reach with their mouths the extremities of the fleuron,--all these details seem to manifest

FIG. 115. SACRED TREE OF PHOENICIA.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. liv. A, fig. 3.)

the intention of depicting the Sacred Tree of Phoenicia in its conventional form and with its characteristic accessories (fig. 115).

On the other hand, the lower half of the image terminates in a regular pennated tail which one would think was copied from a Winged Globe of Western Asia; the medial leaves may be held to be wings; the lower volutes suggest the oblique appendages of the Assyrian Disk which terminates in a loop; finally, the upper volutes reproduce the scroll which surmounts some specimens of the Mesopotamian Globe. [*2]

In fine, two things only are wanting in order to make it a Winged Globe: these are the globe and the wings. Yet--even should it be said that this is Hamlet with Hamlet left out--I cannot

[p. 211]

help asserting that the ubiquitous influence of the Winged Globe was never revealed in a clearer manner by the brush or the chisel of an Oriental artist.

 

We may further instance, as an example of the same ever-present influence, the incised stone of Damascus on which I have above pointed out the amalgamation of the Winged Globe with the Sacred Cone of the Semites. [*1] If this Cone represents the Great Goddess of Nature, herself considered to be the spouse of the solar Baal whom the Winged Globe symbolizes, it may be asked how far the aim of the fusion of the two symbols is not to accentuate still further the figurative representation of this mythic combination.

With greater reason the same explanation applies to the figure of Citium, if we agree to recognize therein a mutual filiation of the Winged Globe and the Sacred Tree, which we have so often seen placed one above another on the symbolic monuments of Western Asia.

North of Phoenicia, in the very middle of Asia Minor--amongst those Khetas or Hittites whose monuments disclose a complete civilization hardly dreamt of thirty years ago--the Winged Globe, once more a Disk, is noticed on seals, stelai, sculptured slabs and bas-reliefs, in company with

FIG. 116. WINGED DISK OF ASIA MINOR.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. i., fig. 22.)

religious subjects. Here, however, it is reproduced in a somewhat clumsy and inexact fashion, some-

[p. 212]

times even perverted in its essential characteristics. The Globe becomes more independent of wings; the latter, in some cases, serve rather as its support than as its appendages; [*1] it changes also into a Star inscribed in a circle.

I will not dwell on these variations, the meaning of which is far from evident. Perhaps they originate in attempts to adapt the foreign symbol to local forms of worship; perhaps they are merely to be ascribed to a whim, or an oversight, of the native artist when dealing with foreign models. It is indeed generally admitted that Hittite art, like the art of Phoenicia, derived its inspirations from Egypt and Assyria.

On approaching Mesopotamia we find the Winged Circle amongst the principal symbols brought into view on the bas-reliefs and cylinders

FIG. 117. WINGED CIRCLE OF ASSYRIA.
 (LAYARD. Monuments of Nineveh, 1st series, pl. vi.)

of Assyria and Chaldaea. Sometimes it hovers above kings and priests, and again it presides at scenes of adoration and of sacrifice. The forms it assumes exhibit manifold variations, but these may be nearly all traced to two types.

One of these presents to our view a Disk surmounted by a scroll whose extremities curl upwards and thus produce the effect of two horns, not straightened out as in the Egyptian symbol,

[p. 213]

but curved in the manner of an inverted Ionic column. Below the Disk, which sometimes takes the form of a Rosette, or a Wheel, a pennated tail opens out like a fan between two wavy or slightly bent appendages which fall obliquely from the upper part of the circle.

The other type is distinguished by the presence of an anthropoid genius inscribed in the Disk between the wings in such a manner that the horns seem to spring from his cap and the pennated tail forms a skirt with plaited flounces. [*1] According to the nature of the scenes where this personage appears his right hand is sometimes uplifted in an attitude of protection or of benediction, at other times he holds a crown or a bow; or again, assuming the warlike attitude especially suited to the

FIG. 118. ANTHROPOID WINGED CIRCLE.
 (LAYARD. Monuments of Nineveh, 1st series, pl. xiii.)

divinities of Assyria, he lets fly a three-headed arrow. [*2]

Cuneiform texts elicit the fact that these Winged Globes are no longer exclusively a solar emblem, but that we are here in the presence of a divinity at once more abstract and more anthropomorphic than the sun: Assur at Nineveh, Bel or Ilu at Babylon.

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] Perhaps this image even served to express the general idea of divinity, if we are to judge from its importance in the religious art of Mesopotamia; sometimes, indeed, it there replaces the simple Disk, the Crescent, the Rouelle, the Cross, the Star, and the other symbols which in the field of the oldest cylinders are exhibited above divine personages, altars, pyres, the Sacred Tree, and so forth.

Yet the Winged Circles of the basin of the Euphrates, like those of Phoenicia and of Asia Minor, certainly originated in the valley of the Nile. It is there alone that they can be traced back to their simple and intelligible elements: the Disk, the sparrow-hawk, the goat, and the uraeus serpents. Moreover--whilst in Egypt the Winged Globe is met with on monuments dating from the sixth dynasty onwards [*1]--it would be vainly sought for in Mesopotamia under the first Chaldaean Empire, and even under the first Assyrian Empire. [*2]

It is only from the time of the Sargonidae that it appears on seals and bas-reliefs. The founding of Khorsabad, moreover, according to Mr. Layard, marks the epoch of the first appearance, in Assyrian art, of the Scarab, the Key of Life, the Lotus-flower, and the other symbols borrowed from Egypt. [*3]

Even the discovery of the Winged Globe on older monuments of Mesopotamia would not be an argument against the Egyptian origin of the symbol. The researches of Assyriology have shown the commencement of intercourse between Egypt and Chaldaea to belong to an extremely

[p. 215]

remote period. These relations seem to date, at least, from the time of Naram-Sin, the son of Sargon, who, according to a tablet of Nabonidos, confirmed by various chronological calculations, reigned in the land of Accad in the thirty-eighth century before our era. [*1] Some students even make them date from the patesi of Telloh, whose monuments, discovered by M. de Sarzec, are perhaps contemporary with the fourth Egyptian dynasty. [*2]

If anything is surprising, it is that the principal symbols of Egypt did not sooner make their way into Chaldaean imagery. They must, in fact, have been spread abroad--long before the formation of the Assyrian Empire--with the ivories, seals, and gems brought from Egypt by the armies and caravans--witness the numerous Scarabs on the cartouches of Thothmes III. and of Amenophis III. discovered by modern explorers in the basin of the Tigris. [*3]

 

Several experts in these matters, amongst others MM. G. Rawlinson and J. Menant, have wondered if the Winged Circle of Mesopotamia had not its prototype in the Sacred Bird with outstretched wings, which was led about in religious processions, and which already surmounts the standards sculptured at Telloh. [*4] It is very certain that the Mesopotamian Disk, thanks to the presence of a pennated tail, exhibits an ornithomorphic character far more accentuated than that of the Winged Globe of Egypt. This similarity, however, provided there be any grounds for maintaining

[p. 216]

that equivalent symbols tend to merge into one another, is merely a result of the importance attributed at an earlier date to the representation of the Sacred Bird in Mesopotamia. In other places, [*1] does not M. Menant record a faint analogy between the combination of lines which cross in the sketch of the Winged Disk, and the group of cuneiform characters which gives the ideogram of the supreme Divinity as an eight-rayed star? Here again the general resemblance proves, not that the cuneiform sign gave rise to the symbol of the Winged Circle, but that the latter was, so to speak, sometimes cast in the mould of the sign used to render the conception of the divinity; just as in Egypt it borrowed the outlines of another solar emblem, the flying Scarab. [*2]

However this may be, the very principle of the ornithomorphic image is undeniably of Egyptian origin. It is Egypt alone that can have given the Assyrians the idea of introducing the Globe, uraei, and horns, into the representation of the Sacred Bird. If any doubt remained in this respect, it would be dismissed by the examination of the intermediate forms which serve as a gradual transition between the Winged Globes of the two countries.

In the rectilinear strokes terminating in a ball, or hook, which form the lower appendages of certain Winged Circles of Assyria, some people have thought they recognized an equivalent of the claws which hold a ring in the representation of the Egyptian vulture or sparrow-hawk. [*3] There

[p. 217]

would be nothing singular in the fact that the ornithomorphic Globe, having borrowed the wings of the Sacred Bird, had also appropriated its claws. Yet in by far the greater number of Asiatic Disks these wavy or curved lines undeniably originate in the Egyptian uraei, as may be proved by comparing the two figures below.

FIG. 119. EGYPTIAN GLOBE.
 (LEPSIUS. Denkmaler, vol. ii., fig. 136.)

FIG. 120. MESOPOTAMIAN GLOBE.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xxxvi., fig. 13.)

It remains to be explained how the Egyptian symbol of the sun became, in Mesopotamia, the figured representation of the supreme God. Mr. G. Rawlinson conjectures that the Assyrians drew a circle to designate eternity, then added wings to express omnipresence, and introduced the human figure to symbolize supreme wisdom. [*1] It is possible, although indications are wanting in this respect, that a similar interpretation was applied to the Winged Globe in the sacerdotal schools of Babylon and of Tyre, during the period of metaphysical speculation, when Sanchoniathon defined, as a symbol of perpetual motion, the double pair of

[p. 218]

wings belonging to certain divine figures derived by Phoenicia from the art of Mesopotamia, or of Egypt. But such subtle intentions would be sought for in vain among the early Assyrian artists, who made the ornithomorphic or anthropoid Disks. It is far more likely that, under the encroaching influence of Egyptian symbolism and art, they restricted themselves to copying, in order to represent their supreme god, the symbol which they knew to express the equivalent idea in the imagery of their neighbours.

In Egypt itself the sun appeared from remote ages as the essential manifestation, the visible face, the "Eye" of the One and only God. The whole mythology of Egypt, at the period of its complete development, had ended by becoming, to borrow an expression of M. Paul Pierret, a solar drama. [*1] Consequently, it is easy to understand that the Winged Globe--i.e., the combination of the principal images employed to represent the sun in the valley of the Nile--was adopted by the nations subject to the influence of Egypt in order to symbolize their own conceptions of God in His highest manifestations.

 

The career of the Winged Globe was not to cease here.

We see in its reception by the Persians how symbols pass from one nation to another, and even from one cult to a rival form of worship. Till Cyrus overcame the second Babylonian Empire in 538 B.C., Ahura Mazda, the omniscient lord, had been perhaps exclusively represented in worship by the flame of the pyres, as was proper for a god "similar to light in body and to truth in spirit." Henceforth he assumes the symbol of Bel

[p. 219]

and of Assur: the Winged Circle under one of the two forms given it by Assyria, but with modifications which were generally improvements. In the anthropoid type, the Disk with its lower appendages becomes more and more of a waist-band with loose ends. All trace of horns disappears. The genius, inscribed in the circle, exchanges the close-fitting tunic and the low cap of the Assyrians for the wide-sleeved dress and tiara of the Medes. Yet his attitude remains that of Assur. Sometimes, soaring above the royal chariot, the god shoots an arrow at wild beasts, or against the enemies of the sovereign; at other times his left

FIG. 121. AHURA MAZDA.
 (LAJARD. Mithra, pl. ii., fig. 32.)

hand is uplifted, and in his right he holds a Lotus-flower.

The other type also exhibits more graceful and freer forms, which may bear comparing with the best specimens of Phoenicia or of Egypt. M. Dieulafoy, moreover, has shown that the architecture and ornamentation of the Persians were frequently influenced by Egyptian art, taken at its very source and not in its Assyrian imitations. [*1]

 

In Europe I am not aware that the Winged Globe has as yet been met with, except in the islands of the Mediterranean, whither it was directly introduced by the Phoenicians. Greece

[p. 220]

does not seem to have accorded it rights of naturalization, although it adopted Asiatic symbols of smaller importance, or less widely spread, such as the gammadion, the triscele, the Thunderbolt and the Lotus. It is met with at Carthage, to be sure, on coins whose execution reveals the plastic influence of Greek art. [*1] But these coins are too closely connected with the religions of Asia in their subject, their legend, and their symbol, to allow of our ascribing them to Hellenic civilization.

The latter was doubtlessly acquainted with the symbol of the Disk, or of the solar Wheel. But Greek art was too anthropomorphic to give unnatural forms to the embodiments of its divine ideal. It therefore reserved monstrous bodies for monsters, and if it added wings to the shoulders of some of its genii, or gods, these were mere accessories which perverted neither the forms nor the proportions of the human figure. When it took from Asia symbolic combinations in which the Winged Globe was originally represented, it replaced it by the Thunderbolt, at once the weapon and the symbol of its own supreme god,--as in those capitals of the temple of Athene at Priene, where the Thunderbolt is suspended over the Sacred Tree and its two acolytes (see above, pl. iv., figs. c and e). [*2]

On seeing some representations of the Thunderbolt

[p. 221]

which recall in a remarkable manner the outlines of the Winged Globe, it may be even asked if it was not owing to this latter symbol that the Greeks transformed into a Winged Spindle (fig. 122 d and e) the Double Trident derived from Assyria (fig. 122 a). At any rate the transition, or, if it be preferred, the combination of the two symbols is met with in those coins of northern Africa where Greek art was so greatly impregnated with Phoenician types. Thus, on coins of Bocchus II., King of Mauritania, figures are found which M. Lajard connected with the Winged Globe, and M. L. Muller calls Thunderbolts, but which are really the result of a crossing between these two emblems (fig. 122 b and c).

FIG. 122. COMBINATION OF THE WINGED GLOBE AND THE THUNDERBOLT. [*1]

There is a type of Jupiter fulmens, which a tardy syncretism attempted to combine, in plastic art as in the worship, with the solar Baal of Tarsus, himself represented by the Winged Globe, or rather by the winged god of Persian symbolism (fig. 123).

It must not be forgotten, however, that here again we are in the very middle of Asia Minor,

[p. 222]

and that this homage paid by local art to the great god of Hellenic culture did not react on the types of Europe.

Even the Winged Wheel, of which the symbolism

FIG. 123. COIN OF TARSUS.

of our industrial arts makes so frequent use, only appears by way of exception on Greek and Roman monuments, if we leave out the sort of velocipede on which Triptolemus rides; and even in these rare instances it appears merely as the abbreviation of a chariot, or as a symbol of motion, and in no case can it be connected with the Winged Circle which, on certain Asiatic monuments, originates in the Egyptian Globe. [*1]

On the other hand, the plastic influence of the Winged Globe seems to have spread far further than the figures in which we find it literally reproduced. M. Gaidoz has pointed out certain representations of Ixion on the Wheel which might well have been taken from the type of the Assyrian god inscribed in the Disk. [*2] Perhaps we should attribute to the same origin the halo of glory which the Christians borrowed from classic art, to surround therewith the head, or body, of their superhuman beings.

To be sure, the earliest idea of the "glory" may

[p. 223]

have been directly furnished by certain aspects of the sun. Velleius Paterculus relates, that "at the moment when Augustus entered Rome the arc of the sun, symmetrically curved round his head, was seen to form a crown of the colour of the rainbow." But it is none the less the case that the manner in which the Aureole encircles the bust of Assyrian divinities refers us directly to the ring which serves Ahura Mazda or Assur as a girdle, and which represents, as I have shown above, the circumference of the Winged Globe, [*1]--save that the disk has here discarded its wings and bristles with rays instead.

FIG. 124. MESOPOTAMIAN AUREOLA.
 (MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. ii., fig. 45.)

It should be remarked that in the Assyrian Aureoles, the rays, instead of widening in diverging from the centre, grow narrower as they get further from it. It is this peculiarity, equally observable in classic and in Christian art, [*2] that permitted of tracing their Aureoles to the analogous symbol represented in Assyria from the fourth century before our era. [*3]

In India, although its symbolism does not seem to have adopted the Winged Globe, we likewise

[p. 224]

meet with certain traditional types which may perhaps have been subjected to the influence of the old Egyptian symbol.

Thus, in a representation of Vishnu, in his avatar of the tortoise, I have noticed, at the Musee Guimet, a sort of wrapper, fashioned after the girdle with loose ends which characterizes the winged genius of Persia. The lower part of the body is formed of a carapace which recalls at once the tail of the Winged Disk and that of the Scarab. The wings are wanting, but their place

FIG. 125. AVATAR OF VISHNU.
 (GUIGNIAUT, pl. ix., fig. 47.)

is taken by two supplementary arms, in conformity with the usual conventions of Hindu pictorial art.

Elsewhere it is the chakra or solar Disk whose

FIG. 126. CHAKRA OF VISHNU.
 (MOOR. Hindu Pantheon, pl. ix., fig. 1.)

lateral appendages, representing leaves, or flames, assume the appearance, or at least take the place, of the wings in the Winged Globe. These representations

[p. 225]

are, in truth, comparatively modern, but it is probable that their type is extremely old..

It is, however, above all in the trisula--that Caduceus of India as it has sometimes been termed--that we will have occasion to note an evident intervention of the Winged Globe amongst the original creations of Hindu symbolism.

 

In the New World I hardly know of more than one figure which bears an unquestionable resemblance to the Winged Globe; this is a human face, furnished with small pennated wings and a formidable pair of moustaches, which two English travellers, Messrs. Pim and Seeman, observed cut in a rock at New Segovia in Central America.

FIG. 127.
 (Journal of the Roy. As. Soc., London, vol. xviii., (new series), p. 397.)

Mr. Robert Sewell considers that these moustaches are imitations of Assyrian scrolls, or Egyptian uraei. [*1] But here the resemblance may well be accidental, and the choice of a globe or face, provided with wings or feathers with a view to typify the sun, is too simple a combination for it not to have been possible to occur independently in the symbolism of nations unknown to one another.

On the other hand, M. d'Eichthal thought he discovered in the ruins of a sanctuary at Ocosingo,

[p. 226]

near Palenque, a fragment of the wing of a globe sculptured above a doorway.  But the globe is far from being depicted with such distinctness as to permit of our accepting this conclusion.

Finally, we find amongst the bas-reliefs of Uxmal, in Yucatan, a geometric design whose lower appendage suggests in a striking manner the pennated tail of certain Assyrian, Phoenician, and Persian Globes.  These, however, are isolated details, and it is the whole of the combination represented by the Winged Globe which must be found in all desirable conditions of authenticity ere we can deduce a case of real transmission.

FIG. 128. SOLAR SYMBOL AT UXMAL.
 (Publications of the Bureau of Ethnography, vol. ii., pl. 57, No. 5.)

Footnotes

^205:1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'art dans l'antiquite, vol. i., p. 604.

^205:2 H. BRUGSCH. Die Sage von der geflugelten Sonnenscheibe, in the Abhandlungen der koniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, 14th year (1868-1869), p. 209.

^206:1 G. MASPERO, in the Revue de l'histoire des religions, vol. v., p. 97.

^207:1 ERNEST RENAN. Mission de Phenicie, Paris, 1864, 1 vol., with atlas, pp. 227, 241, 857.

^207:2 CLERMONT-GANNEAU. Sceaux et Cachets, in the Journal Asiatique, 1883, vol. i.

^207:3 Histoire du peuple d'Israel. Paris, 1887, vol. i., p. 276.

^208:1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Vol. iii., figs. 23, 305, 546.

^208:2 J. MENANT. Les pierres gravees de la Haute-Asie. Paris, 1886, vol. ii., p. 223.

^209:1 C. P. TIELE. Histoire des anciennes religions des peuples semitiques. Paris, 1882, chap. iii.

^210:1 Vol. iii. (Phenicie), p. 706.

^210:2 Mr. G. Rawlinson, describing the most widely spread type of the Sacred Tree among the Assyrians, likens the sort of inverted Ionic capital which supports the terminal palmette to "the scroll commonly surmounting the winged circle." (The five great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World. London, 1862-67, vol. ii., p. 236).

^211:1 See above, fig. 94, <page 185>.

^212:1 1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ, Vol. iv., fig. 356.

^213:1 According to M. Leon Heuzey (Revue archeologique, 1887, p. 256), these so-called plaited and goffered skirts of the Assyrian costume, are nothing but a fringed stuff with long locks of wool hung round the body like a shawl.

^213:2 G. RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies, vol. ii., p. 235.

^214:1 LEPSIUS. Denkmaler aus Aegypten and Aethiopien, vol. ii., Bl. 12, figs. 116, 123, 135, 136.

^214:2 See the classification instituted by M. J. Menant in his valuable work on Les pierres gravees de la Haute-Asie.

^214:3 LAYARD. Nineveh and its remains. London, 1848-49, vol. ii., pp. 213-14.

^215:1 A. H. SAYCE. Religion of the ancient Babylonians. London, 1887, pp. 21 and 137.

^215:2 TERRIEN DE LA COUPERIE. An unknown King of Lagash, in the Babylonian and Oriental Record for August, 1890, p. 193 et seq.

^215:3 LAYARD. Nineveh and Babylon. London, 1853, chap. xii.

^215:4 J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. ii., p. 17.

^216:1 J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. ii., p. 18.

^216:2 M. Gaidoz thinks even that the Scarab may well have been the prototype of the Winged Globe (Le dieu gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de la roue. Paris, 1886, p. 53.) To me it seems that the resemblance of the two symbols is better accounted for by the hypothesis of an independent origin and a subsequent approximation.

^216:3 It is interesting to come across similar appendages, undeniable [p. 217] survivals of the Egyptian uraei, around Disks, Christianized by the inscription of the Cross, or Chrism, which adorn the lintel of the door in Christian tombs of Syria (LETHABY. Architecture, Mysticism and Myth, p. 268.)

^217:1 G. RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies, vol. ii., p. 231.

^218:1 P. PIERRET. Essai sur la mythologie egyptienne. Paris, 1876, p. 15.

^219:1 DIEULAFOY. L'art antique de la Perse, 3rd part,  section iv., p. 33 et seq.

^220:1 DUC DE LUYNES. Numismatique des Satrapies. Paris, 1846, pl. i., figs. 1, 2, 3; pl, ii., figs. 3, 4, 5.--BARCLAY V. HEAD. Guide to the Coins of the Ancients. London, 1881, pl. xi., No. 40, and pl. lix., No. 33.--A coin of Iaetia, in Sicily, exhibits on the reverse a human face with two wings and three legs; but this is a mere embellishment of the Asiatic triscele which, as we have seen, became the emblem of the island with three capes.

^220:2 In the same plate we may follow the subsequent transformation of this symbolic detail which, on the tympanum of the church at Marigny (pl. iv., fig. j) becomes a double branch on the top of the sacred tree.

^221:1 a, On a coin of Faleri (HUNTER, pl. 27, No. 16).

b and c, On Mauritanian coins (L. MuLLER. Numismatique de l'ancienne Afrique. Copenhagen, vol. iii., p. 95, Nos. 5 and 7).

d, On a coin of Ptolemy Soter (L. MuLLER, op. cit., vol. i., p. 141, No. 371).

e, On a coin of Syracuse (BARCLAY V. HEAD. Coins in the British Museum, pl. 35, fig. 30).

^222:1 See, in the Monuments inedits, by Raoul Rochette (Paris, 1833) the scene of the judgment of Orestes (pl. xl., fig. 1), where Minerva leans on a winged wheel, which, in the author's opinion, denotes the chariot of the goddess; see also (same work, pl. xliii., fig. 2) the personage who seems to advance with the help of winged wheels placed under his feet.

^222:2 Symbolisme de la roue, p. 44.

^223:1 Cf. the image of Assur in the cylinder reproduced above, fig. 119.

^223:2 DIDRON. Iconographie chretienne. Paris, 1843, p. 13.

^223:3 J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, vol. ii., pp. 55, 56.

^225:1 Early Buddhist Symbolism, in the Journal of the Roy. Asiat. Soc., vol. xviii., (new series), p. 397.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

II. THE ORIGINS OF THE CADUCEUS.

The Caduceus is one of the symbolic figures which have tried in the highest degree the patience of scholars. Its classic appearance of a winged rod, round which two serpents are symmetrically entwined, is very far removed from its primitive form.

Greek monuments make known to us a period when it consisted of a circle, or a disk, placed on

[p. 227]

the top of a stick, and surmounted by a crescent, making thus a kind of figure 8 open at the top, .

In a still more remote age it seems to have formed a flowered bar with three leaves, tripetalos, as Homer says.

Through what influence were these three leaves transformed into a disk, surmounted by an incomplete circle?

The latter form appears so often on the Phoenician monuments that we are forced to wonder, with M. Perrot, "whether the Caduceus was borrowed by the Phoenicians from Greece and its Hermes, or whether the latter did not rather

         	

FIG. 129. GREEK CADUCEUS.
   (OVERBECK. Kunstmythologie,   pl. xxxvi., fig. 6.)

      	

FIG. 130. PUNIC CADUCEUS.
   (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iii., p. 232.)

     
   appropriate this attribute from some eastern god, his elder by many centuries." [*1]

MM. Perrot and Chipiez seem themselves to give a decisive answer to their question when, in a later volume, they show us the Caduceus on Hittite monuments of Asia Minor, where no one can dream of importations from Greece. [*2]

At Carthage the Caduceus is nearly always associated with the Sacred Cone on stelai dedicated

[p. 228]

either to Tanit "the face of Baal," or conjointly to Baal Hamman and Tanit. If it is likely that this Cone stands for the symbol of Tanit, would it be rash to assume that the Caduceus represents either the companion of the Great Goddess of Carthage, the Phoenician god of the sun, or of the solar heat, Baal Hamman--or the usual hypostasis of Baal Hamman, his "messenger" or "angel," Malac Baal [*1]--or, finally, the third personage of the triad composed of Baal, Tanit, and Iol or Iolaus, the divine solar infant, lost and found by turns like Atys and Adonis elsewhere? [*2]

In all these cases the Caduceus might form the symbol of a solar divinity, and what strengthens this assumption is the fact that on some Libyan stelai the two Caducei which flank the Cone are sometimes replaced by Wheels arranged in the same manner. [*3]

Does not the Caduceus of the Greeks seem likewise to have been an essentially solar emblem? According to the words of Homer it was a rod of gold which alternately "charms the eyes of men and calls them from their slumbers;" [*4] it lures the dead to Hades, and can bring them back to the light of day; lastly, like a real magic wand, it changes all it touches into gold. I in no wise infer therefrom that Hermes was a solar god, or even a god of the sun when below the horizon. With the Greeks themselves, however, tradition makes out that the Caduceus had been given him by Apollo in return for the lyre.

Perhaps the Phoenician Caduceus passed to the hand of Hermes amongst those Greek colonists

[p. 229]

of Cyrenaica who contributed more or less towards introducing Punic, and even Egyptian elements into the religion as into the mythology of the Hellenes. [*1] Perhaps, too, the transmission was brought about on Greek soil through direct intercourse with Phoenician traders, who cannot but have diffused, with their religious and artistic products, the attributes of their own national divinities. [*2]

 

Is it possible to retrace still further the history of the Caduceus?

Numerous origins and manifold antecedents

[p. 230]

have been attributed to it. It has alternately been considered to be an equivalent of the Thunderbolt, a form of the Sacred Tree, a contraction of the Scarab, a combination of the solar Globe and the Crescent of the moon, and so forth. All these derivations may have some foundation in fact. I once attempted to connect it with the Winged Globe, as a mere hypothesis, to be sure, but in terms perhaps too affirmative for want of having taken sufficiently into consideration the intervention of other figures in the genesis of its forms. [*1] I would now be more inclined to admit that it was first of all an instrument, a weapon, a religious, or military, ensign, gradually modified by coming into contact with other figured representations, amongst which was the Winged Globe.

Bas-reliefs of Assyria exhibit military ensigns, prototypes, perhaps, of the Constantinian labarum, which consist of a large ring placed on the top of a staff, and girt with two loose bandelets (fig. 131).

FIG. 131. ASSYRIAN STANDARD.

On the top of this ring--which M. Perrot has no hesitation in comparing with the circle forming the girdle of Assur in certain solar adaptations of the Winged Globe (see above, fig. 118)--place either the horns symbolical of divine power

[p. 231]

amongst the Mesopotamians, or the Crescent, so frequently coupled with the Globe in the religious imagery of the Phoenicians, and the result will be unquestionably the image of the Punic Caduceus.

On Hittite monuments Caducei are noticed which are terminated by a Globe in relief, surmounted by a real pair of horns--a peculiarity which we again meet with on a Tyrian amphora reproduced in

         	

FIG. 132. HITTITE   CADUCEUS.
   (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iv., fig. 353.)

      	

FIG. 133. VARIETY OF GREEK   CADUCEUS.
   (Monuments ceramogr., vol.   iii., pl. 36 a.)

     
   [paragraph continues] De Witte and Lenormant's Monuments ceramographiques.

The result is the same if we invert certain solar

FIG. 134 [*1]

[paragraph continues] Globes of Phoenicia, which are merely an abbreviation of the Winged Globe of Egypt, as is easily seen from the two uraeus snakes which encircle them,

[p. 232]

and the tufts of feathers by which they are surmounted (fig. 134).

The very uraei here form the counterpart of the loose scrolls below the Phoenician Caduceus (fig. 135 a and b), as also underneath the Assyrian ensign (fig. 130, and which are still noticeable in the stemmata of some Greek Caducei.

We find, on a Sardinian cylinder, reproduced by MM. Perrot et Chipiez, a curious alteration of the Winged Globe, in which the ornithomorphic appendages are reduced to a reticular or pennated tail (fig. 134 b). Putting aside the horns, which have at the same time assumed the aspect of a fork, we cannot but be struck by the resemblance of this symbol to those of the Phoenician Caducei, where the Disk seems to be supported by a conical stem (fig. 135 a). In other places the horns are wanting,

FIG. 135. CADUCeES LIBYQUES.
 (A. W. S. VAUX. Phoenician inscript., pi. i., fig. 2, and pl. vii., fig. 20.)

notably in a Globe of Persepolis, which also rests on a triangular tail; here, however, the uraei are lowered in such a manner as to form more plainly the transition from the bandelets (fig. 136). It is worth while remarking that the Winged Globe was sometimes borne as a standard at the

[p. 233]

end of a staff (figs. 138 and 139), in the manner of the Caduceus and the Assyrian ensign.

FIG. 136. PERSEPOLITAN SCULPTURE.
 (GUIGNIAUT. Op. cit., t. iv., pl. xxii., fig. 117 a.)

Does it follow that the Caduceus was necessarily a derivation of the Winged Globe? One might equally admit--and it is on this point I want to insist--that it had an independent origin, and, at a later date, carne under the influence of the Winged Globe, or, reciprocally, that certain reproductions of the Winged Globe were modified on coming into contact with it. [*1]

It must indeed be mentioned that M. Ph. Berger was able, with the same degree of likelihood, to connect the antecedents of the Caduceus among the Phoenicians with the asherah, i.e., with the stake entwined with bandelets (figs. 63, 79), and with the other analogous simulacra which we saw representing among the Syrians the goddess of the earth, or of Nature. [*2]

In support of this opinion, or rather of the assumption that there is a transition from the Sacred Tree surmounted by the solar Disk to the Caduceus of the Phoenicians and the Hittites, I have here brought together three figures taken from cylinders found in Asia Minor.

[p. 234]

In the first (fig. 137) the Sacred Tree is still plainly recognizable below the solar Disk; in the

         	

FIG. 137.

      	

FIG. 138.

      	

FIG. 139. [*1]

     
   second (fig. 138) it supports the latter; in the third (fig. 139) we find nothing more than a stick supporting the Winged Disk in the manner of a standard.

Let us now place side by side with these symbolic representations the following figures taken from Mesopotamian cylinders.

FIG. 140. MESOPOTAMIAN CYLINDERS. [*2]

The wings of the Globe have here disappeared: on the other hand the figures a and b, which are unquestionably connected with the rudimentary forms of the Sacred Tree (cf. above, fig. 61) draw

[p. 235]

nearer at the same time to the Caduceus, as this last emblem appears in fig. c under the form of a mace.

Whether we have here at last the prototype of the Caduceus, or whether we are once again in the presence of other figurative representations which had merely felt the influence of this mysterious emblem, is a question which the relative age of the monuments concerned can alone decide. If, however, as everything goes to prove, it is to Mesopotamia that we must go for the earliest types of the Caduceus, nothing prevents us from assuming that the latter came directly from Asia Minor to Greece, without passing through the medium of the Libyan Caduceus.

As for the latest transformation which Greek art caused the Caduceus to undergo, it may be questioned if the introduction of the serpents and wings is not here evidence of a phenomenon of symbolic atavism, a return to old, or foreign, forms; or even of the persistency of a plastic tradition whose intermediate links have not come down to us. According to some writers the serpents of the classic Caduceus would be due to a transformation of the stemmata or scrolls which hang beneath the Circle. Now, as I have above shown, these latter, in the Winged Globes of Western Asia, are themselves a metamorphosis of the Egyptian uraei. It must be also borne in mind that the serpent twined round the end of a pole forms the symbol of Baal Hamman in the Punic imagery. [*1] On the other hand, Fergusson alleges having noticed live serpents intertwined in this manner; the Greek artist would therefore have done nothing more than adjust to the Caduceus an image provided by real life. [*2]

[p. 236]

At any rate, it is owing to this aesthetic transformation that the Caduceus was preserved until our own times to represent two functions of the ancient Hermes, which are more in vogue than ever with the human race, industry and commerce. Even in the matter of symbols nothing dies which deserves to live, and is capable of transformation.

In India, likewise, the Caduceus has survived to the present time under the form of two serpents intertwined. M. Guimet has found numerous specimens amongst the carvings placed as ex voto in the Vishnu temples of southern India. [*1] It is probable that this symbol was introduced into India in the track of Alexander. It is found, indeed, on the coins of Sophytes, a native prince who copied the monetary types of the Seleucid kings, and it continued to be reproduced without interruption in the coinage of the Indo-Scythic sovereigns. But it is also met with in India under a simpler form which, like the earlier type of the Greek Caduceus, seems to be connected with the

FIG. 141. VARIETIES OF INDIAN CADUCEI. [*2]

[paragraph continues] Asiatic Caduceus formed of a Disk surmounted by a Crescent. This combination, which is sometimes

[p. 237]

placed on the top of a staff, and sometimes isolated like our astronomical sign , appears to have been confounded at an early date with the Buddhist trisula, whose manifold transformations deserve a chapter for themselves.

Footnotes

^226:1 Revue archeologique for 1865, vol. xi. (new series), p. 490.

^226:2 See above, figs. 117, 118, 121, 123, also 134B, and 136.

^227:1 PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iii., p. 463.

^227:2 PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iv., (Judee, Syrie, etc., figs. 274 and 353).

^228:1 PH. BERGER L'ange d'Astarte, in the Faculte de theologie protestante a M. Edouard Reuss. Paris, 1879, pp. 52-54.

^228:2 FR. LENORMANT. Gazette archeologique, 1876, p. 127.

^228:3 Corpus inscriptionum semitic., fasc. iv., 1889; tab. liv., fig. 368.

^228:4 Odyssey, v., lines 47, 48.

^229:1 MAURY. Histoire des religions de la Grece antique. Paris, 1859, vol. iii., p. 265 et seq.

^229:2 It is not even necessary for the Greeks to have believed in the identity of Hermes with the foreign divinity from whom they thus derived the Caduceus. It is, however, proper to point out that the analogies between Hermes and Baal Hamman were too numerous not to have struck their respective worshippers when once these gods came into contact with one another. Both are united to the goddess of love, Aphrodite-Astarte. Both have the ram as their sacred animal; this latter feature belongs to them in common with the Ammon of the Libyans and the Ammon-Ra of the Egyptians. The divinity who patronized the business dealings of the Phoenicians must have easily passed, in the eyes of the Greeks, for the god of commerce, and we know that Hermes appropriated this function in post Homeric times.

As for Malac Baal, M. Ph. Berger reminds us that he was, like Hermes, an initiator, an intermediate agent between mankind, and the superior divinity (L'ange d'Astarte, loc. cit., pp. 52-54). Both are represented and even personified by stelai and hermata, or bethels. Both assume, at times, the human figure with wings, save that Greek art placed the latter on the heels of its god; just as, in the Caduceus, it changed the position of the wings of the Winged Globe.

It may be added that the Greeks themselves had been impressed with this analogy between the messenger of Zeus and the hypostasis of Baal Hamman, for Pausanias (Elis, xv.) informs us that in the prytaneum of Olympia they rendered homage to Hera-Ammonia (probably Tanit), and to Parammon, divinities of Libya. "Parammon," he adds, "is a surname of Hermes."

^230:1 Bulletin de l'Acad. roy. de Belgique, vol. xvi. (1888), p. 638 et seq.

^231:1 a, See above, fig. 113; b, Sardinian scarab (PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. iii., fig. 464).

^233:1 On some coins of Carthage the Caduceus alternates with the Winged Globe above the horse. (HUNTER, tab. xv., No. 14, and LAJARD, pl. xlv., No. 5.)

^233:2 Gazette archeologique for 1880, p. 127.

^234:1 LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xxxiii., fig. 4.--ID., Ibid., pl. lvii., fig. 5.--J. MENANT. Pierres gravees, fig. 112.

^234:2 a, Collection de Clerq, vol. i., pl. xxxi., fig. 330; b, PERROT et CHIPIEZ, vol. ii., p. 342; c, LAJARD. Mithra, pl. xxxviii., fig. 2.

^235:1 PH. BERGER. La Trinite carthaginoise in the Gazette archeologique for 1879, p. 135.

^235:2 Tree and Serpent Worship. Appendix.

^236:1 Huit jours aux Indes, in the Tour du Monde for 1885, 1st part, p. 244.--See also RIVETT CARNAC. The Snake Symbol in India, in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 1879, part i., pl. vi., fig. 4.

^236:2 a, PERCY GARDNER. Coins in the British Museum. Greek and Scythic Kings of India and Bactria, pl. xxii., fig. 9.

b, SENART. Journal asiatique, 1875, vol. vi., p. 137.

c, RIVETT CARNAC. Coins of the Sunga or Mitra dynasty, in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1880, vol. xlix., pl. ix., fig. 19.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

III. THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE TRISULA.

I have already referred to the importance of the Trident in the symbolism of Hinduism where, under the name trisula (tri three, and sula point, spear, or pale) it occurs amongst the most important attributes of Siva. This emblem exhibits no peculiarity of form here; it might as well figure in the hands of Hades, or of Poseidon. This is not the case, however, with respect to the Buddhist trisula or, at least, the symbol which bears this name amongst the Buddhists.

The trisula of the Buddhists, termed also vardhamana, "a crescent," may be described, in its

FIG. 142. THE TRISULA.

simplest form, as an omicron surmounted by an omega.

It is, however, rarely met with under such a simple form. The upper arc of the omicron, or rather of the disk, is nearly always flanked by two small circles, or by two horizontal strokes which often assume the appearance of two leaves or small wings (fig. 143 et seq.). The points of the omega change into fleurons; the disk itself rests on a staff or pedestal, and from its lower arc fall two spires similar to serpents' tails, the ends of which are sometimes curved upwards (fig. 143), and sometimes downwards (fig. 154).

[p. 238]

At times the trisula appears to have only an ornamentive significance. Thus we see it crowning balustrades and porticoes, adorning sword-scabbards,

FIG. 143. TRISULA OF AMARAVATI.
 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xviii. (new series), fig. 1.)

and forming necklace-pendants and ear-rings. [*1] But in most cases it unquestionably discharges the function of a symbol, and even of a religious symbol. Engraved on numerous coins by the side of religious emblems and images, it stands at the beginning and end of votive inscriptions in the caves of Western India. [*2] The sculptures

FIG. 144. TRISULA ON BLAZING PILLAR.
 (FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. lxxi.)

of the bas-reliefs exhibit it, in turn, on the staff of banners, on the back of an elephant, on an altar where homage is paid to it, and, lastly, on a pillar from which flames emerge (fig. 144). At

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] Bharhut it occurs above the throne of Buddha. At Amaravati it is one of the signs cut on the sole of the Master's feet. [*1]

The oldest representations of the trisula are found--in conjunction with the principal symbols of Buddhism, the swastika, the stupa, the Sacred Tree, and so forth--on the coins of Krananda, [*2] a native sovereign contemporary with Alexander or the earliest Seleucid kings.

FIG. 145. COIN OF KRANANDA.

Nevertheless the trisula was far from being solely used by the Buddhists. In caves it is sometimes placed near symbols of the solar worship, and on the coins of the Indo-Scythic princes it is not only struck beside images of the Hindu god Siva but, what at first surprises us, beside those of Greek divinities, such as Zeus; [*3] it is, moreover, possible that it became a mere monetary sign, as often happens with religious symbols used in coinage.

Among the Jains, who have so many affinities

[p. 240]

with Buddhism, the twenty-fourth and last of the Tirthankaras or legendary saints of the sect has the vardhamana as a symbol; this personage even bears, according to Colebrook, the surname of Trisula. [*1]

It may be wondered, at first sight, that the innumerable texts left by Buddhism give us no positive information with regard to the meaning and origin of the trisula. Few symbols have given rise, in our own times, to more varied explanations.

Some have seen therein the monogram of Buddha; [*2] others the symbol of the dharma, the Law, which sums up the doctrine of Buddhism; [*3] others again a representation of the tri-ratna, the threefold jewel formed by Buddha, his Law, and his Church. [*4] There are those who have discovered in the trisula the juxtaposition of the dharma chakra, the "Wheel of the Law" to the ancient letter , y, which itself is said to stand for the mystic formula ye dharma. [*5] Some scholars think they recognize in it the combination of five letters symbolizing respectively intelligence (ma) and the four component elements of matter, air (ya), fire (ra), water (va), and earth (la). [*6]

Eugene Burnouf thought he found therein the vardhamana kaya, "the Propitious One," one of the sixty-five signs which, according to Buddhist

[p. 241]

tradition, adorn the impression of Buddha's foot. [*1]

Finally, according to some writers, we must seek its origins amongst the less abstract images of the naturalistic forms of worship which preceded Buddhism.--M. Kern, laying stress on the actual meaning of vardhamana, the present participle of a verb signifying "to grow or increase," makes it the image of the "horned moon," and sees in the central protuberance of the trisula the nose with which we ourselves sometimes adorn the representation of the lunar crescent . [*2] Edward Thomas seeks therein "an ideal combination of the sun and moon;" the alteration of the primitive form would, according to him, be due to a modification in the forms of worship, or to the overthrowing of the sovereigns termed Lunar by a Solar dynasty. [*3]

Mr. Burgess recognizes therein an image of the Thunderbolt; [*4] Sir George Birdwood, a phallic emblem, or else the Tree of Life; [*5] Mr. Monier Williams, "the Two Feet of Vishnu, with a star or embossment in the middle." [*6]

Lastly, M. Beal takes it for the superposition of the Flame on the Lotus-flower, and M. Senart, of the Trident on the Wheel. [*7]

[p. 242]

Among all these more or less contradictory opinions the interpretation of M. Senart is not only the simplest and most rational, but it is also strictly confirmed by the evidence of the monuments. There are many trisulas in which the upper part of the figure is separated from the Disk, some again in which it assumes distinctly angular forms , instead of the rounded shape of the omega, u; there are others, finally, in which it becomes beyond doubt a Trident, as amongst the sculptures of Buddha Gaya and of Boro-Budur. [*1]

The Trident superposed upon the Disk is also met with upon the coins of the anonymous prince

FIG. 146. SCULPTURE OF BUDDHA GAYa.
 (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., No. 37.)

known by his title of Basileus Soter Megas, and on those of several native kings. [*2]

The only point on which I have some doubt is when M. Senart puts forward the Trident as the original feature, and, so to speak, the primitive nucleus of the Hindu trisula,--which would make it, at least in its origin, an essentially Sivait symbol, destined to represent the flash of the lightning.--As for myself, I should be more inclined to seek this nucleus in the Disk, and, consequently, to connect the trisula with the solar symbols.

[p. 243]

From the most remote times the worship of the sun was widely spread throughout India, and, as nearly everywhere else, the sun was first of all represented there by a Disk, as may be seen from the sculptures of the ancient caves, and the ingots used for bartering before the introduction of coins properly so-called. [*1] At a later date the Disk became a Wheel, and the Buddhists, who applied so many solar images and symbols to their form of worship, made it the Wheel of the Law, "formed of a thousand spokes darting out a thousand rays."

The secondary character of the omega (or Trident) in the trisula plainly follows from certain figures brought into view by Edward Thomas in

         	

FIG. 147. ANCIENT COIN.

      	

FIG. 148. CAVE OF BAJA.

     
     	 

     
     	(Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), pl. ii., figs. 39   and 40.)

     
   his valuable work on the solar symbols of India. These are circles drawn between four omegas. One of these circles exhibits four arrows radiating from the circle between the crescents.

These figures indicate clearly the function of the Trident in the trisula. Doubtlessly, in the hands of Siva--as formerly in the hands of Neptune, and, at a still earlier period, in those of the Assyrian god of the air and the storm--the Trident must symbolize the flash of the lightning. But may it not be questioned whether, considered apart, it should

[p. 244]

not be held to be, in a wider sense, the image of a Three-tongued Flame, and, consequently, when coupled with the Disk, an emblem of fire, or of solar radiation?

Among the sculptures of Boro-Budur, in the island of Java, the Trident, which in some religious scenes is exhibited above the Disk, or Rosette, is replaced at times by a Three-pointed Flame. [*1] Eug. Burnouf had already noticed, in the coloured representations of the Buddhas of Nepaul, that the headdress of the Master exhibits a ball terminating above in a kind of flame, and that on many Singhalese statues this flame takes the shape of "a kind of lyre or trident." [*2] Finally, according to Mr. Beal, the trisula personifies, amongst the Buddhists of the north, the heaven of pure flame superposed upon the heaven of the sun. [*3]

The trisula is then certainly a Hindu symbol. It seems, however, to have felt, at an early date, the influence of the Caduceus. Perhaps even it was in order to approach the latter in appearance that the primitive Trident of the Hindu symbol assumed the rounded forms of the omega and placed itself in direct contact with the Disk.

Those who have some hesitation in admitting the possibility of discovering in a complex symbol the traces of a double antecedent--as we find in a child the characteristic features of both its parents--need only cast a glance over the following picture whose contents I have taken from the coinage and figured monuments of India.

I wish to call especial attention to the figures d and e. They resemble one another so closely that writers commonly rank the former as a trisula 

[p. 245]

when they find it on the coins of certain Indo-Scythic princes. Yet there is no doubt but that it is directly connected with the Caduceus. Moreover,

FIG. 149. CADUCEI AND TRISULAS. [*1]

Fergusson himself has written with respect to the trisula:--"It bears a singular resemblance to the sign of the planet Mercury, or to the Caduceus of the god who bears this name." [*2]

It is also representations of serpents intertwined, closely allied to the Caduceus, which supply us with the earliest type of the lower appendages, in the shape of spires, observed in the trisulas of Sanchi and Amaravati (fig. 143 and 154).

On the other hand, the most complex forms of the trisula exhibit an unquestionable likeness to

[p. 246]

some types of the Winged Globe which have been observed in Asia Minor, Mesopotamia and Persia.

In both figures the centre is occupied by a Disk which is sometimes converted into the Wheel, or the Lotus-flower. Does not the upper part of the trisula, which I have termed the omega, recall the horns of the Mesopotamian emblem, if we only take into consideration the knob between the horns caused by the upper arc of the disk (fig. 150);

FIG. 150. CYLINDER OF CHALCEDON.
 (LAJARD. Culte de Mithra, pl. lii., fig. 2.)

or else the projection caused by the tuft of plumes which surmounts the disk of certain Winged Globes (fig. 151)?

FIG. 151. COIN OF THE SATRAPS OF TARSUS.
 (LAJARD. Culte de Mithra, pl. lxiv.)

The shaft, frequently conical, on which some trisulas rest, takes the place of the fan-shaped tail, and the spires traced on both sides of this support correspond with the lines, ending in a loop, which descend on either side of the tail in the ornithomorphic Disks of Western Asia.

In order to account for this likeness, I will venture on the hypothesis that these forms of the trisula must have been subjected, during their development, to the plastic influence of the ancient Egyptian symbol which had come to India by way of Assyria and Persia.

[p. 247]

The time is past when, dazzled by the sudden discovery of Vedic literature, and fascinated also by the verification of our relationship to the Aryan races of Asia, we turned towards India to seek them the universal source of symbols and dogmas, myths and gods. Since we caught a glimpse of the great antiquity of the civilizations which had reached their prime on the borders of the Euphrates and the Nile at a period when the ancestors of the Aryans were still wandering over the table-lands of Central Asia, we are far more inclined to locate in Mesopotamia, or even in Egypt, the earliest artistic centres which shed their light over the ancient world, from the Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean.

On the other hand, India, up to the Mahometan conquest, did not live in the isolated condition to which historians were long pleased to relegate it. Sir George Birdwood goes, perhaps, a little too far when he asserts, in a general manner, that nearly all the symbols of India are of Mesopotamian origin. [*1] But it is none the less an established fact now, that the products of western art and symbolism must have made their way to the valley of the Indus before the appearance of the oldest stone monuments on which ancient India has left us a vestige of its beliefs. [*2]

Without taking into consideration the intercourse which is supposed to have existed between the dwellers on the banks of the Indus and the most ancient empires of the Euphrates and the Nile, and without laying stress either on the factories which the Phoenicians are said to have established in southern India, I will recall to mind that Darius I

[p. 248]

had annexed the valley of the Indus, and the actual province of the Punjab, about the end of the seventh century B.C. [*1] Such competent authorities as James Fergusson and General Cunningham have shown that India borrowed its earliest style of architecture from the Persians, [*2] and in the north-east of the peninsula there have been repeatedly found products of Persian art which date back to Darius and his successors--especially cylinders and coins bearing the Winged Circle. [*3] It was in one of these finds that one of the coins of Tarsus containing a Winged Circle so nearly allied to the trisula was found (fig. 151).

It seems to be now generally admitted that the Indian alphabets are of Semitic origin. [*4] Why then should religious symbols not have followed the same paths as the symbols of language and the creations of art?

In the centuries following the expedition of Alexander, it was Greek, or rather Graeco-Asiatic art which influenced the development of Indian architecture and sculpture. Coins show us first of all sovereigns of Greek origin, who Hellenize Bactria, the Cabul country, and the valley of the Indus as far as the Ganges basin; then Scythic and Parthian princes who maintain, until the second century of our era, the language and traditions of this civilization imported from the West.

[p. 249]

[paragraph continues] For more than two centuries the Greek Pantheon alone supplies images for the coins of western India. At most a few Buddhist emblems occur here and there; the Bo tree and the stupa under Agathocles, and the Wheel under Menander. From the time of Gondophares the representation of Siva alternates with that of Poseidon; yet the type of the two divinities remains so similar that on some coins it is difficult to decide if it is the Greek or the Hindu god. [*1]

At the same time, however, there occurs in India a veritable invasion of Iranian divinities. Mr. Percy Gardner and M. James Darmesteter, the former through investigating the coins of the British Museum, and the latter through the study of Persian traditions in the Hindu epic poem, came simultaneously to the somewhat startling conclusion that western India, after being Hellenised under the Indo-Bactrians, had been largely Iranised under the Indo-Scythians. [*2] On the coins of the latter not only do Zeus, Pallas, Helios, Selene, Poseidon, Herakles, and Serapis alternate with Mithras, Mao, and Atar, as well as with Siva, Lukshmi, and even Buddha, but also the classic forms of the Thunderbolt, the Caduceus and the Cornucopia occur side by side with the Buddhist trisula and Wheel as well as with the Sivait Trident and bull.

India has always been the favourite home of religious syncretism; but at no period of its history did it open its portals to so many different forms of worship--even under Akbar, that great Mogul who was willing to combine in a single religion the beliefs of the Mahometans, the Hindus, the Parsees, the Jews and the Christians.

[p. 250]

How could symbols have escaped an impulse which carried away the gods themselves? At any rate Buddhism would have been unfaithful to the spirit of its whole symbolism if, when acquainted with the emblems by which neighbouring religions represented their great solar divinity, or even their supreme god, it had not sought to appropriate them, either by adopting them as they stood with a new signification, or oftener by assimilating them, through slight linear alterations, with one or other of its favourite symbols.

It is, as we have seen, among the sculptures of Amaravati that the trisula assumes the form most closely allied to the ornithomorphic Disk. Now, nowhere else has the general influence of Graeco-Asiatic art over native architecture and sculpture been verified in a more obvious manner. Already in the year 645 of our era the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Thsang likened the sanctuary of Amaravati to the palaces of the Tahia, i.e., the inhabitants of Bactria. [*1] The same fact has been recorded in our own times by James Fergusson: "There is," he writes, "so much of what is Greek, or rather Bactrian, in the architectural details of Amaravati that this monument must belong to a period nearer to the Christian era than the character of the inscriptions would lead one to suppose." And the eminent archaeologist adds that the study of these sculptures seems to him destined to elucidate especially the interesting question of the intercourse, and even of the exchange of thought, between east and west. [*2]

The Winged Circle and the Caduceus are not,

[p. 251]

moreover, the only factors which have reacted upon the genesis, or at least the development, of the trisula.

In an interesting paper, read in 1886 before the Royal Asiatic Society, Mr. Robert Sewell was perhaps the first to seek to the west of the Indus, and even in Egypt, the origins of the trisula, which he connects with the Scarab. The birthplace of a symbol is one thing; the origin of the figures which may have influenced its development is something very different. With this reservation, however, I must admit that there is nothing farfetched in this parallel, especially if, following

FIG. 152.
 (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xviii. (new series), fig. 13.)

[paragraph continues] Mr. Sewell's example, we interpose between the two figures the type of the Scarab with raised wings and bent legs which surmounts certain Assyrian columns.

But in Egypt itself, as M. Perrot shows, the flying Scarab borrowed the outlines of the Winged Globe, [*1] by which fact, according to our theory, its resemblance to the trisula is sufficiently explained. It must be observed, moreover, that several of

[p. 252]

these Assyrian Scarabs hold between their fore-legs the Disk adorned with the uraei. [*1]

It may be noticed, by the way, that among the Egyptians the Trident already occurs in conjunction with the Winged Globe, at least in the texts. The inscription of Edfu, which relates how Horus was transformed into a Winged Globe in order to fight the armies of Set, gives him as a weapon a three-pointed spear. [*2]

On a number of monuments the Disk of the trisula changes into a Rosette, imitating an expanded lotus-blossom, as on the gate of Sanchi. The same monument further exhibits Lotuses at the ends of two stalks which spring from the basis of the central fleuron; finally, the two extreme points of the omega take a shape which suggests the calyx of a flower. We have already shown the solar character of the Lotus in the symbolism of the Hindus. [*3] In the trisula the transformation of the Disk into a Lotus is therefore the equivalent, the plastic rendering of the transformation which, among the Buddhists, substituted the padma mani, or "Jewel of the Lotus," for the sura mani, or "Jewel of the Sun"; whence the well-known formula:--Om! mani padme, "Oh! the Jewel in the Lotus!" [*4]

Elsewhere the trisula seems to reproduce the Sivait emblem of the lingam between two serpents standing erect. This figure, which when superposed upon the Disk has perhaps a doubly phallic

[p. 253]

import, certainly seems quite foreign to the original doctrine of Buddhism. Yet here again the Buddhists have shown themselves to be masters in the art of adapting the symbols of other religions. M. Gustave Lebon, in his Voyage au Nepaul, quotes a characteristic instance of the fanciful interpretations with the help of which Buddhism brings about or justifies these adaptations. "The linga," he writes, "is likewise adopted by the Buddhists of Nepaul as an emblem of the Lotus in which Adi-Buddha manifested himself, in the shape of a flame, at the beginning of the world." [*1]

It ought to be mentioned that, in the opinion of some writers, such as Ch. Lenormant and Baron de Witte, the Caduceus among the Greeks symbolized the combination of the two sexes in the

FIG. 153. CADUCEUS ON AN AMPHORA. [*2]
 (From the Elite des monuments ceramographiques, vol. iii., pl. xci.)

same individual, hermaphrodism in fact, [*3]--and in the valuable publication of those two archaeologists upon the Elite des monuments ceramographiques de la Grece we find a variety of the Caduceus where a vertical projection, similar to the representation of the phallus, springs from the centre of the Crescent, which in this case is somewhat separated from the Disk.

[p. 254]

On the coins of the Sunga dynasty the lingam placed between the serpents becomes the headdress of Buddha; the Disk stands for the Master's head, and the lateral appendages of the trisula are represented by two projections which stretch out horizontally on either side of this head. [*1]

The trisula is thus seen to be converted into an anthropoid figure. A transformation of the same kind, but still more accentuated, is observable in the three famous idols of Puri which General Cunningham long ago proved to be three ancient trisulas (figs. 154 and 155). [*2]

FIG. 154. TRISULA OF SANCHI.
 (Musee des moulages, Brussels.)

These emblems were doubtlessly a great object of popular veneration at the period when Puri was a Buddhist sanctuary. When Brahminism came to establish itself there it contented itself with changing them, by means of a few slight alterations, into the image of Vishnu, or rather Jaganath, and his brother and sister. In thus appropriating the old solar symbol, still discernible in

[p. 255]

spite of its successive alterations, Vishnu, moreover, did nothing but recover what belonged to him, since he is, in Hinduism, pre-eminently the solar divinity.

Finally, the trisula, whose plasticity is only equalled by its power of absorption, borrows forms from the vegetable kingdom with the same freedom as from the human physiognomy. M. Rousselet points out the resemblance of the mystic symbol of the Buddhists to the kalpavriksh or Tree of Knowledge which the Jainas represented

FIG. 155. IDOL OF JAGANNATH. (ROUSSELET. L'Inde des Rajahs, p. 517.)

FIG. 155. IDOL OF JAGANNATH.
 (ROUSSELET. L'Inde des Rajahs, p. 517.)

by a stem with three branches on the mitre of the Tirthankaras sculptured on the caves of Gwalior. [*1] A similar combination is observable on coins of the Sunga dynasty, where the upper part of the trisula, forming the head-dress of Buddha, is transformed into a regular crown of branches. [*2] On other monuments the stem on which the trisula rests becomes the trunk of a tree whose branches are laden with conventional fruits and interlaced with necklaces of jewels. [*3]

This vegetalization of the trisula, or, properly

[p. 256]

speaking, of the Trident which surmounts it, is nowhere more evident than among the sculptures of Boro-Budur, where it literally merges into the Bo tree through a series of gradual transformations. "The shape of the points of the trisula," M. Ch. Leemans writes in his able commentary upon the Atlas published under the patronage of the Dutch government, "may sometimes

FIG. 156. TRIDENT OF SIVA.
 (MOOR. Hindu Pantheon, pl. xlii.)

have been derived from that of a flame, or else from the calyx of a flower, or again from a symbolic tree." [*1] The same observation applies

FIG. 157. EGYPTIAN LOTUS.

moreover to the Trident of Siva, which at times exhibits the forms of a lotus calyx depicted in the Egyptian manner (fig. 157).

Perhaps other transformations of the trisula might still be found at Boro-Budur. I will restrict myself to pointing out a detail which is not without interest: the same Disk which, when transformed into a most complicated ornament, is.

[p. 257]

sometimes crowned by a Trident, is also met with between two serpents--which brings us back to the origin of the Winged Circle--the Globe of Egypt with the uraei.

FIG. 158. BAS-RELIEFS OF BORO-BUDUR. [*1]
 (Boro-Boedoer, Atlas, pl. cccxvi. and ccclxx.)

Moreover this ornament, between which and certain forms of the trisula the transition is easily traced, commonly surmounts the entrance to the pagodas depicted in the bas-reliefs--in exactly the same manner as the Winged Globe adorns the lintel of the temples in Egypt and Phoenicia.

FIG. 159. BAS-RELIEFS OF BORO-BUDUR.
 (Boro-Boedoer, Atlas, pl. cclxxxiii., No. 105.)

It is proper to point out that in the West there are some figures which exhibit an odd resemblance to the trisula. Such is, in the first place, the Cyprian image to which I have drawn attention (fig. 114), as presenting to our view a combination

[p. 258]

of the Sacred Tree and the Winged Globe. The upper volutes with the flowered projection bisecting the centre of the arc recall the three points of the trisula with their central fleuron. The pair of volutes whose lower parts are bent downward on both sides of the base, suggest the ophidian appendages which, in the Buddhist symbol, descend on either side of the pedestal. Lastly in both cases, the middle part of the figures shows two leaves which by their position, as well as by their shape, suggest two small wings.

Mr. William Simpson, an English artist, well known on account of his archaeological work in connection with the monuments of India, has

FIG. 160. THUNDERBOLT OF ELIS.

pointed out the resemblance of the trisula to some representations of the Thunderbolt graven on coins of Elis which date from the fifth century B.C. [*1]

FIG. 161. SCULPTURE OF BORO-BUDUR.

This Thunderbolt especially resembles a somewhat enigmatical figure sculptured among the bas-reliefs of Boro-Budur, where, to all appearance, it plays the part of a trisula. [*2]

On the whole, there would be nothing remarkable

[p. 259]

in these similarities, since the Thunderbolt and the trisula, as we have just seen, are both a development of the Trident.

What is more singular is to find a kind of trisula engraved on the flank of a lamb which adorns the serpent-shaped scroll on a pastoral staff dating from the Middle Ages. [*1]

Have we here an exchange or a mere coincidence? This is a question which I will not venture to decide, although nothing is wanting in the Christian symbol to make of it a real trisula, neither the Disk, nor the central point imitating a fleur-de-lis, nor the rounded projection of the two lateral points.

 

After all, if we have been able to find the antecedents, and, so to speak, the factors of the trisula, and even its probable signification in the creeds which preceded Buddhism, we have not learned much as to the meaning of this symbol in the religion which made most use of it. The fact is, that here the plastic figures cannot make up for the silence of the written monuments. So long as symbols remain images and are applicable to concrete objects, or physical phenomena, it is not impossible to discover the meaning which they in all probability bore. But when, having entered upon what may be called their derived or secondary phase, they become signs and express abstract ideas--which is nearly always the case in Buddhism--the field of interpretation becomes, so to speak, unlimited for critics, as sometimes also for the faithful.

The proper signification of the trisula remains then in the suppositive stage, although the purpose of its transformations does not always escape us. The issue of some hitherto unpublished text

[p. 260]

can alone reveal to us the general and authentic meaning of this symbol, before which millions of our fellow-creatures have bowed down, but whose name we do not even know with any degree of certainty.

My purpose, moreover, was less to solve a problem whose solution has so far escaped the most competent minds, than to trace the transformations of the trisula in the course of its plastic development, and to show once again with what ease symbols of most dissimilar origin merge into one another as soon as, in their form, or in their meaning, there occur points of contact which are sufficient to facilitate this transition.

Footnotes

^238:1 A. CUNNINGHAM. The Stupa of Barhut. London, 1879, pl. xlix., fig. 10; pl. 1., figs. 5 and 6.

^238:2 EUG. BURNOUF. Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi, p. 626.

^239:1 A. CUNNINGHAM. The Stupa of Bharhut, and J. FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, 1st vol., with plates. London, 1868, passim.--Cf. engraving of our frontispiece.

^239:2 Edward Thomas has maintained that Krananda was identical with the Xandrames of Diodorus (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, vol. i., new series, p. 477, On the identity of Xandrames and Krananda), which would make this coin earlier than the year 317 B.C.--Wilson, on his side, makes Xandrames to be Chandragupta, the ancestor of Asoka (Introduction to the translation of the Mudrarakshasa. The Theatre of the Hindus, vol. ii., 131, 132).

^239:3 PERCY GARDNER. Coins in the British Museum. Greek and Scythic Kings of India and Bactria, pp. 106 and 107.

^240:1 COLEBROOK. Observations on the Jainas, in the Asiatic Researches. London, 1809, vol. vii., p. 306.

^240:2 J. FERGUSSON. Description of the Amaravati Tope, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London (vol. iii. of new series, p. 162).

^240:3 EDW. THOMAS, in vol. iv. (new series) of the Numismatic Chronicle, p. 282, foot-note.

^240:4 A. CUNNINGHAM. The Stupa of Barhut, p. III.

^240:5 F. PINCOTT. The Tri-Ratna, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, vol. xix. (new series), p. 242.

^240:6 A. CUNNINGHAM. The Topes of Central India, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London (vol. xiii., 1st series), p. 114.

^241:1 EUG. BURNOUF. Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi. Paris, 1852, p. 627.

^241:2 KERN. Der Buddhismus, German translation by Jacobi. Leipzig, 1884, vol. ii., pp. 241-242.

^241:3 EDW. THOMAS. On the identity of Xandrames and Krananda, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, vol. i. (new series), pp. 483-484.

^241:4 BURGESS. Archaeological Report on Elura.

^241:5 SIR GEORGE BIRDWOOD, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, vol. xviii. (new series), p. 407.

^241:6 Quoted by Mr. Greg. Archaeologia. London, 1885, vol. xlviii., p. 320.

^241:7 S. BEAL. A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the East. London, 1871, p. 11.--E. SENART, Essai sur la legende du Bouddha in vol. vi. of the Journal Asiatique. Paris, 1875, p. 184.

^242:1 Boro-Boedoer op het eiland Java. Leyden, 1873, Atlas, pl. cccxvi.

^242:2 PERCY GARDNER. Op. cit., pl. xxiv., figs. 1-6. See also SENART. Journal Asiatique. Paris, 1875, vol. vi., p. 185.

^243:1 EDWARD THOMAS. The earliest Indian Coinage, in vol. iv. (new series) of the Numismatic Chronicle, p. 271. See also his article in vol. xx. of same series, The Indian Swastika.

^244:1 Boro-Boudour op het eiland Java. Atlas, pl. cclxxx., fig. 100.

^244:2 E. BURNOUF. Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi, p. 539

^244:3 S. BEAL. A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese, p. 11.

^245:1 a, Coin of Sophytes (PERCY GARDNER, pl. i., fig. 3).

b, Ancient ingot (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. iv., new series, pl. xi., fig. 28).

c, Old coin (Numismatic Chronicle, vol. iv., new series, pl. xi., fig. 16).

d, Coin of Azes (PERCY GARDNER, pl. XX., fig. 2).

e, Coin of Krananda (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. i., new series, p. 475).

f, On a sculptured altar at Sanchi (FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, Atlas, pl. xxv., fig. 3).

g, On the pole of a standard at Sanchi (CUNNINGHAM. The Bhilsa Topes, pl. xxxii., fig. 8).

h, On the pole of a standard of Sanchi (FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, pl. xxxviii., fig. 1).

i, On the handle of an ivory instrument (CUNNINGHAM. Archaeological Survey of India, vol. x., pl. ii., fig. 5).

^245:2 Tree and Serpent Worship, p. 116.

^247:1 Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, 1886, vol. xviii. (new series), p. 407.

^247:2 G. RAWLINSON. The Five Great Monarchies of the East. London, 1862, vol. i., p. 101.--A. H. SAYCE. Religion of the ancient Babylonians. London, 1887, pp. 137-138.

^248:1 G. MASPERO. Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient. Paris, 1886, p. 618.

^248:2 J. FERGUSSON. Tree and Serpent Worship, p. 94.--A. CUNNINGHAM. Archaeological Survey of India, vol. v., Append. A.

^248:3 Relics of ancient Persia, in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Calcutta, 1881, 1st part, p. 151; 1883, 1st part, pp. 64 and 261.

^248:4 See upon this question the summing up of Mr. Cust in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, 1884, vol. xvi. (new series), p. 325; also an article by M. Halevy in the Journal Asiatique. Paris, 1885, vol. ii.

^249:1 PERCY GARDNER. Coins of Greek and Scythic Kings in India, p. lviii.

^249:2 PERCY GARDNER. Id.,  section iv.--J. DARMESTETER, in the Journal Asiatique. Paris, July-August, 1887.

^250:1 For the identification of the Tahia with the Bactrians, see PERCY GARDNER. Op. cit., p. xxxi.

^250:2 Description of the Amaravati Tope, in vol. iii. (new series) of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London.--The gates of Sanchi seem to date from the first years of our era although the tope itself is older by several centuries (ROUSSELET, L'Inde des Rajahs, p. 513).

^251:1 See PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'Art dans l'antiquite, vol. i., p. 811.

^252:1 See PERROT et CHIPIEZ. Histoire de l'Art dans l'antiquite, vol. ii., p. 399.

^252:2 H. BRUGSCH. Die Sage von der geflugelten Sonnenscheibe, in the Abhandlungen der koniglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, vol. xiv. (1868-1869), p. 201.

^252:3 S. BEAL. A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures, p. 11.

^252:4 It must be observed, however, that the Disk is already found closely associated with the Lotus-flower in the symbolism of Asia Minor. (See the Histoire de l'Art dans l'antiquite, by MM. Perrot and Chipiez, vol. iii., fig. 509.)

^253:1 In the Tour du Monde for 1886 (vol. li., p. 266)--At Boro-Boudour the Sivait linga has become a representation of the dagoba (C. LEEMANS, Boro-Boedoer, p. 452).

^253:2 Cf. the form of the trisula on the pillar of the sun at Buddha Gaya (our illustration, fig. 146).

^253:3 Elite des monuments ceramographiques de la Grece. Paris, 1868, vol. iii., p. 197.

^254:1 A. RIVETT CARNAC. Coins of the Sunga or Mitra dynasty, in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. xliv., 1st part, pl. vii. and viii.

^254:2 The Topes of Central India, in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London (vol. iii. of 1st series). General Cunningham adds that these rude figures are likewise used in native calendars to represent Vishnu in his avatar of Buddha.

^255:1 ROUSSELET. L'Inde des Rajahs, p. 370.

^255:2 RIVETT CARNAC. Loc. cit.

^255:3 F. PINCOTT. The Tri-Ratna, vol. xix. (new series) of the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London, p. 243.

^256:1 Boro-Boedoer, p. 455 of commentary.

^257:1 See also same Atlas, pl. ccxxxvi., 11; cclxxxviii., 114; and especially ccxlviii., 36, where this subject rests on the apex of a triangle which corresponds with the pennated tail of the Mesopotamian globes.

^258:1 The Trisula Symbol in the Journal of the Roy. As. Soc. for 1890, vol. xxii. (new series), p. 306.

^258:2 Boro-Boedoer, vol. iii., pl. ccxlvi., fig. 35.

^259:1 Cf. CAHIER et MARTIN. Melanges d'archeologie, vol. iv. fig. 58.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONCLUSION.

IN most of the instances which I have here quoted it is easy to discover through what ways the specified symbol was transmitted from one nation to another. In this respect the migration of symbols proceeds directly in conformity with what may be called the history of commercial intercourse. Whatever the similarity of form, and even of meaning, may be between two symbolic figures of different origin, it is proper, ere we assert their relationship, to show the probability, or at least the possibility, of international relations which would have served as a vehicle of transport. This point once set at rest, it remains to be seen who was the giver and who the receiver.

It may be asked, for instance, why it is not the Greeks who communicated the Thunderbolt to Mesopotamia, or the Hindus who transmitted the

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] Lotus to the Egyptians? It is here especially that the advantages we possess over preceding generations come into play. There was a time when the origin of the gods, myths, and symbols spread over the whole surface of the Old World could be vaguely located in India; and another, when it would have been rash not to ascribe to Greece the honour of all intellectual and religious creations possessing any moral or artistic value. But the researches carried on for the last half century have henceforth placed on a definite basis the ancient history of the East, and the latter, in its turn, has enabled us to assign their relative distance to the principal centres of artistic culture which have reacted upon one another since the beginnings of civilization.

We may differ in opinion as to whether the Ionic column borrowed its volutes from the horns of the ibex, or the half-closed petals of the lotus. We may even argue whether Ionia received it directly from Golgos by the ships of the Phoenicians, or from Pterium, by the caravans of Asia Minor. But whoever has noted its presence on the monuments of Khorsabad, or of Kouyunjik, will not refuse to locate in Mesopotamia its starting-place on its journey to the Aegean Sea. This is only one example of those types and motives whose development doubtlessly owed its importance to the independent inspirations of Greek genius, but whose origins must nevertheless be sought for in Phrygia, in Lycia, in Phoenicia, and even beyond these countries, in the valleys of the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the Nile. In India likewise the most ancient products of sculpture and of carving, when they do not bear witness to the direct influence of Greek art--as in the Buddhist bas-reliefs of Yusufzai, and the Bacchanalian scenes of Mathura--are connected with the monuments of Persia through the adoption of what

[p. 262]

might be called classic motives in Persepolitan architecture: such are those capitals formed by animals, sometimes face to face, sometimes back to back, which are, as it were, a plastic signature, in the former case of Assyria, in the latter of Egypt.

I am far from denying that there arose among some nations independent and self-governing centres of artistic creation. In this respect it will be. sufficient to make mention of China and pre-Columbian America. But it must be admitted that art in the extreme East was profoundly modified through the influence of the Buddhist types which proceeded directly from India. We might even take into account a still older element which would directly connect the art, as also the religion, of the Chinese empire with the development of Mesopotamian civilization, if, as is assumed by M. Terrien de la Couperie, who has brought together a considerable amount of presumptive evidence in support of this theory, the ancestors of the Chinese were descended from the nation which occupied Chaldaea and Elam some three and twenty centuries before our era. [*1] At any rate, it would be astonishing if, in the course of so many centuries, infiltrations had not occurred between the civilizations which were developing in this parallel manner on the Asiatic continent.

As for ancient America, Gustave d'Eichthal had already called attention to the similarities which are met with on the monuments of Central America and of Buddhist Asia. For myself, I am more and more inclined to admit, not the Asiatic origin of the inhabitants of America, which is quite another question, but the intervention of certain artistic influences radiated from China,

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] Japan, or the Indian Archipelago, to the shores of the New World, long before the Spanish conquest.

In short, whether we start from Japan, from Greece, from India, or even from Libya, from Etruria, or from Gaul, we always arrive, after many halting-places, at two great centres of artistic diffusion, partially irreducible as regards one another, Egypt and Chaldaea--with this difference, that, towards the eighth century before our era, Mesopotamia took lessons from Egypt, whilst Egypt learnt little of any country. Now, as we have noted more than once in the present volume, not only did symbols follow the same paths as purely ornamental schemes, but they were also transmitted in the same manner, at the same periods, and in nearly the same proportion. Concerning symbols as well as artistic products we everywhere find, by the side of aboriginal types, the deposit of a powerful current which has its more or less distant origin in the symbolism of the banks of the Euphrates, or the Nile. In a word, the two classes of importations are joined together to such a degree, that in writing the history of art we write to a great extent the history of symbols, or at least, of their migrations.

 

The knowledge of these migrations, in its turn, throws quite a new light not only upon the presence of the same emblems among nations who never professed the same creed, but also upon the formation of certain complex images which cannot be accounted for save as the result of a reciprocal action between symbols often differing greatly in origin and in meaning. Through thus always finding, often among nations far apart, either the same symbolic combinations, or the same features in different combinations, we might be tempted to believe that symbolism had at its disposal only an

[p. 264]

extremely limited number of signs and figures to provide for the plastic requirements of the religious sentiment.

Need I add that this is not so? The variety of symbolic representations has no more limits than the spirit of analogy. But certain figures, when once formed, have so captivated the eye and the imagination that they have become the commonplaces of figurative language, and the artist's hand could not free itself from their influence when engaged in producing new symbols. It is equally easy to understand that, having forgotten, or having never known, the meaning to be attached to a foreign pattern, the copyist should have attempted to connect his productions with some other known and popular type. At other times, again, the symbolic syncretism is intentional and premeditated; whether it be in the desire to unite, for the sake of greater efficacy, the attributes of several divinities in a single figure, as is shown in certain pantheistic figures of Gnostic origin; or a wish to state, by the fusion of symbols, the unity of the gods and the identity of creeds, as in the mystic monogram wherein the Brahmaists of contemporary India have testified to their religious eclecticism by interweaving the Om of the Hindus with the Trident, the Crescent, and the Cross. [*1]

Sometimes, too, the sacerdotal interest must have tended towards accentuating the analogies rather than the dissimilarities of symbols, in order to assist the absorption or unification of the doctrines which they represented. Finally, we must take into consideration the popular tendency towards syncretism which, when not held in check by a rigorous orthodoxy, acts upon symbols, as well as upon creeds, by introducing into the new form of worship the images consecrated by a long

[p. 265]

veneration. Or else it is the innovators themselves who take advantage of symbolism in order to disguise, through borrowing from antique forms, the newness of their doctrine and, if need be, to transform into allies the emblems, or traditions, which they are unable to boldly extirpate.

Need I recall to mind Constantine choosing as a standard that labarum which might be claimed both by the religion of Christ and the worship of the sun? It is singular to find the same policy attributed to the first Christian king of Norway. According to an old song of the Shetland Islands, Hakon Adalsteinfostri, obliged to drink to Odin at an official banquet, traced quickly upon the bowl the sign of the Cross; and when his companions reproached him for doing so, he told them that it was the sign of Thor's Hammer. [*1] We know, indeed, that in Germanic and Scandinavian countries the Cross of Christ more than once drew near in appearance to the Two-headed Hammer of Thor, as in Egypt it assumed, in more than one inscription, the aspect of the Key of Life. [*2]

Buddhism was even less scrupulous. In some of its sanctuaries it did not hesitate to preserve the images of the worship paid by the natives of India to the sun, to fire, or to serpents, whilst ascribing these rites to its own traditions. The solar Wheel thus became easily the Wheel of the Law; the Cosmic Tree represented the Tree of Knowledge, under which Sakya Muni attained the perfect illumination; the Seven-headed Serpent

[p. 266]

[paragraph continues] Naga was transformed into the guardian of the impression left by the Feet of Vishnu, itself to be attributed henceforth to Buddha, and so on. Some years ago there were discovered at Bharhut the remains of a Buddhist sanctuary whose bas-reliefs exhibited emblems and religious scenes with inscriptions which served as their legends, or rather as their labels. Great was the joy of Anglo-Indian archaeologists at the receipt of this intelligence. We were to have at last an interpretation of Buddhist rites and symbols, formulated by the Buddhists themselves one or two centuries before our era. We had unfortunately to lower our expectations when a minute investigation showed that it was merely an ancient temple of the sun taken possession of by the Buddhists at a later date. They had contented themselves with placing on the figured representations of the solar worship inscriptions which connected them with their own creed. [*1]

 

Some have gone as far as to say that religions changed, but that the form of worship remained always the same. Thus formulated the proposition is too absolute. But it is certain that each religion preserves, in its rites and symbols, survivals of the whole series of former religions. And no complaint need be made of this. It is not the vessel that is important, but the wine which we pour into it; not the form, but the ideas which animate and transcend that form.

When the Christians and the Buddhists concentrated on the image of their respective Masters the principal attributes of the sun--beginning with that halo of glory whose prototype dates back to the Aureoles carved upon the Chaldaean monuments--did they mean to do homage to the orb of day?

[p. 267]

[paragraph continues] In reality, they only claimed to refer to the venerated physiognomy of their founder the symbol which has not only formed from time immemorial the most radiant expression of celestial glory, but which also characterized, in an especial manner, the highest personification of the Divinity in contemporary creeds. We must call to mind the reply of a Father of the Church to those who accused the Christians of celebrating the festival of the sun:--"We solemnize this day, not, like the heathen, on account of the sun, but on account of Him who made the sun." [*1] Constantine went further still when he composed, to be recited on Sundays by his legions, a prayer which, according to M. V. Duruy, could at once satisfy the worshippers of Mithras, of Serapis, of the sun, and of Christ. [*2]

Symbolism may combine with the most mystical tendencies, but, like mysticism itself, it is a powerful ally of the religious sentiment against the immobility of dogma, and the tyranny of the written Word. M. Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu has shown, in his valuable researches into religion in Russia, how, thanks to the symbolic interpretation of texts and ceremonies, the conservative ritualism of the Old Believers has managed to arrive at the liberty of doctrines, and even, in some instances, at a complete rationalism, without breaking with the traditional symbols of Christianity, and even of the Eastern Church. [*3]

There comes a time when religions which deal largely with the supernatural come into collision with the progress of the different branches of knowledge, and above all with the growing belief

[p. 268]

in a rational order of the universe. Symbolism then offers them a means of safety, of which they have more than once taken advantage, in order to keep abreast of the times. If we take nations in a lower stage of development, we find among them fetiches--i.e., beings and objects invested at pleasure with superhuman faculties--then idols, which are fetiches carved to resemble a human being or animal. But we do not find any symbols as long as there is neither the desire to depict what is abstract by what is concrete, nor the consciousness that there is no identity between the symbol and the reality thus represented. When the mind opens itself to the conception of abstract or invisible gods, it may preserve its veneration for its ancient fetiches, but under the condition of looking upon them henceforth as but representative signs of the divinities. Lastly, when people can conceive of a supreme God of whom the ancient divinities are simply the ministers, or the hypostases, these antique representations may yet have a part to play, provided however that they be referred to the perfections and attributes of the superior Being in whom the Divine World is resolved.

 

Such is the evolution observable in the midst of all the ancient worships, and which still continues, often unconsciously, in many a contemporary religion. It implies, as a last conclusion, the belief in the equivalence of symbols, that is to say, the conviction that symbolic representations are all inadequate, inasmuch as they attempt to explain the inexplicable, but that they are all justifiable, inasmuch as they aim at bringing us closer to the Supreme Reality; and, moreover, that they are all beneficial in so far as they contribute to awaken ideas of the Good and of the Beautiful. In this respect the functions of symbolism cannot but increase; for, in religion, as in art and literature, it

[p. 269]

corresponds with a necessity of the human mind, which, very fortunately for our aesthetic development, has never been able to content itself with pure abstractions, nor remain at the surface of things. Here, indeed, is the secret of the impulse which increasingly moves the new generations to break with the commonplace conventions of superannuated traditions, as also with the superficial platitudes of a false realism.

Footnotes

^262:1 Origin from Babylonia and Elam of the early Chinese Civilization, in the Babylonian and Oriental Record, vol. iii., No. 3 et seq.

^264:1 PROTAP CHUNDER MOZOUMDAR. Life and Teaching of Keshub Chunder Sen. Calcutta, 1887, p. 501.

^265:1 KARL BLIND. Odinic Songs in Shetland, in the Nineteenth Century, 1879, p. 1098.

^265:2 The Abbe Ansault has shown, without any difficulty, in his Memoire sur le culte de la croix avant Jesus-Christ (Paris, 1891, p. 68 et seq.), first of all, that heathen nations used as religious emblems Greek, Latin, Maltese, pattees, gammees, potencees, ansees, treflees, and other crosses; and, secondly, that the Christian Church has always accepted these different forms of the Cross as the representation of its own symbol.

^266:1 EDW. THOMAS. Numismatic Chronicle, vol. xx. (new series), p. 27.

^267:1 S. AUGUSTIN. In natale Domini, sermon 390, MIGNE edition, vol. v., 1st part, p. 1007.

^267:2 V. DURUY. Histoire des Romains. Paris, 1885, vol. vii., p. 54.

^267:3 L'Empire des Tzars, vol. iii., p. 451.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 270]

  

ADDENDA.

CHAP. II.  section 1.--The slab found at Huy on the Meuse representing a priest whose vestments are adorned with gammadions has an equivalent in the Musee de Cluny, at Paris, where an Abbot of Cluny, who died in 1394, is figured on his tombstone as wearing sacerdotal robes ornamented with gammadions in the same manner.

CHAP. III.--In the Correspondenzblatt der Westdeutschen Zeitschrift, 1892, p. 179 seq., Mr. Ohlenschlager speaks of a bas-relief in the cathedral of Spires which recalls the group of Sampson killing the lion in the cathedral of Nivelles, with the same Mithraic affinities.

CHAP. IV. and seq.--I have received, too late to take advantage of it, Dr. Bonavia's recent book, The Flora of the Assyrian Monuments and its Outcome (1 vol., London, Archibald Constable and Co., 1894), which deals with many questions treated in this volume. Ingenious and suggestive as his views are, I see nothing in them to alter my general conclusions.

For instance, he insists, still more than I do, on the importance of the Horn symbol in Assyrian worship--going so far as to qualify their whole religion by the picturesque term of hornism! He has made a strong case, when he looked to this symbol as an antecedent to the Caduceus, the fleur-de-lys, the anthemion or palmette, the Ionian

[p. 271]

volutes, the Horseshoe, the Crescent, the Thunderbolt, the trisula, certain Keys of Life and so forth. I am ready to admit that in shaping the fork or Trident of their storm gods the Assyrians have been influenced by their habitual way of representing conventionally the Sacred Tree adorned with the symbolical Horns. But does not the learned author go too far, when he infers that this weapon in the hands of the god is meant for a pair of horns mounted on a stem and, therefore, that the thunderbolt originally represented only a double pair of horns with the sacred stem in the middle?

There would be nothing surprising if the Assyrians had symbolized lightning by a pair of horns, although this remains a supposition so long as not confirmed by some text. One could understand a description or representation of the storm god as a mighty bull, or even as a horned man striking his victims with the head. But when we see this supernatural being, whether horned or not, holding in his hand a bident or a trident, there is no need to go further and to take this weapon for anything else than what it appears to be--a spear or javelin with several points.

But Dr. Bonavia goes still further and contends that it may not be at all a representation of lightning, simply a hornstick, a charm against the evil eye in the hands of a protecting deity. To this, without entering into details, I shall answer, firstly, that according to all Assyriologists, this kind of Trident is essentially the attribute of Rammanu, the god of the atmosphere and therefore of the storm; secondly, that there is a text where lightning is described as a weapon with several heads (W. A. I., ii., 19, trad. Sayce); thirdly, that there exists on Assyrian monuments a gradual and unmistakable transition--as shown in this book and by Dr. Bonavia's own illustrations--between his

[p. 272]

[paragraph continues] "horned stick" and what became the Thunderbolt of the Greeks, without any apparent break of continuity in the meaning of the symbol. If somebody alleges that such break remains possible, with him lies the onus probandi.

G. D'A.

     
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 273]

  

INDEX.

Adonis, <page 143>, <page 172>.

Adonis, Gardens of, <page 172>.

Ambrosia (amrita), <page 162>-<page 165>, <page 170>.

Apollo and Python, <page 64>.

Apple-tree, <page 132>, <page 134>, n. .

Apples of Idhunna, <page 168>.

-- Golden, <page 158>, <page 166>.

Armorial Bearings, <page 66>, <page 138>.

Asherim, <page 143>, <page 144>, <page 233>.

Assyrian Symbols, <page 26>, <page 30>, <page 78>, <page 80>, <page 94>, <page 98>, <page 100>, <page 114>, <page 120>, <page 121>, <page 123>, <page 129>, <page 133>, <page 134>, <page 144>-<page 148>, <page 151>, <page 152>, <page 154>, <page 200>, <page 211>-<page 215>, <page 217>-<page 219>, <page 230>, <page 252>.

Aureole, <page 222>, <page 223>, <page 267>.

Axe and Drum, merging of the symbols, <page 178>.

 

Bellerophon and the Chimera, <page 86>.

Bethyles (Bethels), <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 137>, <page 184>-<page 187>, <page 199>, <page 229>; V. also Sacred Cone.

Birds as Symbols, <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 95>, <page 98>, <page 111>, <page 114>, <page 115>, <page 137>, <page 160>, <page 163>, <page 165>, <page 204>, <page 205>, <page 215>, <page 216>.

-- v. sub. nn.

Boar, Wild, The, <page 55>.

Bo-tree, The, <page 163> n. , <page 249>, <page 256>.

Bull (Winged), <page 100>.

Bull's Head (Bucrane), <page 96>.

 

Caduceus, <page 56>, <page 85>, <page 96>, <page 199>, <page 225>-<page 237>, <page 244>, <page 245>, <page 249>, <page 250>, <page 253>.

Candelabrum, <page 113>, <page 122> n. , <page 138>.

Cedar, The, <page 141>, <page 146>, <page 172>.

Celestial Hand, v. Hand.

Centaurs, Origin of the name, <page 163>.

Chakra, <page 240>, <page 243>, <page 249>.

Chaldaean Symbols, <page 14>, <page 19>, <page 27>, <page 33>, <page 80>, <page 86>, <page 87>, <page 94>, <page 97>, <page 119>, <page 120>-<page 122>, <page 131>, <page 133>, <page 143>, <page 144>, <page 155>-<page 158>, <page 160>, <page 212>, <page 215>.

Cherub, v. Kerubim.

Chimaera, Origin in art of the, <page 24>.

-- a Solar Symbol, <page 86>.

Chrism, <page 138>, <page 179>, <page 180>.

Christian Symbols, <page 35>, <page 38>, <page 39>, <page 53>, <page 87>-<page 89>, <page 90>, <page 94>, <page 127>, <page 128>, <page 131>, <page 137>, <page 138>, <page 190>, <page 194> n. , <page 223>.

-- -- Pagan influence on, <page 53>, <page 66>, <page 87>-<page 89>, <page 94>, <page 127>, <page 128>, <page 131>, <page 137>, <page 138>, <page 190>, <page 194> n. , <page 223>.

Circuit, Sacred, <page 67>.

Clover, The Four-leaved, <page 42> n. .

Cock, The, <page 58>, <page 138>, <page 180>.

-- A Solar Symbol, <page 58>, <page 180>.

Coins aiding the transference of Symbols, <page 18>, et pass.

Column, Symbolic, <page 106>-<page 114>.

-- -- merges with Tree

and Candelabrum, <page 122> n. .

[p. 274]

Cone, Sacred, <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 112>, <page 137>, <page 142>, <page 185>-<page 187>, <page 189>, <page 191>-<page 196>, <page 197>-<page 199>, <page 200>, <page 211>, <page 227>, <page 228>.

Cornucopia, <page 56>, <page 249>.

Crescent, The, <page 12>, <page 53>, <page 71>, <page 102>, <page 119>, <page 182>, <page 183>, <page 187>, <page 197>, <page 227>, <page 230>, <page 236>, <page 241>, <page 265>.

Cross, The, <page 12>, <page 13>, <page 16>, <page 33>, <page 45>-<page 47>, <page 49>, <page 53>, <page 60>, <page 65>, <page 66>, <page 69>, <page 70>, <page 85>, <page 103>-<page 105>, <page 109>, <page 110>, <page 113>, <page 114>, <page 116>, <page 137>, <page 203>, <page 214>, <page 265>, <page 266>.

-- a Weather Symbol, <page 13>, <page 46>, <page 49>, <page 130>.

-- Equilateral, <page 12>-<page 14>, <page 53>, <page 60>, <page 65>, <page 66>, <page 69>-<page 71>.

-- Gibbet (or Tau), <page 16>, <page 45>, <page 190>.

-- Hieroglyphic, <page 15>.

-- Pattee, <page 33>.

-- Sign of the, <page 46>, <page 47>.

Crux Ansata, <page 16>, <page 82>, <page 90>, <page 155>, <page 180>, <page 187>-<page 191>, <page 193>-<page 195>, <page 199>, <page 202>, <page 203>, <page 266>.

-- -- Meaning of, <page 188>.

-- -- marks zone of Egypto-Babylonian culture, <page 82>.

Cypress, <page 142>, <page 172>.

 

Damietta stone, The, <page 15>.

Disk, Lunar, <page 187>, <page 193>, <page 197>.

-- Solar, <page 12>, <page 14>, <page 26>, <page 51>, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 56>, <page 57>, <page 59>, <page 61>-<page 63>, <page 65>-<page 67>, <page 71>, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 179>, <page 183>, <page 187>, <page 197>, <page 203>, <page 204>-<page 224>, <page 226>, <page 232>-<page 234>, <page 242>-<page 244>, <page 248>, <page 250>, <page 252>, <page 256>.

Deasil, v. Circuit.

Dordj, v. Thunderbolt.

Dove, in Symbols, The, <page 91>-<page 93>, <page 126>, <page 138>, <page 165>.

Dragon, The, <page 86>, <page 129>, <page 136>, <page 180>, <page 166>, <page 167>.

Drum, merging with Axe in Symbol, <page 178>.

 

Eagle, The, <page 17>, <page 21>-<page 25>, <page 58>, <page 80>, <page 90>, <page 98>, <page 165>, <page 167>.

-- Double-headed, <page 21>-<page 25>.

-- and Serpent, <page 17>.

Easter-eve, Superstition concerning, <page 64>.

Eau-de-Vie, <page 153>, <page 154>, <page 162>, <page 163>, <page 165>, <page 169>, <page 173>.

Eden, Garden of, <page 152>, <page 153>, <page 159>.

Egyptian Symbols, <page 19>, <page 20>, <page 24>, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 80>, <page 82>, <page 85>, <page 95>, <page 180>, <page 187>-<page 189>, <page 190>, <page 191>, <page 196>, <page 204>-<page 218>, <page 246>.

Eleusis, Mysteries of, <page 2> pref.

Elixir of Life, v. Water of Life and Tree of Life.

Evil eye, charm against the, <page 19>, <page 141>.

 

Fetiche, <page 19>, <page 20>, <page 268>, <page 269>.

Fig-tree, The, <page 134>, <page 162>.

Fir-cone as Symbol, The, <page 103>, <page 104>, <page 107>-<page 111>, <page 113>, <page 146>-<page 151>.

Fleur-de-Lys, <page 121>, <page 259>.

Flowers, Symbolic, <page 150>, <page 151>, <page 155>, <page 172>, <page 179>, <page 189>.

Footprints as Symbol, p. <page 63>.

Form, Human, influence on Symbols of the, <page 102>, <page 192>-<page 194>, <page 198>, <page 213>, <page 217>.

Fountain of Youth, v. Water of Life.

Fylfot, The, v. Gammadion.

 

Gammadion, The, <page 32>-<page 82>, <page 180>, <page 182>, <page 220>.

-- Solar and Astronomical Symbol, <page 52>-<page 72>.

-- Birthplace of, <page 72>-<page 82>.

-- Interpretations of, <page 44>-<page 72>.

-- Characterizes zone of Greek civilization, <page 82>.

Gandharva, personification of Wind, <page 163>.

Genii, Eagle-headed, <page 122>, <page 129>, <page 146>.

[p. 275]

Genii, Winged, <page 94>, <page 95>, <page 145>, <page 146>-<page 151>, <page 164>, <page 213>, <page 219>.

George, St., connection with Solar Symbolism, <page 86>.

Geryon, The Triple, Egyptian origin of, <page 24>.

Globe, Winged, <page 135>, <page 186>, <page 187>, <page 204>-<page 224>, <page 225>, <page 226>, <page 230>, <page 231>-<page 236>, <page 246>, <page 251>, <page 257>, <page 258>.

Glory, v. Aureole.

Goat, The, a Solar Symbol, <page 204>.

Greek art, Phoenician influence on, <page 33>, <page 34>, <page 220>, <page 221>.

Greek Symbols, <page 14>, <page 23>, <page 24>, <page 34>, <page 35>, <page 50>, <page 55>, <page 56>, <page 63>, <page 85>, <page 87>, <page 98>, <page 100>, <page 125>, <page 137>, <page 165>, <page 166>, <page 182>, <page 192>-<page 194>, <page 221>, <page 222>.

Griffin, The, meaning of, <page 128> n. .

 

Hammer, <page 15>, <page 16>, <page 45>, <page 98>.

-- double-headed, <page 16>, <page 45>, <page 98>, <page 266>.

Hand, The, of Justice, <page 27>.

-- Symbol of Divinity, <page 26>.

-- -- Semitic origin, <page 26>-<page 28>.

Hawk, The, Solar Symbol, <page 98>, <page 205>, <page 216>.

Heraldry, supporters in, <page 138>-<page 139>.

Hercules and Geryon, <page 24>.

-- and Hesperides, <page 158>, <page 166>.

-- -- connection with the Chaldaean myth, <page 158>.

Hindu Symbols, <page 14>, <page 17>, <page 20>, <page 24>, <page 28>, <page 42>, <page 50>, <page 51>, <page 56>, <page 60>-<page 63>, <page 67>, <page 68> n. , <page 80>, <page 87>, <page 98>, <page 99>, <page 124>, <page 161>, <page 223>, <page 224>, <page 225>, <page 227>, <page 236>-<page 260>.

Hittite Civilization, Nature of the, <page 201>.

-- Symbols, <page 21>, <page 23>, <page 40>, <page 78>, <page 135>, <page 197>, <page 200>, <page 201>, <page 211>, <page 212>, <page 231>, <page 233>.

Horns, Assyrian sign of Divinity, <page 133>, <page 212>, <page 213>.

Horns on Sacred Disk, <page 197>, <page 203>, <page 205>, <page 212>, <page 213>, <page 219>, <page 230>, <page 231>.

-- in Sacred Tree, <page 133>, <page 141>.

Horse, The, A Solar Symbol, <page 55>, <page 58>.

Horus, A Solar Symbol, <page 85>, <page 86>, <page 205>, <page 252>.

 

Indian Symbols, <page 20>, <page 24>, <page 28>, <page 30>, <page 40>, <page 41>, <page 56>, <page 60>-<page 63>, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 82>, <page 87>, <page 98>, <page 99>, <page 114>, <page 123>, <page 124>, <page 135>, <page 136>, <page 161>, <page 162>, <page 163>, <page 178>, <page 179>, <page 194>, <page 195>, <page 223>, <page 224>, <page 236>-<page 260>.

 

Jeminsul, The, <page 106>, <page 107>, <page 112>, <page 114>.

 

Kerubim, <page 152>, <page 153>.

Key of Life, The, v. crux ansata.

 

Labarum, Assyrian prototypes of the, <page 230>; a combination of sun-worship and Christianity, <page 265>.

Lily, The, <page 102>.

Lion, The, <page 58>, <page 87>, <page 88>, <page 96>, <page 122>, <page 123>, <page 126>, <page 128>, <page 134>, <page 138>, <page 139>, <page 180>, <page 181>.

Lotus, The, <page 28>, <page 30>, <page 36>, <page 102>, <page 123>, <page 124>, <page 129>, <page 154>, <page 155>, <page 176>, <page 179>, <page 189>, <page 190>, <page 219>, <page 220>, <page 241>, <page 246>, <page 252>, <page 256>, <page 261>.

-- Solar Symbol, <page 28>.

-- Symbol of Immortality, <page 29>-<page 31>, <page 154>.

 

Maypole, The, A Phallic Emblem, <page 112>, <page 143>.

Mediaeval Art, Pagan Influence on, <page 87>, <page 88>, <page 89>, <page 138>.

Meander, The, <page 46>, <page 83>.

Mountain of the World, The, <page 156>.

Myth, The, Definition of, <page 6> pref.

[p. 276]

Nandyavarta, v. Gammadion.

Nava-ratna, Hindu origin of the, <page 136>.

 

Oak, The, <page 139>, <page 141>, <page 168>, <page 173>.

Olive, The, <page 132>.

Omphalos, <page 55>, <page 90>, <page 91>, <page 137>, also v. sub. Bethel and Sacred Cone.

Ouan v. Gammadion.

 

Paganism, Fusion with Christian Dogma, <page 16> n. .

-- Influence on Christian Art, v. sub. Christian Symbols.

Palm, The, <page 120>, <page 131>, <page 134>, <page 241>, <page 145>-<page 50>, <page 151>, <page 153>, <page 159>, <page 273>.

-- Inflorescence of; <page 145>-<page 151>.

Pan, Solar Character of, <page 64>.

Peacock, The, <page 111>, <page 115>, <page 138>.

Perron (Peron), <page 103>-<page 117>.

-- origin and meaning of, <page 105>.

Persian Art, Egyptian Influence on, <page 219>.

Persian Symbols, <page 14>, <page 24>, <page 30>, <page 31>, So, <page 81>, <page 82>, <page 94>, <page 100>, <page 123>, <page 127>, <page 151>, <page 164>, <page 182>, <page 218>, <page 219>.

-- Absence of Gammadion from, <page 80>-<page 82>.

-- Assyrian origin of; <page 30>, <page 94>, <page 100>, <page 123>, <page 151>, <page 218>.

-- Influence on Byzantine Art, <page 127>.

-- Influence on Indian Art, <page 248>-<page 249>.

Phallic Emblems, <page 12>, <page 107>, <page 208>, <page 109>, <page 112>, <page 134>, <page 151>, <page 187>, <page 189>, <page 241>, <page 252>-<page 253>.

Phoenician Symbols, <page 16>, <page 24>, <page 30>, <page 71>, <page 80>, <page 91>, <page 123>-<page 125>, <page 151>, <page 155>, <page 178>, <page 185>-<page 187>, <page 190>, <page 191>, <page 197>, <page 202>, <page 206>-<page 210>, <page 219>, <page 221>, <page 227>, <page 228>, <page 231>, <page 233>.

Phoenix, a Solar Symbol, <page 95>.

-- Symbol of Imperial Apotheosis at Rome, <page 95>.

-- Symbol of Christian Resurrection, <page 95>.

Phrygian Symbols, <page 78>, <page 134>.

Pillar of the World, The, v. Irminsul.

Pine, The, <page 108>, <page 141>, <page 142>, <page 146>, <page 172>.

Polytheism, Origin of, <page 19>.

Pomegranate, The, <page 120>, <page 241>, <page 151>, <page 154>.

-- Emblem of fertility, <page 154>.

Pyr (of Augsburg), The, <page 109>-<page 110>.

 

Rain, The Sap of the World-Tree, <page 174>.

Ram, The, a Solar Symbol, <page 204>. 

-- <page 94>, <page 142>, <page 229> n. .

River of Life, The, <page 174>.

Rosette, The, a Solar Symbol, <page 62>, <page 150>, <page 179>, <page 213>, <page 244>, <page 252>.

Rouelle, The, <page 179>, <page 214>.

 

Sagittarius, Assyrian origin of, <page 100>.

Scarab, <page 19>, <page 29>, <page 204>, <page 205>, <page 214>-<page 216>, <page 224>, <page 230>, <page 251>.

Serpent, <page 17>, <page 85>, <page 95>, <page 96>, <page 115>, <page 129>, <page 132>, <page 133>, <page 258>, <page 168>, <page 205> et seq., <page 226>, <page 245>, <page 252>, <page 254>, <page 266>.

Solar Disk, v. Disk.

Solar Steps, The Three, <page 64>, <page 65>.

-- Symbolism v. Sun.

Star, Cuneiform, <page 200>, <page 203>, <page 216>.

Sun, Symbols of, v. sub. Apollo, Chimaera, Cock, Disk, Eagle, Gammadion, Globe, Goat, Hawk, Hercules, Horse, Horns, Lotus, Phoenix, Pan, Ram, Rosette, Scarab, Triscele, Wheel.

Swastika, v. Gammadion.

[p. 277]

Table of Offerings, Egyptian, <page 196>.

Tau, v. Gibbet-Cross.

Temple, Monetary Type of, <page 93>, <page 101>, <page 102>.

Tetrascele, v. Gammadion.

Thor, Hammer of; v. Hammer.

Thunderbolt, The, <page 38>, <page 56>, <page 97>-<page 100>, <page 178>, <page 220>, <page 221>, <page 230>, <page 241>, <page 249>, <page 258>, <page 261>.

-- Origin in the Double Trident, <page 97>-<page 100>.

Thyrsus, <page 208>, <page 114>.

Tree, The Calendar, <page 160>.

-- Cosmic, <page 60>, <page 61>, <page 114>, <page 155>-<page 158>, <page 261>, <page 163>, <page 167>, <page 168>, <page 171>, <page 266>.

-- Sacred, <page 118>-<page 176>, <page 178>, <page 201>, <page 203>, <page 210>, <page 230>, <page 233>, <page 234>, <page 239>, <page 258>.

-- of Knowledge, <page 158>, <page 159>, <page 161>-<page 164>, <page 176>, <page 255>, <page 266>.

-- of Life, <page 94>, <page 114>, <page 124>, <page 151>-<page 153>, <page 161>, <page 170>, <page 171>-<page 174>, <page 176>.

-- of Plenty, <page 16>, <page 168> n. .

-- of Temptation, <page 131>, <page 152>, <page 158>, <page 176>.

Tree, a Symbol of (1) Death, <page 172>; (2) Life, <page 12>, <page 172>.

-- Worship of the, <page 140>.

Triangle, Sacred, The, <page 12>, <page 26>, <page 185>-<page 203>, <page 257>.

Trident, The, <page 62>, <page 97>-<page 100>, <page 221>, <page 237>, <page 241>, <page 242>, <page 243>, <page 249>, <page 252>, <page 256>, <page 257>, <page 259>, <page 265>.

Triquetra, v. Triscele.

Triscele, <page 20>, <page 22>, <page 54>, <page 55>, <page 58>, <page 63>, <page 68>, <page 77>, <page 180>-<page 183>, <page 220>.

-- Link between the, Isle of Man and Sicily, <page 20>, <page 21> n. .

Triscele, connected with tetrascele, <page 54>.

-- a Solar Symbol, <page 54>, <page 55>, <page 63>, <page 68>, <page 180>.

-- a Lunar Symbol, <page 182>, <page 220>.

Blending with other Symbols, <page 180>, <page 181>.

-- Origin of, <page 183>.

Trisula, <page 60>-<page 63>, <page 178>, <page 225>, <page 237>-<page 260>.

Trojan Symbols, <page 33>, <page 34>, <page 48>, <page 53>, <page 56>, <page 66>, <page 71>, <page 72>, <page 76>.

 

Unicorns, Supporters of the Sacred Tree, <page 122>, <page 151>; in Western Heraldry, <page 138>.

Uraeus, Egyptian, <page 205>, <page 208>, <page 216>, <page 217>, <page 225>, <page 231>, <page 232>, <page 236>, <page 252>, <page 257>.

Urim-Thummim, <page 207>.

 

Vajra, the weapon of Indra, <page 45>, <page 99>.

Vardhamana, <page 237>, <page 240>; Interpretations of, <page 241>; also v. sub Trisula.

Vine, The, <page 120>, <page 134>, <page 141>, <page 153>, <page 173>.

Virgin of the Seven Swords (Sorrows), Chaldaeic origin of the, <page 86>.

 

Water of Life, The, <page 162>-<page 165>, <page 169>, <page 174>, <page 175>, <page 189>.

Wheel, The Symbolic, <page 33>, <page 37>, <page 50>, <page 51>, <page 63>, <page 66>, <page 67>, <page 71>, <page 179>, <page 180>, <page 213>, <page 214>, <page 222>, <page 228>, <page 240>, <page 243>, <page 249>, <page 266>.

 

Yggdrasil, v. Cosmic Tree.

    
The Migration of Symbols, by Goblet d'Alviella, [1894], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 278] [p. 279]

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS ON THE FRENCH EDITION

"... livre qui rendra service aux etudes ou la competence de l'auteur est depuis longtemps reconnue."--GEORGE PERROT. Comptes-rendus de l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres.

"Les archeologues ont beaucoup a profiter du livre tres-sage de M. Goblet d'Alviella."--SALOMON REINACH. Revue archeologique.

"... indique avec beaucoup de justesse ce qu'il y a de stable et de mobile dans les representations figurees.--JOACHIM MENANT. Revue de l'histoire des Religions.

"Quiconque s'interesse a l'histoire des religions et surtout des symboles qui les representent dans l'art et deviennent ensuite des motifs artistiques, ne lira le livre sans etre instruit et charme."--H. GAIDOZ. Melusine.

"... etude analytique tres complete d'un sujet aussi interessant."--J. TOUTAIN. Revue critique d'histoire et de litterature.

"... s'il n'a pas dit le dernier mot sur cette question aura aide plus que tout autre a en rendre la solution attrayante et meme facile dans un avenir prochain."--Le Moyen Age.

"... contient une multitude de symboles que chacun peut interpreter a sa facon, et que l'amateur de sciences symboliques si en vogue aujourd'hui, est bien aise d'avoir sous la main."--Revue britannique.

"... a etabli la loi qui amene les symboles voisins ou analogues a se fondre en une figure intermediaire, partout ou ils entrent en contact."--J. STALLAERT. Bulletin de la classe des Beaux Arts de l'Academie royale de Belgique.

"... plein d'erudition et d'apercus nouveaux."--Revue numismatique belge.

"... style clair, raisonnement serre, consequences d'une profonde erudition avec une exposition tres rationnelle de la matiere, que completent de nombreuses figures dont les artistes pourront utilement lirer parti."--L'Emulation, organe de la Societe d'architecture de Belgique.

[p. 280]

"... tres utile contribution a l'histoire religieuse de l'antiquite."--Independance belge.

"... excelle a dechiffrer les indications les plus variees, les plus subtiles, les plus enigmatiques."--La Meuse.

". . d'une erudition consciencieuse. ... Utile contribution a la mythologie iconographique."--CH. PLOIX. Revue des traditions populaires.

"... oeuvre magistrale."--CTE. A. DE GUBERNATIS. Folk-Lore asiatique.

"We wish to particularly recommend it to the earnest attention of the students of ornamental art."--The Atheneum.

"... strongly recommended to the perusal of all who are interested in mythological symbolism."--The National Observer.

"... the most important contribution to the literature of symbolism for many years."--Daily Chronicle.

"A desirable work for the student of the development and transference of religious ideas."--The New World, Boston.

 

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: mrad.txt =====


    
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

  

MENTAL RADIO

  

BY

  

UPTON SINCLAIR

  

INTRODUCTION BY

  

WILLIAM McDOUGALL

  

NEW YORK

  

ALBERT & CHARLES BONI

  

[1930]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, May 2008. This text is in the public domain in the United States because its copyright was not renewed in a timely fashion as required by law at the time.

Title Page
Click to enlarge
Title Page

Verso
Click to enlarge
Verso

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

INTRODUCTION

MR. UPTON SINCLAIR needs no introduction to the public as a fearless, honest, and critical student of public affairs. But in the present book he has with characteristic courage entered a new field, one in which reputations are more easily lost than made, the field of Psychic Research. When he does me the honor to ask me to write a few words of introduction to this book, a refusal would imply on my part a lack either of courage or of due sense of scientific responsibility, I have long been keenly interested in this field; and it is not necessary to hold that the researches of the past fifty years have brought any solidly established conclusions in order to feel sure that further research is very much worth while. Even if the results of such research should in the end prove wholly negative that would be a result of no small importance; for from many points of view it is urgently to be wished that we may know where we stand in this question of the reality of alleged supernormal phenomena. In discussing this question recently with a small group of scientific men, one of them (who is perhaps

[p. vi]

the most prominent and influential of American psychologists) seemed to feel that the whole problem was settled in the negative when he asserted that at the present time no American psychologist of standing took any interest in this field. I do not know whether he meant to deny my Americanism or my standing, neither of which I can establish. But his remark if it were true, would not in any degree support his conclusion; it would rather be a grave reproach to American psychologists. Happily it is possible to name several younger American psychologists who are keenly interested in the problem of telepathy.

And it is with experiments in telepathy that Mr. Sinclair's book is chiefly concerned. In this part, as in other parts, of the field of Psychic Research, progress must largely depend upon such work by intelligent educated laymen or amateurs as is here reported. For facility in obtaining seemingly supernormal phenomena seems to be of rare and sporadic occurrence; and it is the duty of men of science to give whatever encouragement and sympathetic support may be possible to all amateurs who find themselves in a position to observe and carefully and honestly to study such phenomena.

[p. vii]

Mrs. Sinclair would seem to be one of the rare persons who have telepathic power in a marked degree and perhaps other supernormal powers. The experiments in telepathy, as reported in the pages of this book, were so remarkably successful as to rank among the very best hitherto reported. The degree of success and the conditions of experiment were such that we can reject them as conclusive evidence of some mode of communication not at present explicable in accepted scientific terms only by assuming that Mr. and Mrs. Sinclair either are grossly stupid, incompetent and careless persons or have deliberately entered upon a conspiracy to deceive the public in a most heartless and reprehensible fashion. I have unfortunately no intimate personal knowledge of Mr. and Mrs. Sinclair; but I am acquainted with some of Mr. Sinclair's earlier publications; and that acquaintance suffices to convince me, as it should convince any impartial reader, that he is an able and sincere man with a strong sense of right and wrong and of individual responsibility. His record and his writings should secure a wide and respectful hearing for what he has to tell us in the following pages.

Mrs. Sinclair's account of her condition during

[p. viii]

successful experiments seems to me particularly interesting; for it falls into line with what has been observed by several other workers; namely, they report that a peculiar passive mental state or attitude seems to be a highly favorable, if not an essential, condition of telepathic communication. It would seem that if the faint and unusual telepathic processes are to manifest themselves, the track of the mind must be kept clear of other traffic.

Other experiments reported in the book seem to imply some supernormal power of perception of physical things such as is commonly called clairvoyance. It is natural and logical that alleged instances of clairvoyance should have from most of us a reception even more skeptical than that we accord to telepathic claims. After all, a mind at work is an active agent of whose nature and activity our knowledge is very imperfect; and science furnishes us no good reasons for denying that its activity may affect another mind in some fashion utterly obscure to us. But when an experimenter seems to have large success in reading printed words shut in a thick-walled box, words whose identity is unknown to any human being, we seem to be more nearly in a position to assert positively--That cannot occur!

[p. ix]

[paragraph continues] For we do seem to know with very fair completeness the possibilities of influence extending from the printed word to the experimenter; and under the conditions all such possibilities seem surely excluded. Yet here also we must keep the open mind, gather the facts, however unintelligible they may seem at present, repeating observations under varied conditions.

And Mrs. Sinclair's clairvoyant successes do not stand alone. They are in line with the many successful "book-tests" recorded of recent years by competent workers of the English Society for Psychical Research, as well as with many other less carefully observed and recorded incidents.

Mr. Sinclair's book will amply justify itself if it shall lead a few (let us say two per cent) of his readers to undertake carefully and critically experiments similar to those which he has so vividly described.

WILLIAM MCDOUGALL

DUKE UNIVERSITY, N. C.
 September, 1929.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

MENTAL RADIO

  

I

IF you were born as long as fifty years ago, you can remember a time when the test of a sound, common-sense mind was refusing to fool with "new-fangled notions." Without exactly putting it into a formula, people took it for granted that truth was known and familiar, and anything that was not known and familiar was nonsense. In my boyhood, the funniest joke in the world was a "flying machine man"; and when my mother took up a notion about "germs" getting into you and making you sick, my father made it a theme for no end of domestic wit. Even as late as twenty years ago, when I wanted to write a play based on the idea that men might some day be able to make a human voice audible to groups of people all over America, my friends assured me that I could not interest the public in such a fantastic notion.

Among the objects of scorn, in my boyhood, was what we called "superstition"; and we made the term include, not merely the notion that the number thirteen brought you bad luck; not

[p. 2]

merely a belief in witches, ghosts and goblins, but also a belief in any strange phenomena of the mind which we did not understand. We knew about hypnotism, because we had seen stage performances, and were in the midst of reading a naughty book called "Trilby"; but such things as trance mediumship, automatic writing, table-tapping, telekinesis, telepathy and clairvoyance--we didn't know these long names, but if such ideas were explained to us, we knew right away that it was "all nonsense."

In my youth I had the experience of meeting a scholarly Unitarian clergyman, the Rev. Minot J. Savage of New York, who assured me quite seriously that he had seen and talked with ghosts. He didn't convince me, but he sowed the seed of curiosity in my mind, and I began reading books on psychic research. From first to last, I have read hundreds of volumes; always interested, and always uncertain--an uncomfortable mental state. The evidence in support of telepathy came to seem to me conclusive, yet it never quite became real to me. The consequences of belief would be so tremendous, the changes it would make in my view of the universe so revolutionary, that I didn't believe, even when I said I did.

[p. 3]

But for thirty years the subject has been among the things I hoped to know about; and, as it happened, fate was planning to favor me. It sent me a wife who became interested, and who not merely investigated telepathy, but learned to practice it. For the past three years I have been watching this work, day by day and night by night, in our home. So at last I can say that I am no longer guessing. Now I really. know. I am going to tell you about it, and hope to convince you; but regardless of what anybody can say, there will never again be a doubt about it in my mind. I KNOW!

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

II

TELEPATHY, or mind-reading: that is to say, can one human mind communicate with another human mind, except by the sense channels ordinarily known and used--seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting and touching? Can a thought or image in one mind be sent directly to another mind and there reproduced and recognized? If this can be done, how is it done? Is it some kind of vibration, going out from the brain, like radio broadcasting? Or is it some contact with a deeper level of mind, as bubbles on a stream have contact with the water of the stream? And if this power exists, can it be developed and used? Is it something that manifests itself now and then, like a lightning flash, over which we have no control? Or can we make the energy and store it, and use it regularly, as we have learned to do with the lightning which Franklin brought from the clouds?

These are the questions; and the answers, as well as I can summarize them, are as follows: Telepathy is real; it does happen. Whatever

[p. 5]

may be the nature of the force, it has nothing to do with distance, for it works exactly as well over forty miles as over thirty feet. And while it may be spontaneous and may depend upon a special endowment, it can be cultivated and used deliberately, as any other object of study, in physics and chemistry. The essential in this training is an art of mental concentration and autosuggestion, which can be learned. I am going to tell you not merely what you can do, but how you can do it, so that if you have patience and real interest, you can make your own contribution to knowledge.

Starting the subject, I am like the wandering book-agent or peddler who taps on your door and gets you to open it, and has to speak quickly and persuasively, putting his best goods foremost. Your prejudice is against this idea; and if you are one of my old-time readers, you are a little shocked to find me taking up a new and unexpected line of activity. You have come, after thirty years, to the position where you allow me to be one kind of "crank," but you won't stand for two kinds. So let me come straight to the point--open up my pack, pull out my choicest wares, and catch your attention with them if I can.

[p. 6]

Here is a drawing of a table-fork. It was done with a lead-pencil on a sheet of ruled paper, which has been photographed, and then reproduced in the ordinary way. You note that it bears a signature and a date (fig. 1):

Fig. 1

This drawing was produced by my brother-in-law, Robert L. Irwin, a young business man, and no kind of "crank," under the following circumstances. He was sitting in a room in his home in Pasadena at a specified hour, eleven-thirty in the morning of July 13, 1928, having agreed to make a drawing of any object he might select, at random, and then to sit gazing at it, concentrating his entire attention upon it for a period of from fifteen to twenty minutes.

At the same agreed hour, eleven-thirty in the morning of July 13, 1928, my wife was lying on the couch in her study, in our home in Long Beach, forty miles away by the road. She was in semi-darkness, with her eyes closed; employing a system of mental concentration which she has

[p. 7]

been practicing off and on for several years, and mentally suggesting to her subconscious mind to bring her whatever was in the mind of her brother-in-law. Having become satisfied that the image which came to her mind was the correct one--because it persisted, and came back again and again--she sat up and took pencil and paper and wrote the date, and six words, as follows (fig. 1a):

Fig. 1a

A day or two later we drove to Pasadena, and then in the presence of Bob and his wife, the drawing and writing were produced and compared. I have in my possession affidavits from Bob, his wife, and my wife, to the effect that the drawing and writing were produced in this way. Later in this book I shall present four other pairs of drawings, made in the same way, three of them equally successful.

[p. 8]

Second case. Here is a drawing (fig. 2), and below it a set of five drawings (fig. 2a):

Fig. 2, Fig. 2a.

The above drawings were produced under the following circumstances. The single drawing (fig. 2) was made by me in my study at my

[p. 9]

home. I was alone, and the door was closed before the drawing was made, and was not opened until the test was concluded. Having made the drawing, I held it before me and concentrated upon it for a period of five or ten minutes.

The five drawings (fig. 2a) were produced by my wife, who was lying on the couch in her study, some thirty feet away from me, with the door closed between us. The only words spoken were as follows: when I was ready to make my drawing, I called, "All right," and when she had completed her drawings, she called, "All right" --whereupon I opened the door and took my drawing to her and we compared them. I found that in addition to the five little pictures, she had written some explanation of how she came to draw them. This I shall quote and discuss later on. I shall also tell about six other pairs of drawings, produced in this same way.

Third case: another drawing (fig. 3a), produced under the following circumstances. My wife went upstairs, and shut the door which is at the top of the stairway. I went on tip-toe to a cupboard in a downstairs room and took from a shelf a red electric-light bulb--it having been agreed that I should select any small article, of which there were certainly many hundreds in our

[p. 10]

home. I wrapped this bulb in several thicknesses of newspaper, and put it, so wrapped, in a shoe-box, and wrapped the shoe-box in a whole newspaper, and tied it tightly with a string. I then called my wife and she came downstairs, and lay on her couch and put the box on her body, over the solar plexus. I sat watching, and never took my eyes from her, nor did I speak a word during the test. Finally she sat up, and made her drawing, with the written comment, and handed it to me. Every word of the comment, as well as the drawing, was produced before I said a word, and the drawing and writing as here reproduced have not been touched or altered in any way (fig. 3a):

Fig. 3a

[p. 11]

The text of my wife's written comment is as follows:

"First see round glass. Guess nose glasses? No. Then comes V shape again with a 'button' in top. Button stands out from object. This round top is of different color from lower part. It is light color, the other part is dark."

To avoid any possible misunderstanding, perhaps I should state that the question and answer in the above were my wife's description of her own mental process, and do not represent a question asked of me. She did not "guess" aloud, nor did either of us speak a single word during this test, except the single word, "Ready," to call my wife downstairs.

The next drawings were produced in the following manner. The one at the top (fig. 4) was drawn by me alone in my study, and was one of nine, all made at the same time, and with no restriction upon what I should draw--anything that came into my head. Having made the nine drawings, I wrapped each one in a separate sheet of green paper, to make it absolutely invisible, and put each one in a plain envelope and sealed it, and then took the nine sealed envelopes and laid them on the table by my wife's couch. My wife then took one of them and placed it

[p. 12]

Fig. 4, Fig. 4a

over her solar plexus, and lay in her state of concentration, while I sat watching her, at her insistence, in order to make the evidence more convincing. Having received what she considered a convincing telepathic "message," or image of the contents of the envelope, she sat up and made her sketch (fig. 4a) on a pad of paper.

The essence of our procedure is this: that never did she see my drawing until hers was completed and her descriptive words written; that I spoke no word and made no comment until

[p. 13]

after this was done; and that the drawings presented here are in every case exactly what I drew, and the corresponding drawing is exactly what my wife drew, with no change or addition whatsoever. In the case of this particular pair, my wife wrote: "Inside of rock well with vines climbing on outside." Such was her guess as to the drawing, which I had meant for a bird's nest surrounded by leaves; but you see that the two drawings are for practical purposes identical.

Many tests have been made, by each of the different methods above outlined, and the results will be given and explained in these pages. The method of attempting to reproduce little drawings was used more than any other, simply because it proved the most convenient; it could be done at a moment's notice, and so fitted into our busy lives. The procedure was varied in a few details to save time and trouble, as I shall later explain, but the essential feature remains unchanged: I make a set of drawings, and my wife takes them one by one and attempts to reproduce them without having seen them. Here are a few samples, chosen at random because of their picturesque character. If my wife wrote anything on the drawing, I add it as "comment"; and you are to understand here, and for the rest

[p. 14]

of this book, that "comment" means the exact words which she wrote before she saw my drawing. Often there will be parts of this "comment" visible in the photograph. I give it all in print. Note that drawings 1, 2, 3, etc., are mine, while la, 2a, 3a, etc., are my wife's.

In the case of my drawing numbered five, my wife's comment was: "Knight's helmet."

Fig. 5, Fig. 5a

Fig. 6, Fig. 6a

[p. 15]

On figure 6, the comment was: "Desert scene, camel, ostrich, then below"--and the drawing in figure 6a. On the reverse side of the page is further comment: "This came in fragments, as if I saw it being drawn by invisible pencil."

And here is a pair with no comment, and none needed (fig. 7, 7a):

Fig. 7, Fig. 7a

On the following, also, no comment was written (fig. 8, 8a):

Fig. 8, Fig. 8a

[p. 16]

Fig 9, Fig. 9a

I drew figure 9, and my wife drew 9a, a striking success, and wrote the comment: "May be elephant's snout--but anyway it is some kind of a running animal. Long thing like rope flung out in front of him."

Next, a series of three pairs, which, as it happened, were done one after the other, numbers three, four and five in the twenty-third series of my drawings. They are selected in part because they are amusing. First, I tried to draw a bat, from vague memories of boyhood days when they used to fly into the ball-rooms at Virginia

[p. 17]

springs hotels, and have to be massacred with brooms, because it was believed that they sought to tangle themselves in the hair of the ladies (fig. 10, 10a):

Fig 10, Fig. 10a

My wife's comment on the above reads: "Big insect. I know this is right because it moves his legs as if flying. Beetle working its legs. Legs in motion!"

And next, my effort at a Chinese mandarin (fig. 11, 11a):

Fig. 11, Fig. 11a

[p. 18]

The comment reads: "More beetles, or legged bugs"--and she draws the mustaches of the mandarin and his hair. "Head of dragon with big mouth. See also a part of his body--in front, or shoulders." The association of mandarins with dragons is obvious.

And finally, my effort at a boy's foot and roller-skate, which undergoes a strange telepathic transformation. I have put it upside down for easier comparison (fig. 12, 12a):

Fig. 12, Fig. 12a

[p. 19]

The comment, complete, reads: "Profile of head and neck of animal--lion or dog--a muzzle. Maybe pig snout."

The above are samples of our successes. Altogether, of such drawings, 38 were prepared by my secretary, while I made 252, a total of 290. I have classified the drawings to the best of my ability into three groups: successes, partial successes, and failures. The partial successes are those drawings which contain some easily recognized element of the original drawing: such as, for example, the last one above. The profile of a pig's head is not a roller skate, but when you compare the drawings, you see that in my wife's first sketch the eyes resemble the wheels of the roller-skates, and in her second sketch the snout resembles my shoe-tip; also there is a general similarity of outline, which is what she most commonly gets.

In the 290 drawings, the total of successes is 65, which is roughly 23 per cent. The total of partial successes is 155, which is 53 per cent. The total of failures is 70, which is 24 per cent. I asked some mathematician friends to work out the probabilities on the above results, but I found that the problem was too complicated. Who could estimate how many possible objects

[p. 20]

there were, which might come into my head to be drawn? Any time the supply ran short, I would pick up a magazine, and in the advertising pages find a score of new drawings to imitate. Again, very few of the drawings were simple. We began with such things as a circle, a square, a cross, a number or a letter; but soon we were doing Chinese mandarins with long mustaches, and puppies chasing a string. Each of these drawings has many different features; and what mathematician could count the number of these features, and the chances of reproducing them?

It is a matter to be judged by common sense. It seems to me any one must agree that the chances of the twelve drawings so far shown having been reproduced by accident is too great to be worth considering. A million years would not be enough for such a set of coincidences.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

III

MUCH of the evidence which I am using rests upon the good faith of Mary Craig Sinclair; so, before we go further, I ask your permission to introduce her. She is a daughter of the far South; her father a retired planter, bank president and judge, of Mississippi. The fates endowed his oldest child with the blessings of beauty, health, wealth and wisdom--and then spoiled it, by adding a curse in the shape of a too tender heart. The griefs of other people overwhelm Craig like a suffocation. Strangers take one glance at her, and instantly decide that here is one who will "understand." I have seen her go into a store to buy a piece of ribbon, and come out with tears in her eyes, because of a tragic story which some clerk was moved to pour out to her, all in a moment, without provocation. She has always said that she "gets" the feelings of people, not by their words, but by intuition. But she never paid any attention to this gift; never associated it with "psychic" matters. She was always too busy, first with eight younger

[p. 22]

brothers and sisters, and then with the practical affairs of an unpractical author-husband.

Early in childhood, things like this would happen: her mother would say to a little negro servant, "Go and find Miss Mary Craig"; but before the boy could start, Craig would know that her mother wanted her, and would be on the way. This might, of course, have been coincidence; if it stood alone, it would have no value. But the same thing happened with dreams. Craig dreamed there was a needle in her bed, and woke up and looked for it in vain; in the morning she told her mother, who slept in another room. The mother said: "How strange! I dreamed the same thing, and I woke up and really found one!"

Of her young ladyhood Craig tells this story, one of many: Driving with a girl friend, miles from home, she suddenly remarked: "Let's go home; Mr. B is there." Now this was a place to which Mr. B had never come; it was three hundred miles from his town. But Craig said: "I have just had an impression of him, sitting on our front porch." Going home, they found him there.

Another instance, of more recent date. Shortly after our coming to California, my wife all at

[p. 23]

once became greatly worried about Jack London; she insisted that he was in terrible mental distress. As it happened, George Sterling had told us much about Jack's troubles, but these were of old standing, and there was nothing to account for the sudden notion which my wife took up on a certain day. We had a lot of conversation about it; I offered to take her to the London ranch, but she said she would not attempt to meddle in the affairs of a married man, unless at his wife's request. I made the laughing suggestion that she go alone, in the guise of a gypsy fortune-teller--a role which in her young ladyhood she had played with social eclat. Two days later we read that Jack London was dead, and very soon came letters from George Sterling, telling us that he had taken his own life. This, again, might be coincidence; if it stood alone I would attach no importance to it. But taken with this mass of evidence, it has a share of weight.

When we were married, seventeen years ago, we spent some time in England, and there we met a woman physician, interested in "mental healing," and full of ideas about "psychic" things. Both Craig and I were in need of healing, having been through a siege of trouble.

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] Craig was suffering with intense headaches, something hitherto unknown in her life; while I had an ancient problem of indigestion, caused by excess of brain work and lack of body work. We began to experiment with healing by the "laying on of hands"--without knowing anything about it, just groping in the dark. I found that I could cure Craig's headaches--and get them myself; while she found that she could take my indigestion, a trouble she had never known hitherto. Each of us was willing to take the other's pains, but neither was willing to give them, so our experiments came to a halt.

We forgot the whole subject for more than ten years. I was busy trying to reform America; while Craig was of the most intensely materialistic convictions. Her early experiences of evangelical religion had repelled her so violently that everything suggestive of "spirituality" was repugnant to her. Never was a woman more "practical," more centered upon the here and now, the things which can be seen and touched. I do not go into details about this, but I want to make it as emphatic as possible, for the light it throws upon her attitude and disposition.

But shortly after the age of forty, her custom of carrying the troubles of all who were near her

[p. 25]

resulted in a breakdown of health. A story of suffering needless to go into: suffice it that she had many ills to experiment upon, and mental control became suddenly a matter of life and death. In the course of the last five or six years Craig has acquired a fair-sized library of books on the mind, both orthodox scientific, and "crank." She has sat up half the night studying, marking passages and making notes, seeking to reconcile various doctrines, to know what the mind really is, and how it works, and what can be done with it. Always it was a practical problem: things had to work. If now she believes anything, rest assured that it is because she has tried it out in the crucibles of pain, and proved it in her daily regimen.

She was not content to see psychic phenomena produced by other persons. Even though authorities warned her that trances might be dangerous, and that rapport with others might lead to dissociations of personality--even so, she had to find out for herself. A hundred times in the course of the experiments of which I am going to tell, she has turned to me, saying: "Can you think of any way this can be chance? What can I do to make it more sure?" When I said, the other night: "This settles it for me. I am

[p. 26]

going to write the story," her reply was, "Wait a while!" She wants to do more experimenting; but I think that enough is enough.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

IV

TWO years ago Craig and I heard of a "psychic," a young foreigner who was astounding physicians of Southern California, performing feats so completely beyond their understanding that they were content to watch without trying to understand. We went to see this young man, and befriended him; he came to our home every day, and his strange demonstrations became familiar to us. He had the ability to produce anaesthesia in many parts of his body, and stick hatpins through his tongue and cheeks without pain; he could go into a deep trance in which his body became rigid and cold; and I put his head on one chair and his heels on another, and stood in the middle, as if he were a two-inch plank. We have a motion picture film, showing a 150-pound rock being broken with a sledge-hammer on his abdomen while he lay in this trance. The vital faculties were so far suspended in this trance that he could be shut up in an airtight coffin and buried underground for several hours; nor was there any hocus-pocus

[p. 28]

about this--I know physicians who got the coffins and arranged for the tests and watched every detail; in Ventura, California, it was done in a ball park, and a game was played over the grave.

In our home he gave what appeared to be a demonstration of levitation without contact. I do not say that it really was levitation; I merely say that our friends who witnessed it--physicians, scientists, writers and their wives, fourteen persons in all--were unable even to suggest a normal method by which the event could have happened. There was no one present who could have been a confederate, and the psychic had been searched for apparatus; it was in our home, where he had no opportunity whatever for preparation. His wrists and ankles were firmly held by persons whom I know well; and there was sufficient light in the room so that I could see the outline of his figure, slumped in a chair. Under these circumstances a 34-pound table rose four feet into the air and moved slowly a distance of eight feet over my head.

We saw this; our friends saw it; yet, in my mind, and likewise in theirs, the worm of doubt would always creep in. There are so many ways to fool people; so many conjuring tricks--think of Houdini, for example! I was unwilling to

[p. 29]

publish what I had seen; yet, also, I was unwilling not to publish it--for think of the possible importance of faculties such as this, locked up in our minds! Here was my wife, ill, suffering pain; and these faculties might perhaps be used in healing. If by concentration and autosuggestion it was possible for the mind to control the body, and put a veto upon even a few of its disorders, certainly it was worth while for us to prove the fact. I could not escape the moral obligation to probe these matters.

This "psychic" claimed also to possess and demonstrate the power of telepathy, or mind-reading. He would go out of the room while one of as selected mentally some object in the room, not revealing the choice to any one else. The "psychic" would then come back, and tell us to stand behind him and concentrate our thoughts upon that object, and follow close behind him, thinking of it. He would wander about the room for a while, and in the end pick up the object, and do with it whatever we mentally "willed" him to do.

We saw him make this test not less than a hundred times, in California, New York, and Boston; he succeeded with it more than half the time. There was no contact, no word spoken,

[p. 30]

nothing that we could imagine as giving him a clue. Did we unconsciously make in our throats some faint pronunciation of words, and did the young man have a super-acuity of hearing? Again, you see, the worm of doubt, and we never could quite decide what we really believed about this performance. After puzzling over it for a year or more, my wife said: "There is only one way to be certain. I am going to learn to do these things myself!"

This young man, whom I will call Jan, was a peculiar person. Sometimes he would be open and frank, and again he would be mysterious and secretive. At one time he would agree to teach us all he knew, and again he would hold on to his arts, which he had had to go all the way to India to get. Was it that he considered these forces too dangerous for amateurs to play with? Or was it merely that he was considering his means of livelihood?

Jan was a hypnotist; and my wife had come to realize that all illness is more or less amenable to suggestion. She had had the idea of being hypnotized and given curative suggestions; but she did not know enough about this stranger, and was unwilling to trust him. After she got to know him better, her purposes changed. Here was a fund of knowledge which she craved, and

[p. 31]

she put her woman's wits to work to get it. She told him to go ahead and hypnotize her--and explained to me her purpose of trying to turn the tables on him. Jan fixed his eyes upon hers in the hypnotic stare, and made his magnetic passes; at the same time his patient stared back, and I sat and watched the strange duel of personalities.

An essential part of Jan's technique, as he had explained it, was in outstaring the patient and never blinking his eyes. Now suddenly he blinked; then he closed his eyes and kept them closed. "Do your eyes hurt?" asked his patient, in pretended innocence. "No," he replied. "Are you tired?" she asked. "No, thank you," said he. "What was I thinking?" she asked. "To hypnotize me," he replied, sleepily. But Craig wanted further proof, so she closed her eyes and willed that Jan should get up and go to the telephone. "Shall I go on treating you?" he asked. "Yes," said she. He hesitated a moment, then said, "Excuse me, I have to telephone to a friend!"

I am telling about these matters in the order of time, as they came to us. I am sorry that these stories of Jan come first, because they are the strangest, and the least capable of proof. In the hope of taking part of the onus from our

[p. 32]

shoulders, let me quote from a book by Charles Richet, a member of the Institute of Medicine in France, and a leading scientist; he is citing Pierre Janet, whose name is known wherever in the world the human mind is studied. The statement reads:

"P. Janet, a most eminent French psychiatrist, and one of the founders of the famous Salpetriere school of psychology in Paris, and a careful and sceptical observer, has verified that a patient of his, Leonie B., being put into hypnotic sleep by himself, or his brother (from whom Leonie in her hypnotic sleep was unable to distinguish him), could recognize exactly the substance that he placed in his mouth--sugar, salt, pepper. One day his brother, J. Janet, in an adjoining room, scorched his right arm above the wrist. Leonie, who could have known nothing about it normally, gave signs of real pain, and showed to P. Janet (who knew nothing of the occurrence), the exact place of the burn."

Or let me cite the late Professor Quackenbos, of Columbia University, who wrote many books on hypnotism as a therapeutic agency, and tells of numerous cases of the same kind. He himself would sometimes go involuntarily into hypnotic sleep with his patient, and so, sometimes, would the nurse. Frequently between the hypnotist

[p. 33]

and the subject comes what is called rapport, whereby each knows what is in the other's mind, and suggestions are taken without their being spoken. You may believe this, or refuse to believe it--that is your privilege. All I want to do is to make clear that my wife is claiming no special achievement, but merely repeating the standard experiences of the textbooks on this subject.

This rapport between Craig and her protege was developed to such an extent that she could tell him what was in his mind, and what he had been doing; she told him many stories about himself, where he had been and what he had done at a certain hour. This was embarrassing to a young man who perhaps did not care to have his life so closely overseen; also, possibly, he was wounded in his amour propre, that a mere amateur--and a woman at that--should be coming into possession of his secret arts.

The trick depends upon a process of intense concentration, which will later be described in detail. After this concentration, Craig would give to her subconscious mind the suggestion, or command, that it should bring to her consciousness a vision of what Jan was doing. This giving an order to the subconscious mind is much the same sort of thing that you do when you seek

[p. 34]

to remember a name; whether you realize it or not, you order your subconscious mind to get that bit of information and bring it to you. Whatever came to Craig, she would write it out, and when next she met Jan, she would use her woman's wits to verify it without Jan's knowing what was happening. At times it would be very amusing--when he would find himself accused of some youthful misdemeanor which his preceptress was not supposed to know about. In his efforts to defend himself, he would fail entirely to realize the telepathic aspects of the matter.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

V

PLEASE let me repeat, I am not telling here a set of fairy tales and fantasies; I am presenting a record of experiments, conducted in strict scientific fashion. All the results were set down day by day in writing. For an hour or two every day for the past three years my wife has been scribbling notes of her experiments, and there are eight boxes full in her study, enough to fill a big trunk. No statement in all the following rests upon our memories; everything is taken from memoranda now in my hands. Admitting that new facts can be learned about the mind, I do not see how any one can use more careful methods than we have done.

My wife "saw" Jan carrying a bouquet of flowers, wrapped in white paper, on the street, and she wrote this down. She later ascertained that at this hour Jan had carried flowers to a friend in a hospital in Los Angeles, and she telephoned this friend and verified the facts. On another occasion when Jan was in Santa Barbara, a hundred miles from our home, she "saw" him escorting a blonde girl in a blue dress from

[p. 36]

an auto to a hotel over a rainy pavement; she wrote this down, and later ascertained that it had actually been happening. The details were verified, not merely by Jan, but by another member of the party. I ought to add that in no case did my wife tell the other persons what she had "seen" until after these persons had told her what had happened. No chance was taken of their making up events to conform to her records. Always Craig kept her cold-blooded determination to know what was real in this field where so much is invented and imagined.

Again, she "saw" Jan preparing to commit suicide, dressed in a pair of yellow silk pajamas; then she "saw" him lying dead on the floor. She was much disturbed--until Jan reminded her that he had been seven times publicly "buried" in Southern California before she met him. Several weeks later she learned that in one of these "burials" he had worn yellow silk pajamas. Jan had forgotten this, but Dr. Frank Sweet, of Long Beach, who had overseen the procedure, remembered the pajamas, and how they had been ruined by mud.

Craig saw a vision of a bride, at a time when Jan, in his room in a far part of the city, was awakening from sleep with a dream about a friend's wedding. On two occasions, while "concentrating,"

[p. 37]

she got the impression that Jan and a friend of his had returned unexpectedly from Santa Barbara to Hollywood. In both cases she made careful record, and it turned out to be correct; I have a written statement of the two young men, confirming the second instance, and saying that it could not have been normally known to my wife.

I have also a detailed record--some twenty pages long--of a "clairvoyant" vision of Jan's movements about the city of Long Beach, including his parking of a car, carrying something over his arm, visiting a barber-shop and a flower-shop, and stopping and hesitating and then going on. The record includes a detailed description of the streets and their lay-out, a one-story white building, etc. Jan had been doing all this at approximately the time specified. He had carried his trousers to a tailor-shop, with a barber-shop directly opposite; he had stopped in front of a flower-shop and debated whether to buy some flowers; he had taken a letter to be copied by a typist, and had stopped on the street, hesitating as to whether to wait for this copying to be done. All these details he narrated to my wife before he knew what was in her written record.

Another curious experience: I took Jan to the

[p. 38]

home of Dr. John R. Haynes of Los Angeles, to give a demonstration of his mind-reading. Jan said he felt ill, and would not be successful. Only one or two of the tests succeeded. But meanwhile my wife was at home, concentrating, and ordering her subconscious mind to show her what Jan and I were doing. When I returned I found that she had written a detailed description of Dr. Haynes' home, including a correct ground plan of the entrance hall, stairs and drawing-room, and a description of the color and style of decorations, furniture, lamps, vases, etc., in good part correct. Craig has never been in this house.

Jan goes into one of his deep states--a cataleptic trance, he calls it--in which his body is rigid and cold. He has the power to fix in advance the time when he will come out of the trance, and his subconscious mind apparently possesses the power to keep track of time--days, hours, minutes, even seconds. I have seen him amaze a group of scientists by coming out on the second, while they held stop-watches on him.

But now my wife thinks she will vary this procedure. Jan goes into the trance in our home and Craig sits and silently wills, "Your right leg will come out; you will lift it; you will put it down again. You will sit erect"--and so on.

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] Without speaking a word, she can make him do whatever she pleases.

Another incident, quite a long one. I ask you to have patience with the details, promising that in the end you will see what it is all about. I am in the next room, and I hear Jan and my wife having one of their regular evening arguments, because he will not tell her how he does this or that; at one moment he insists that he has told her--and the next moment he insists that he does not know. My wife finally asks him to concentrate upon an object in the room, and she will see if she can "get" it. He selects the gas stove, in which a fire is burning; and Craig says, "I see a lot of little flames." Jan insists that is "no good," she didn't get the stove; which annoys her very much--she thinks he does not want to allow any success to a woman. He is a "continental male," something she makes fierce feminist war upon.

Craig is suffering from neuralgia in neck and shoulder, and Jan offers to treat her. He will use what he calls "magnetism"; he believes there is an emanation from his finger-tips, and so, with his two forefingers he lightly traces the course of the nerves of her neck and shoulder and arm. For ten or fifteen minutes his two fingers are tracing patterns in front of her.

[p. 40]

Then it is time for him to go home, and he is unhappy, and she succeeds in drawing the explanation from him--he has to walk, and his shoes are tight and hurt him. He has to have them stretched, he tells her. She offers him a pair of my big tennis shoes to wear home, and then she scolds him because he has the fashionable notion that white canvas tennis shoes are not proper footwear for eleven o'clock in the evening. Finally he puts them on and departs; and my wife lies down and makes her mind a blank, and orders it to tell her what Jan is doing.

She has a pencil and paper, and presently she is writing words. They are foreign words, and she thinks they must be in Jan's native language; they come drifting through her mind for several minutes. Next day comes Jan for the daily lesson, and she shows him this record. He tells her that the words are not in his language, but German--which he knows, but never uses. My wife knows no German; except possibly sauerkraut and kindergarten. But here she has written a string of German and near-German words. I have the original sheet before me, and I give it as well as I can make out the scrawl: "ei einfinen ein-fe-en swenfenz fingen sweizzen czie ofen weizen ofen fingen sweinfen swei fingern efein

[p. 41]

boden fienzen meifen bogen feingen Bladen Meichen frefen eifein."

Some of this is nonsense; but there are a few German words in it, and others which are guesses at German words, such as might be made by a person hearing a strange language, and trying to set down what he hears. Part of the effort seems to be concentrated on getting one expression, "zwei Fingern"--two fingers! You remember the two fingers moving up and down over Craig's neck and shoulder! And "Ofen"--the argument about the stove! And "bladen"--to stretch shoes over a block of wood. Where these ideas came from seems plain enough. But where did the German come from--unless from the subconscious mind of Jan?

A further detail, especially curious. Jan gave my wife the meaning for the word "bladen": "to stretch shoes over a block of wood"; I have the memo which he wrote at the time. But looking up the word in the dictionaries, I do not find it, nor can I find any German who knows it. Apparently there is no such word; and this would clearly seem to indicate that my wife got her German from Jan. If so, it was by telepathy, for he spoke no word of it that evening.

It is the fashion among young ladies of the South to tease the men; and Craig found in this

[p. 42]

episode a basis for tormenting her psychic instructor. He had assured his patient that during the treatment he was sending her "curative thoughts." But what kind of telepathic healer was it who sent gas-stoves and shoe-blocks into a neuralgic shoulder? Jan, missing the humor, and trying to save his reputation, declared that he hated the German language so greatly, he did not even allow himself to think in it! Germany was associated in his mind with the most painful memories, and all that previous day he had been fighting depression caused by these memories. You see, in this blundering defense, a significant bit of evidence. Jan had really had the German language in his thoughts at the time Craig got them!

I have before me a letter from Jan to my wife, postmarked Santa Barbara, October 19, 1927. He says: "May these lovely Cosmos bring you such peace and contentment as they have brought me." He has cut a double slit in the paper, and inserted cosmos blossoms and violets. Prior to the receipt of this letter, my wife was making the record of a dream, and here is what she wrote down: "I dreamed Jan had a little basket of flowers, pink roses and violets, shaped like this." (A drawing.) "He lifted them up and said they were for me, but a girl near

[p. 43]

him took them and said, 'But I want them.'" When Jan came to see us again, my wife asked about the circumstance, and learned the following: a woman friend, who had given Jan the

Fig. 13, Fig. 13a

flowers, had accused him of meaning to send them to a girl; but he had answered that they were for "a middle-aged and distinguished lady."

I present here the basket of "pink roses and

[p. 44]

violets" which my wife drew, and then the spray of pink double cosmos and violets which met her eyes when she opened the young "psychic's" letter a day or two later. I explain that my wife's drawing (fig. 13) is partly written over by the words of her notes; while in Jan's letter the violets had to be at once traced in pencil, as they would not last. My wife drew pencil marks around them and wrote the word "violet" in three places, to indicate what the marks meant. The cosmos flowers, pressed and dried, are still exactly as Jan stuck them into position and as they remained until I took them to be photographed (fig. 13).

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

VI

AS I have said, I hesitate to tell about incidents such as these. They are hard to believe, and the skeptic may say that my wife was hypnotized by Jan, and made to believe them. But it happens that Craig has been able to establish exactly the same rapport with her husband, who has never had anything to do with hypnosis, except to watch it a few times. A Socialist "muckraker," much wrapped up in his job, the husband sits and reads, or revises manuscript, while the wife works her white magic upon his mind. Suddenly his train of thought is broken by an exclamation; the wife has "willed" him to do such and so--and he has done it! Or maybe she has been asleep, and come out with the tail end of a dream, and has written down what appears to be a lot of rubbish--but turns out to be a reproduction of something the husband has been reading or writing at that very moment! Hear one or two instances of such events, all written down at the time.

Colonel Lindbergh has flown to France, but Craig does not know much about it, because she

[p. 46]

is not reading the papers, she is asking, "What is life?" A year passes, and in the mail I receive a monthly magazine, the "Lantern," published by Sacco-Vanzetti sympathizers in Boston. I open it, and find an article by a young radical, assailing Lindbergh because he does not follow in his father's footsteps; his father was a radical congressman, but now the son allows himself to be used by the army and navy people, and by the capitalist press, to distract the minds of the masses from social justice. So runs the charge; and before I am through reading it, my wife comes downstairs from a nap. "What are you reading?" she asks, and I answer: "Something about Lindbergh." Says my wife: "Here are my notes about a dream I just had." She hands me a sheet of paper, I have it before me now as I write, and I give it with misspelling and abbreviations exactly as she wrote it in a hurry, not anticipating that it would ever become public:

"'I do not believe that Lindberg flew across the ocean in order to take a ransome from a foreign gov as well as from his own. Nor in order to induce the nations of the earth to a war in the air.' Words which were in my mind as I awoke from nap on aft May 25."

I should add that my wife had had no opportunity

[p. 47]

to look at the Boston magazine, whether consciously or unconsciously. She tells me that Lindbergh had not been in her conscious mind for a long time, and she had no remotest idea that the radicals were attacking him.

Another instance: I am reading the latest "book of the month," which has just come in the mail, and to which my wife has paid no attention. She interrupts me with a question: "Are there any flowers in what you are reading?" I answer, "Yes," and she says: "I have been trying to concentrate, and I keep seeing flowers. I have drawn them." She hands me two drawings (figs. 14a, 14b):

Fig. 14a, Fig. 14b

The book was Mumford's "Herman Melville," and I was at page 346, a chapter entitled, "The Flowering Aloe." On this page are six lines from a poem called "The American Aloe on Exhibition." On the preceding page is a discussion of the habits of this plant. While my wife was

[p. 48]

making the left-hand drawing (fig. 14a), I had been reading page 344: "the red clover had blushed through the fields about their house"; and "he would return home with a handful of clover blossoms."

Of experiences like this there have been many. Important as the subject is, I find it a bother, because I am called upon to listen to long narratives of dreams and telepathy, while my mind is on Sacco and Vanzetti, or the Socialist presidential campaign, or whatever it is. Sometimes the messages from the subconscious are complicated and take patience to disentangle. Consider, for example, a little drawing (fig. 15)--one of nearly

Fig. 15, Fig. 15a

three hundred which this long-suffering husband has made for his witch-wife to reproduce by telepathy: a football, you see, neatly laced up. In her drawing (fig. 15a) Craig gets the general effect perfectly, but she puts it on a calf. Her written comment was: "Belly-band on calf."

[p. 49]

While Craig was making this particular experiment, her husband was reading a book; and now, wishing to solve the mystery, she asks, "What are you reading?" The husband replies, wearily: "DeKruif's 'Hunger Fighters,' page 283." "What does it deal with?" "It is a treatise on the feeding of cows." "Really?" says Craig. "Will you please write that down for me and sign it?"

But why did the cow become a calf? That, too, is something to be explained. Says Craig: "Do you remember what I used to tell you about old Mr. Bebb and his calves?" Yes, the husband knows the story of the half-crazy old Welshman, who thirty or forty years ago was the caretaker of the Kimbrough summer home on the Mississippi Sound. Old Mr. Bebb made his hobby the raising of calves by hand, and turning them into parlor pets. He would teach them to use his three fingers as a nursing bottle, and would make fancy embroidered belly-bands for them, and tie them up in these. So to the subconscious mind which was once little Mary Craig Kimbrough of Mississippi, the idea of a calf sewed up like a football is one of the most natural in the world.

Since my wife and I have no secrets from each other, it does not trouble me that she is able to

[p. 50]

see what I am doing. While I am away from home, she will "concentrate" upon me, and immediately afterwards write out what she "sees." On one occasion she described to me a little red book which I had got in the mail at the office. By way of establishing just what kind of book she had "seen," she had gone to my bookcase and picked out a French dictionary--and it happened that I had just received the Italian dictionary of that same series, uniform in binding. On another occasion, while making a study of dream-material, she wrote out a dream about being lost in long and involved concrete corridors --while I was trying to find my way through the locker-rooms of a Y. M. C. A. basement, running into one blind passage after another, and being much annoyed by doors that wouldn't open.

Dreams, you understand, are products of subconscious activity, and to watch them is one method of proving telepathy. By practice Craig has learned to lie passive, immediately after awakening, and trace back a long train of dreams. Here is one of the results, a story worth telling in detail--save that I fear you will refuse to believe it after it is told.

On the afternoon of January 30, 1928, I was playing tennis on the courts of the Virginia

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Hotel, in Long Beach, California, and my wife was taking a nap. She did not know that I was playing tennis, and has no knowledge about the places where I play. She takes no interest in the game, regarding it as a foolish business which will some day cause her husband to drop dead of heart failure--and she declines to be present on the occasion. When I entered the house, she said: "I woke up with a long involved dream, and it seemed so absurd I didn't want to write it out, but I did so." Here are the opening sentences verbatim:

"Dreamed I was on a pier, watching a new kind of small, one or two seated sport-boat, a little water car into which a woman got and was shot by machinery from the pier out to the water, where she skidded around a minute or two and was drawn back to the pier. With us on the pier were my sister and child, and two young men in white with white caps. These appeared to be in charge of this new sport-boat. This boat is not really a boat. It is a sort of miniature car. I've never seen anything like it. Short, so that only one or two people could sit in it. An amusement thing, belonging to the pier. The two young men were intensely interested, and stood close together watching it out on the water," etc., etc.

[p. 52]

Understand that this dream was not supposed to have anything to do with me. It was before Craig had come to realize the state of rapport with me; she had not been thinking about me, and when she told me about this dream, she had no thought that any part of it had come from my mind. But here is what I told her about my afternoon:

The Virginia Hotel courts are close to what is called "The Pike," and there is an amusement pier just across the way, and on it a so-called "Ferris wheel," with little cars exactly like the description, which go up into the air with people in them. That afternoon it happened that the tennis courts were crowded, so my partner and I waited out a set or two. We sat on a bench, in white tennis suits and hats, and watched this wheel, and the cars which went up in the air, and at a certain point took a slide on long rods, which made them "skid around," and caused the women in them to scream with excitement. Underneath the pier was the ocean, plainly visible along with the little cars.

I should also mention the case of our friend, Mrs. Kate Crane-Gartz, with whom there is a rapport which my wife does not tell her about. My wife will say to me, "Mrs. Gartz is going to phone," and in a minute or two the phone will

[p. 53]

ring. She will say, "Mrs. Gartz is coming. She wants me to go to Los Angeles with her." Of course, a good deal of guessing might be possible, in the case of two intimate friends. But consider such guessing as this: My wife had a dream of an earthquake and wrote it down. Soon thereafter occurred this conversation with Mrs. Gartz. I heard it, and my wife recorded it immediately afterwards, and I quote her written record:

"Mrs. Gartz dreamed of earthquake. 'Wasn't it queer that I dreamed of swaying slowly from side to side.'

"'I dreamed the same,' I said. 'But I was in a high building.'"

"'So was I,' she replied."

Craig calls attention to the word "slowly," as both she and Mrs. Gartz commented on this. They didn't believe that an earthquake would behave that way; but I pointed out that it would happen just so with a steel-frame building.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

VII

I COME now to a less fantastic and more convincing series of experiments; those made with the husband of my wife's younger sister, Robert L. Irwin. Eight years ago the doctors gave Bob only a few months to live, on account of tuberculosis. Needless to say, he has much time on his hands, waiting for the doctors' clairvoyance to be verified. He proved to be a good "subject"--the best of all in the tests with Jan. One day in our home, a series of five tests were made, with Bob holding an object in mind, while sitting several feet away from Jan. The latter found the object, and made the correct disposition of it, as willed by Bob, in four out of the five trials. This included such unlikely things as picking up a striped blanket and wrapping it about my shoulders.

Bob and Craig made the arrangement that at a certain hour each day, Bob, in his home in Pasadena, was to take pencil and paper and make a drawing of an object, and sit and concentrate his mind upon that drawing. At the

[p. 55]

same hour Craig, in our home in Long Beach, forty miles away, was to go into her state of "concentration," and give orders to her subconscious mind to find out what was in Bob's mind. The drawings were to be dated, and filed, and when the two of them met, they would compare the results, in the presence of myself and Bob's wife. If there should turn out to be a correspondence between the drawings, greater than could be attributed to chance, it would be evidence of telepathy, as good as any that could be imagined or desired.

The results were such as to make me glad that it was another person than myself, so as to afford a disinterested witness to these matters, so difficult of belief. I repeat that Bob is a young American business man, priding himself on having no "crank" ideas; he has had a Socialist brother-in-law for ten years or more without being in the slightest degree affected in manners, morals, or convictions. Here is his first drawing, done on a half sheet of green paper. The word "CHAIR" underneath, and the date, were written by Bob, while the words "drawn by Bob Irwin" were added for purposes of record by Craig (fig. 16):

[p. 56]

Fig. 16

And now for Craig's results. I give her report verbatim, with the two drawings which are part of her text:

"At 10 o'clock or a little before, while sewing (without effort) I saw Bob take something from black sideboard--think it was the glass candlestick. At 11:15 (I concentrate now) I saw Bob sitting at dining room table--a dish or some small object in front of him (on N. E. corner table). I try to see the object on table--see white something at last. I can't decide what it is so I concentrate on seeing his drawing on a green paper as it is about 11:20 now and I think he has made his drawing. I try hard to see what

[p. 57]

he has drawn--try to see a paper with a drawing on it, and see a straight chair. Am not sure of second drawing. It does not seem to be on his paper. It may his bed-foot. I distinctly see a chair like 1st on his paper." (fig. 16a):

Fig. 16a

When Bob and my wife discussed the above test, she learned that he had sat at the northeast corner of the table, trying to decide what to draw, and facing the sideboard on which were silver candlesticks. Later he went to his bedroom and lay down, gazing through the foot of his bed at the chair which he had taken as his model for the drawing. The bed has white bars running vertically, as in my wife's second drawing. The chair, like Bob's drawing, has the

[p. 58]

strips of wood supporting the back running crossways, and this feature is reproduced in Craig's first drawing. Her report goes on to add that she sees a star and some straight lines, which she draws; they are horizontal parallel lines, as in the back of the chair. The back of the chair Bob had looked at had a carved star upon it.

The second attempt was the next day, and Bob drew his watch (fig. 17). Craig first drew a chair, and then wrote, "But do not feel it is correct." Then she drew the following (fig. 17a):

The comment was: "I see this picture. Later I think it is not flower but wire (metal, shining). The 'petals' are not petals but wire, and should

Fig. 17 Fig. 17a

[p. 59]

be uniform. This is hasty drawing so not exact as seen. What I mean is, I try to see Bob's drawing and not what he drew from. So I see no flower but shape of one on paper. Then decide it is of wire, but this may be merely because I see drawing, which would have no flower color. However, I see it shining as if it is metal. Later a glass circle." Drawings then show an ellipse, and then a drinking glass and a glass pitcher. It is interesting to note that Bob had in front of him a glass bowl with gold-fish.

The next day Bob drew a pair of scissors (fig. 18):

Fig. 18

[p. 60]

The drawings of Craig follow without comment (figs. 18a, 18b):

Fig. 18a Fig. 18b

Three days later Bob drew the table fork, which has already been reproduced (fig. 1), and Craig made the report which has been given in facsimile (fig. 1a): "See a table fork. Nothing else."

One more test between Bob and Craig, the most sensational of all. It is quite a story, and I have to ask your pardon for the medical details involved. So much vital knowledge hangs upon these tests that I have asked my brother-in-law to forget his personal feelings. The reader will please consider himself a medical student or hospital nurse for the moment.

The test occurred July 11, 1928. My wife made her drawing, and then told me about the

[p. 61]

matter at once. Also she wrote out all the details and the record is now before me. She saw a feather, then a flower spray, and then she heard a scream. Her first thought in case of illness or danger is her aged parents, and she took it for her mother's voice, and this so excited her that she lost interest in the experiment. But soon she concentrated again, and drew a series of concentric circles, with a heavy black spot in the center. Then she saw another and much larger spot, and this began to spread and cover the sheet of paper. At the same time came a feeling of intense depression, and Craig decided that the black spot was blood, and that Bob had had a hemorrhage. Here is her drawing (fig. 19a)

Fig. 19a

[p. 62]

Two or three days later Bob's wife drove him to our home, and in the presence of all four of us he produced the drawing he had made. He had taken a compass and drawn a large circle; making, of course, a hole in the center of the paper. "Is that all you thought of during the time?" asked my wife. "No," said Bob, "but I'd hate to have you get the rest of it." "What was it?" "Well, I discovered that I had a hemorrhoid, and couldn't put my mind on anything else but the thought, 'My God, my lungs--my kidneys--and now this!'"

A hemorrhoid is, of course, apt to be accompanied by a hemorrhage; and it seems clear that my wife got the mood of depression of her brother-in-law, his thoughts of blood and bodily breakdown, as well as the circle and the hole in the paper. There is another detail which does not appear in the written record, but is fixed in my memory. My wife said: "I wanted to draw a little hill." Upon hearing that, I called up a physician friend who is interested in these tests, and asked him what a drawing of a hemorrhoid would look like, and he agreed that "a little hill' was about as near as one could come. I hope you will note that this particular drawing test is supported by the testimony of four different persons,

[p. 63]

my wife, her sister, the sister's husband, and myself. I do not see how there could possibly be more conclusive evidence of telepathic influence--unless you suspect all four of us of a series of stupid and senseless falsehoods. Let me repeat that Bob and his wife have read this manuscript and certified to its correctness so far as concerns them. The comment written by my wife reads: "All this dark like a stain--feel it is blood; that Bob is ill--more than usual."

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

VIII

THE experiments just described were all that were done with Bob, because he found them a strain. Craig asked me to make some drawings for her, and I did so, sitting in the next room, some thirty feet away, but always behind a closed door. Thus you may verify my assertion that the telepathic energy, whatever it may be, knows no difference between thirty feet and forty miles. The results with Bob and with myself were about the same.

The first drawings made with me are those which have already been given (fig. 2, 2a), but I give them again for the sake of convenience. I explain that in these particular drawings the lines have been traced over in heavier pencil; the reason being that Craig wanted a carbon copy, and went over the lines in order to make it. This had the effect of making them heavier than they originally were, and it made the whirly lines in Craig's first drawing more numerous than they should be. She did this in the case of two or three of the early drawings, wishing to

[p. 65]

send a report to a friend. I pointed out to her how this would weaken their value as evidence, so she never did it again.

After my wife and I had compared the above drawings, she wrote a note to the effect that just

[p. 66]

before starting to concentrate, she had been looking at her drawing of many concentric circles, which she had made in a test with Bob the previous day (fig. 19a). So her first vision was of a whirl of circles. This turned sideways, and then took the shape of an arrowhead, and then of a letter A, and finally evolved into a complete star. As the agent in this test, I wish to repeat that I made my drawing in my study with the door closed, that I kept it before my eyes the entire time, and that the door stayed closed until Craig called that she was through.

I do not find it easy to concentrate on a drawing, because my active mind wanders off to side issues. If I draw a lighted cigarette, I immediately think of the odious advertising now appearing in the papers; or I think: "Will Craig get this right, and what does it mean, and will the world accept evidence on this subject from me?"--and so on. Several times my wife has "got" such thoughts, and so we took to noting them on the record. On July 29, I drew a cigarette, with two little curls for smoke, each running off like a string of the letter "eeeee," written by hand. Underneath I wrote as follows: "My thought: 'cigarette with curls of smoke.' I said to myself these words: 'she got the curls but not the cigarette.'"

[p. 67]

This would appear to be telepathy coming from Craig to me, for her drawing was found to contain a lot of different curves--a curly capital S, several other half circles twisted together, and three??? one inside the other. She added the following words: "I can't draw it, but curls of some sort."

Again, here is a work of art from my facile pen, dated July 21, and having underneath my notation: "Concentrated on bald head" (fig. 20)

Fig. 20

My wife's note was: "Saw Upton's face." Then she drew a line through the words, and wrote the following explanation: "Saw two half circles. Then they came together making full circle. But I felt uncertain as to whether they belonged together or not. Then suddenly saw Upton's profile float across vision."

[p. 68]

July 20 I drew a three-pronged fork, and made the note that I was not sure if it was a hay-fork or an oyster-fork, and decided it was the latter, whereupon my mind went off to "society" people and their many kinds of forks. Craig wrote: "I thought it was an animal's head with horns, and the head was on a long stick--a trophy mounted like this"--and she drew a two-pronged fork.

July 17 I drew a large round stone with a smaller stone on top: at least so I thought, and then decided they were two eggs. Craig drew two almost tangent circles, and wrote: "I see two round things, not one inside the other, as in Bob's drawing of circles. Then the above vanished and I saw as below"--and she drew four little oblongs, tangent, which might be a cluster of fish-eggs or fly-eggs.

July 20 I drew two heavy straight lines making a capital letter T, and Craig drew a complete cross or square X, which is, of course, the T with vertical arm prolonged. July 14 I drew a sort of jack-lantern. It is on next page (fig. 21). I looked at this drawing and thought of the eyes of M.C.S., and said mentally, "I should have drawn the curves over eyes." Afterwards I told Craig about this, and she noted it down on the drawing. On the reverse side of the sheet

[p. 69]

Fig. 21

she added the following: "I told U. it was shaped like a half moon with something in center--I supposed it must be a star, though I did not see it as star but as indistinct marks." Her drawing follows, turned upside down for greater convenience (fig. 21a):

Fig. 21a

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

IX

A NEW method of experiment invented itself by accident; and makes perhaps the strangest story yet. There came a letter from a clergyman in South Africa, saying that he was sending me a copy of his wife's novel dealing with South African life. I get many letters from strangers, and answer politely, and as a rule forget them quickly. Some time afterwards came two volumes, entitled, "Patricia, by Marcus Romondt," and I did not associate them with the clergyman's letter. I glanced at the preface, and saw that the work had something to do with the religious cults of the South African natives. I didn't read more than twenty lines--just enough to classify the book as belonging in Craig's department. Everything having to do with philosophy, psychology, religion and medicine is first read by her, and then fed back to me in her eager discourses. I took the volumes home and laid them on her table, saying, "This may interest you." The remark attracted no special attention, for the reason that I bring her a book, or a

[p. 71]

magazine, or some clippings at least once a day. She did not touch these volumes, nor even glance at the title while I was in the room.

I went into the kitchen to get some lunch, and when it was ready I called, "Are you going to eat?" "Let me alone," she said, "I am writing a story." That also is a common experience. I ate my lunch in silence, and then came into the living room again, and there was Craig, absorbed in writing. Some time later she came to me, exclaiming, "Oh, I have had the most marvelous idea for a story! Something just flashed over me, something absolutely novel--I never heard anything like it. I have a whole synopsis. Do you want to hear it?" "No," I said, "you had better go and eat"--for it is my job to try to keep her body on earth. "I can't eat now," she said, "I am too excited. I'll read a while and get quiet." So she went to her couch, and there was a minute or two of silence, and then an exclamation: "Come here!"

Craig had picked up one of the two volumes from South Africa, and was staring at it. "Look at this! " she said. "Look what I opened to!" I looked at a page in the middle of the book--she has the devilish habit of reading a book that way--and in the center of the page, in capital

[p. 72]

letters, I read the words: "THE BLACK MAGICIAN." "What about it?" I said. "Did you ever hear of that idea?" asked Craig. I answered that I had, and she said, "Well, I never did. I thought it was my own. It is the theme of the 'story' I have just been writing. I have made a synopsis of a whole chapter in this book, and without ever having touched it!"

So Craig had a new set of experiments to try all by herself, without bothering her busy husband. She would go to one of my bookcases, with which she had hitherto had nothing to do, since her own books are kept in her own place. With her back to the bookcase, she would draw a book, and take it to her couch and lie down, placing the book upon her solar plexus, and taking every precaution to make sure that it never came into her line of vision. Most of the books, being new, were in their paper jackets, so there was no lettering that could be felt with her fingers. This, you note, is not a test of telepathy, for no human mind knew what particular book Craig's hand had fallen upon. If she could tell anything about the contents of that book, it would appear to be clairvoyance, or what is known as "psychometry."

My books are oddly varied in character. There

[p. 73]

are new novels, and works of history, biography, travel and economics. In addition, there are what I call "crank books"; the queerly assorted volumes which are destined by donors all over the world to convert me to vegetarianism, antivivisection, anarchism, Mormonism, Mohammedanism, infanticide, the abolition of money, or the doctrine that alopecia is caused by onanism. Believe me, the person who sets out to guess the contents of the books that come to me in the course of a month has his or her hands full!

But Craig was able to do it. She did it on so many occasions that she would sit and stare at me and exclaim, "Now what do you make of that?" She would insist that I sit and watch the process, so as to be able to state that she never had the book in her line of vision. In my presence she picked out a volume, and, keeping it hidden from both of us, she said, "I see a blue cover, with a rising sun and a bare landscape." It happened to be a volume circulated by the followers of "Pastor Russell," and as the preface tells me that 1,405,000 have been sold, it may be that you too have it in your library. The title is "Deliverance," by J. F. Rutherford, and it has a blue cloth cover, with a gold design of a

[p. 74]

sun rising behind a mass of clouds and a globe.

On another occasion Craig wrote: "One big eye, with nothing else distinct--then lines or spikes came around it, or maybe these project from the head like stiff long hairs, or eye-lashes. Can't tell what kind of head--but feel it must be a tropical something, tho the eye looks human," etc. The book was "Mr. Blettsworthy on Rampole Island," by H. G. Wells, and in this book is a chapter headed, "The Friendly Eye," with the following sentences: "I became aware that an Eye observed me continually. . . . It was a reddish brown eye. It looked out from a system of bandages that also projected a huge shock of brown hair upward and a great chestnut beard . . . the eye watched me with the illuminating but expressionless detachment of a head-lamp. . . . Polyphemus, for that was my private name for the man."

A long string of such surprises! Craig picked up a book and wrote: "Black wings--a vampire flying by night." The title of the book was "The Devil's Jest." She picked up one and wrote: "A Negro's head with a light around it." It is a German volume, called "Africa Singt," and has a big startling design exactly as described. She picked up a book by Leon Trotsky, and wrote

[p. 75]

the word "Checkro"--which may not sound like Russian to Trotsky, but does to Craig! And a book with Mussolini on the cover, wearing a black coat and feeding a lion; she got the shape of the Duce's figure, only she labeled him "Black Bird." And here is a part of the jacket design of "wings" on the "Literary Guild" books--and below is what Craig made of it. She added the comment: "Motion--the thing is traveling, point first" (fig. 22, 22a):

Fig. 22, Fig. 22a

Another volume was described as follows: "A pale blue book. Lonely prairie country, stretch

[p. 76]

of flat land against sky, and outlined against it a procession of people. Had feeling of moving--wheeled vehicle which seemed to be baby-carriage. This was strange, because country was covered with snow." Upon examination, the book proved to be bound in mottled pale blue boards, title, "I'm Scairt," with subtitle, "Childhood Days on the Prairies." On the first page of the preface occurs the following: "It was in those days that a company of Swedes left their beloved homeland in the far North and came to make a home for themselves and their children on the Kansas prairie."

Finally, I have obtained the publisher's consent to reproduce the jacket design of a recent book, so that I may put Craig's telepathy alongside it, and give you a laugh or two. Observe the jolly little tourists, and what they have turned into! And then the efforts of Craig's subconscious mind at French. They taught it to her in a "finishing school" on Fifth Avenue, and you can see that it was finished before it began (fig. 23, 23a):

[p. 77]

Fig. 23, Fig. 23a

[p. 78]

Yet another form of experiment invented itself under the pressure of necessity. Impossible to have such a witch-wife without trying to put her to use!

I have the habit of working out a chapter of a new book in my head, and writing down a few notes on a scrap of paper, and sticking it away in any place that is handy; then, next day, or whenever I am ready for work, it is gone, and there is the devil to pay. I wander about the house for an hour or two, trying to imagine where I can have put that scrap of paper, and reluctant to do the work all over again. On one occasion I searched every pocket, my desk, the trash-baskets, and then, deciding that I had dropped it outdoors, where I work with my typewriter, I figured the direction of the wind, and picked up all the scraps of paper I saw decorating the landscape of our beach home. Then I decided it must be in a manuscript which I had given to a friend in Los Angeles, and I was about to phone to that friend, when Craig asked what the trouble was, and said, "Come, let's make an experiment. Lie down here, and describe the paper to me."

I told her, a sheet off a little pad, written on both sides, and folded once. She took my hand,

[p. 79]

and went into her state of concentration, and said, "It is in the pocket of a gray coat." I answered, "Impossible; I have searched every coat in the house half a dozen times." She said, "It is in a pocket, and I will get it." She got up off the couch, and went to a gray coat of mine, and in a pocket I had somehow overlooked, there was the paper! Let me add that Craig had had nothing to do with my clothing in the interim, and had never seen the paper, nor heard of it until I began roaming about the house, grumbling and fussing. Neither of us know of any "normal" way by which her subconscious mind could have got this information.

My secretary lost two screw-caps of the office typewriter, and I said to my wife, "I will bring him over, and you see if you can tell him where to look." But my wife was ill, and did not want to meet any one, so she said, "I will see if I can get it through you." Be it understood, Craig has not been to the office in a year, and has met my secretary only casually. She said, "I see him standing up at his typewriting." That is an unusual thing for a typist to do, but it happened to be true. Said Craig: "He has put the screw-caps on something high. They are in the south room, above the level of any table or desk." I

[p. 80]

went to the phone to ask my secretary, and learned that he had just found the screws, which he had put on top of a window-sash in the south room.

The third incident requires the statement that, a few months back, while my wife was away, our home had been loaned to friends, and I had camped at the little house which I was using as an office. Some medical apparatus had been left there; at least I had a vague impression that I had had it there, and I said, "I'll go and look." Said Craig: "Let's try an experiment." She took my hand, and told me to make my mind a blank, and presently she said, "I see it under the kitchen sink." I went over to the office, and found the object, not under the sink, but under the north end of the bathtub. I took it back to the house, and before I spoke a word, my wife said: "I tried to get you on the phone. I concentrated again, and saw the thing and wrote it out." She gave me a slip of paper, from which I copy: "Down under something, wrapped in. paper--on N. side of room--under laundry tub on floor or under bath tub on floor in N. corner."

You may say, of course, if you are an incurable skeptic: "The man's wife had been over to the office and seen the object; she had been searching

[p. 81]

his pockets, and had seen the paper." Craig is positive that she did nothing of the sort; but of course it is conceivable that she may have done it and then forgotten it. Therefore, I pass on to a different and more acceptable kind of evidence--a set of drawing tests, in which I watched and checked every step of the proceedings at my wife's insistence. Here again I am a co-equal witness with her, and the skeptic has no alternative but to say that the two of us have contrived this elaborate hoax, making nearly three hundred drawings with fake reproductions, in order to get notoriety, or to sell a few books. I really hope nobody will say that is possible. Very certainly I could sell more books with less trouble by writing what the public wants; and if I were a dishonest man, I should not have waited until the age of fifty-one to begin such a career.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

X

CONCERNING these drawings, there are preliminary explanations to be made. They were done hastily, by two busy people. Neither is a trained artist, and our ability to convey what we wish is limited. When I start on a giraffe, I manage to produce a pretty good neck, but when I get to the body, I am disturbed to note it turning into a sheep or a donkey. When I draw a monkey climbing a tree, and Craig says, "Buffalo or lion, tiger--wild animal"--I have to admit that may be so; likewise when my limb of a tree is called a "trumpet," or when Craig's "wild animal" resembles a chorus girl's legs. I will let you see those particular drawings. Figure 24 is mine, while 24a and 24b are my wife's.

Fig. 24

[p. 83]

Fig. 24a, Fig. 24b

Again, I draw a volcano in eruption, and my wife calls it a black beetle, which hardly sounds like a triumphant success; but study the drawings, and you see that my black smoke happens to be the shape of a beetle, while the two sides of the volcano serve very well for the long feelers of an insect (fig. 25, 25a):

Fig. 25 Fig. 25a

The tests began with four series of drawings, 38 in all, made by my secretary. Following these were 31 series drawn by myself, comprising

[p. 84]

[paragraph continues] 252 separate drawings. Each drawing would be wrapped in an extra sheet of paper, and sealed in a separate envelope, and the envelopes handed to my wife when she was ready for the tests. She would put them on the table by her couch, and lie down, putting the first envelope, unopened, over her solar plexus, covered by her hand. Her head would be lying back on a pillow, eyes closed, and head at such an angle that nothing but the ceiling could be seen if the eyes were open. A dim light to avoid sense stimulation; enough light to see everything plainly. When she had what she judged was the right image, she would take a pad and pencil and make the drawing or write the description of what she "saw." Then she would open the envelope and compare the two drawings, and number both for .

This recording was, of course, an interruption of her passive state, and made the task difficult. In a few cases she repeated a number or forgot the number, and this leaves a chance for confusion. I have done my best to clear up all such uncertainties, but there is a margin of error of one or two per cent to be noted. This is too small to affect the results, but is mentioned in the interest of exactness.

[p. 85]

Since I found the sealing of envelopes tiresome, and Craig found the opening of them more so, we decided half way through the tests to abandon the sealing, and later we abandoned the envelopes altogether. We reasoned that acceptance of the evidence rests upon our good faith anyhow, and all that any sensible reader can ask is that Craig makes sure of never letting a drawing get within her range of vision. She was doing this laborious work to get knowledge for herself, and she certainly made sure that she was not wasting her own time.

At present the practice is this: I make her a set of six or eight drawings on little sheets of pad paper, and lay them face down on her table, with a clean sheet of paper over them. She lies down, and with her head lying back on the pillow and her eyes closed, she reaches for one of the drawings, and slides it over and onto her body, covered by her hand. It is always out of her range of vision, even if the drawing were turned towards her eyes, which it never is.

For the comfort of the suspicious, let me add that the relaxing of the conditions caused no change in the averages. In the first four series, drawn by my secretary, and sealed by him in envelopes, there were only five complete failures

[p. 86]

in thirty-eight tests, which is thirteen per cent; whereas in the 252 drawings made by me there have been 65 outright failures, which is nearly twice as large a percentage. Series number six, which was carefully sealed up, produced four complete successes, five partial successes, and no failures; whereas series twenty-one, which was not put in envelopes at all, produced no complete successes, three partial successes, and six failures. Perhaps I should explain that by a "series" I mean simply a group of drawings which were done at one time. It is my custom to make from six to a dozen and when Craig has finished with them, they are put into an envelope and filed away.

I will add that Craig again and again begged me to sit and watch her work, so that I might be able to add my testimony to hers; I did so, watching tests both with envelopes and without, and assure you she left no loophole for self-deception. There was plenty of light to see by, and some of the most startling successes were produced under my eyes. I will add that no one could take this matter with more seriousness than my wife. She is the most honorable person I know, and she has worked on these experiments with rigid conscientiousness.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

XI

I SHALL give a number of the successful drawings, and some of the partial successes, but none of the failures, for these obviously are merely waste. When I draw a cow, and my wife draws a star or a fish or a horseshoe, all you want is the word "Failure," and then you want to know the percentage of failures, so that you can figure the probabilities. Failures prove nothing that you do not already believe; if your ideas are to be changed, it is successes that will change them.

I begin with series three, because of the interesting circumstances under which it was made. Late in the afternoon I phoned my secretary to make a dozen drawings; and then, after dark, Craig and I decided to drive to Pasadena, and on the way I stopped at the office and got the twelve sealed envelopes which had been laid on my desk. I picked them up in a hurry and slipped them into a pocket, and a minute or two later I put them on the seat beside me in the car.

After we had started, I said, "Why don't you try some of the drawings on the way?" We were passing through the Signal Hill oil-field, amid

[p. 88]

thunder of machinery and hiss of steam and flashing of headlights of cars and trucks. "It will be interesting to see if I can concentrate in such circumstances," said Craig, and took one envelope and held it against her body in the darkness, while I went on with my job of driving. After a few minutes Craig said, "I see something long and oblong, like a stand." She got a pad and pencil from a pocket of the car, and switched on the ceiling light, and made a drawing, and then opened the envelope. Here are the pictures; I call it a partial success (fig. 26, 26a):

Fig. 26, Fig. 26a

Here is the next pair, done on the same drive to Pasadena (figs. 27, 27a):

Fig. 27, Fig. 27a

[p. 89]

Then came a drawing of an automobile. Considering the attendant circumstances, it was surely not surprising that Craig should report it as "a big light in the end of a tube or horn." There were many such lights in her eyes.

Then a fourth envelope: she said, "I see a little animal or bug with legs, and the legs sticking out in bug effect." When she looked into the envelope, she was so excited that she tried to get me to look--at forty miles an hour on a highway at night! Here is the drawing, meant to be a skull and cross-bones, but so done that a "bug with legs" is really a fair description of it (fig. 28):

Fig. 28

After we arrived at our destination, my wife did some more of the drawings, and got partial successes. On this telephone the comment was:

[p. 90]

[paragraph continues] "Goblet with another one floating near or above it inverted" (figs. 29, 29a):

Fig. 29, Fig. 29a

And then this arrow (figs. 30, 30a):

Fig. 30, Fig. 30a

Concerning the above my wife wrote: "See something that suggests a garden tool--a lawn rake, or spade." And for the next one (fig. 31) she wrote: "A pully-bone"--which is Mississippi "darky" talk for a wish-bone of a chicken. I don't know whether it means a bone that you pull, or whether it is Creole for "poulet." Here is what my secretary had drawn (fig. 31):

Fig. 31

[p. 91]

I had asked my secretary at the outset to make simple geometrical designs, letters and figures, thinking that these would be easier to recognize and reproduce. But they brought only partial successes; Craig would get elements of the drawing, but would not know how to put them together. There were seven in the first series, and there is some element right in every one. An oblong was drawn exactly, and then two fragments of oblongs added to it. A capital M in script had the first stroke done exactly, with the curl. A capital E in script was done with the curls left out.

And the same with the second series. Here is a square--but you see that the two halves of it are wandering about (fig. 32, 32a):

Fig. 32, Fig. 32a

[p. 92]

And here is a letter Y, but by telepathy it has been turned from script into print (fig. 33, 33a):

Fig. 33, Fig. 33a

A quite different story began when my secretary allowed his imagination a little play. He knows that my wife lives in part on milk, and he knows that she is particular about the quality, because he has to handle the bills. So he has a little fun with her, and you see that immediately she gets, not the form, but the color and feeling of it (figs. 34, 34a):

The comment reads: "Round white foamy stuff on top like soap suds or froth." As she

[p. 93]

drinks her milk sour and whipped, you see that its foaminess is a prominent feature.

Then comes an oil derrick. We live in the midst of these unsightly objects, and are liable to be turned out of house and home by drilling nearby; moreover, I have written a book called "Oil! " and the exclamation mark at the end has been justified by the effect of it on our lives. My wife made a figure five with long lines going out, and wrote: "I don't know why the five should have such a thing as an appendage, but the appendage was most vivid, so there it is" (figs. 35, 35a):

Fig. 35, Fig. 35a

After she had opened the envelope and seen the original drawing, the problem became, not why a figure five should have an appendage, but why an oil derrick should have a figure five. Craig puzzled over this, and then lay down and told her subconscious mind to bring her the

[p. 94]

answer. What came was this: the German version of my book, called "Petroleum," has three oil derricks on the front, and a huge dollar sign on the back of the cover, and this was what Craig had really "seen." She had looked at this book when it arrived, a year or more back, and it had been filed away in her memory. Of course this may not be the correct explanation, but it is the one which her mind brought to her.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 95]

  

XII

THESE drawing tests afford a basis for psychoanalysis, and it is interesting to note some of the facts thus brought up from the childhood of my wife. For example, fires! She was raised in the "black belt," where there are nine Negroes to one white, and the former are still close to Africa. When Craig was a girl, a nurse in the family, having been discharged, set fire to the home while the adults were away, and the children asleep. Another servant, jealous of an unfaithful husband, put her two babies into a barrel full of feathers and burned them alive. Other fires occurred; so now, in her home, Craig keeps an uneasy eye out for greasy rags, or overheated stoves, or whatever else her fears suggest. When in these drawing tests there has been anything indicating fire or smoke, she has "got" it, with only one or two failures out of more than a dozen cases. Sometimes she "got" the fire or smoke without the object; sometimes she supplied fire or smoke to an object which might properly have it--a pipe, for example. The results are so curious

[p. 96]

that I assemble them together--a series of fire-alarms, as it were.

You recall the fact that in one of the early drawing tests--those in which, instead of giving the drawings to my wife, I sat in my study and concentrated upon them--I drew a lighted cigarette, and thought of the curls of smoke. Craig filled up her drawing with curves, and wrote: "I can't draw it, but curls of some sort." At this time the convention that "curls" stood for smoke had not been established. But now, in the series drawn by my secretary, appeared a little house with smoking chimney, and you will see that my wife got the smoke better than the house (figs. 36, 36a):

Fig. 36, Fig. 36a

This apparently established in her mind the association of curls with smoke. So when, in series six, I drew a pipe with smoke-curls, my wife first drew an ellipse, and then wrote: "Now

[p. 97]

it begins to spin, round and round, and is attached to a stick." She then drew (figs. 37, 37a):

Fig. 37, Fig. 37a

In series eight I drew a sky-rocket going up. My first impulse had been to draw a bursting rocket, with a shower of stars, but I realized that would be difficult, so I drew this instead (fig. 38):

Fig. 38

[p. 98]

My wife apparently took my first thought, rather than my drawing. Anyhow, she made half a dozen sketches of whirligigs and light (figs. 38a, 38b, 38c):

Fig. 38a, Fig. 38b, Fig. 38c

And here in series twenty-two is a burning lamp (figs. 39, 39a):

Fig. 39, Fig. 39a

[p. 99]

And in series thirty-four another, with comment: "flame and sparks" (figs. 40, 40a):

Fig. 40, Fig. 40a

I drew another pipe in series twenty-two, with the usual curls of smoke; and Craig wrote: "Smoke stack." I drew another in series thirty-three with the result that, five drawings in advance of the correct one, Craig drew a pipe with smoke. Of course, this may have been a coincidence; but wait till you see how often such coincidences happen! (figs. 41, 41a):

Fig. 41, Fig. 41a

[p. 100]

In series twenty-one I drew a chimney, and Craig drew a chimney, and added smoke. In thirty-four I drew an old-fashioned trench-mortar; and here again she supplied the smoke (figs. 42, 42a):

Fig. 42, Fig. 42a

Cannons are especially horrible things to her, as you may note again and again in her published war-sonnets:

The sharpened steel whips round, the black guns blaze,
     Waste are the harvests, mute the songs of birds.

So when, in series eleven, I drew the muzzle half of an old-style cannon, Craig's imagination got to work one drawing ahead of time. She wrote: "Fire and smoke--smoke--flame," and then drew as follows (fig. 43a):

[p. 101]

Fig. 43a

The next drawing was the cannon, and I give it, along with the drawing Craig made to go with it. The comment she wrote was: "Half circle --double lines--light inside--light is fire busy whirling or flaming" (figs. 44, 44a):

Fig. 44, Fig. 44a

[p. 102]

So much for fires, and things associated with fire. Now consider another detail about life in the Yazoo delta, brought out in the course of our psychoanalysis. In the days of Craig's childhood, poisonous snakes were an ever-present menace, and fear of them had to be taught to children, and could hardly be taught too early. There is a family story of a little tot crawling under the house and coming back to report, "I see nuffin wiv a tail to it!" In the swamps back of Craig's summer home on the Mississippi Sound I have counted a dozen copperheads and moccasins in the course of a half hour's walk. Also, her father has some childhood complex buried in his mind, which causes him to have a spell of nausea at the sight of a snake. All this, of course, strongly affected the child's early days, and now it is in her mental depths. So when I drew a hissing snake, just see the uproar I caused! She made no drawing, but wrote a little essay. I give my drawing, and her essay following (fig. 45):

Fig. 45

[p. 103]

"See something like kitten with tail and saucer of milk. Now it leaps into action and runs away to outdoors. Turns to fleeing animal outdoors. Great activity among outdoor creatures. Know it's some outdoor thing, not indoor object--see trees, and a frightened bird on the wing (turned sidewise). It's outdoor thing, but none of above seems to be it."

In other words, little Mary Craig Kimbrough is back on the plantation, seeing terror among birds and poultry, and not knowing what causes it! Study the drawing, and you see that I got the action of the snake, but didn't get the coils very well, so they might be a "saucer of milk" --and a sure-enough kitten's tail sticking out from it. Another childhood horror here! Craig was a fat little thing, and she slipped and plumped down on her favorite pet kitten, and exploded it.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 104]

  

XIII

THE person whom we are subjecting to this process of psychoanalysis has a strong color sense, and wanted to be a painter. So we note that she "gets" colors and names them correctly. Here is my drawing of what I meant to be a bouquet of pink roses (figs. 46, 46a):

Fig. 46, Fig, 46a

Or take this case of a lobster. Craig's comment was: "Gorgeous colors, red and greenish tinges." Apparently I had failed to decide whether I was drawing a live lobster or a boiled one! My wife wrote further: "Now it turns into a lizard, camelian ['Chameleon,' see above--JBH], reds and greens." When

[p. 105]

she sees this about to be made public, she is embarrassed by her bad spelling; but she says: "Please do not overlook the fact that a chameleon is a reptile--and so is a lobster." I dutifully quote her, even though her zoology is even worse than her spelling! (figs. 47, 47a):

Fig. 47, Fig. 47a

While we are on the "reptiles," I include this menacing crab, which may have got hold of little Mary Craig's toe on the beach of the Mississippi Sound (fig. 48):

Fig. 48

[p. 106]

For the crab, Craig made two drawings, on opposite sides of the paper (figs. 48a, 48b):

Fig. 48a, Fig. 48b

The comments on the above read: "Wings, or fingers--wing effect, but no feathers, things like fingers instead of feathers. Then many little dots which all disappear, and leave two of them, O O, as eyes of something." And then, "Streamers flying from something."

Another color instance: I drew the head of a horse, and Craig drew a lot of apparently promiscuous lines, and at various places wrote "yellow," "white," "blue," "(dark)," and then a general description, "Oriental." Afterwards she said to me: "That looks like a complete failure; yet it was so vivid, I can't be mistaken. Where did you get that horse?" Said I: "I copied it from a Sunday supplement." We got the paper from the trash-basket, and the page opposite the horse contained what Craig described.

[p. 107]

We shall note several other cases of this sort of intrusion of things I did not draw, but which I had before me while drawing.

Also anything with metal or shine seems to stand a good chance of being "got." For example, these nose-glasses (figs. 49, 49a):

Fig. 49, Fig. 49a

The comment reads: "Opalescent shine or gleam. Also peafowl."

Or again, a belt-buckle; my wife writes the word "shines" (figs. 50, 50a):

Fig. 50, Fig. 50a

[p. 108]

Or this very busy alarm clock--she writes the same word "shines" (figs. 51, 51a):

Fig. 51, Fig. 51a

She has got at least part of a watch whenever one has been presented. You remember the one Bob drew (fig. 17). There was another in series thirty-three; Craig made a crude drawing and added: "Shines, glass or metal" (figs. 52, 52a):

Fig. 52, Fig. 52a

Also, on the automobile ride to Pasadena, series three, there was a watch-face among the drawings, and Craig drew the angle of the hands, and added the words, "a complication of small

[p. 109]

configurations." Having arrived in Pasadena, she took the twelve drawings and tried them over again. This time, of course, she had a one in twelve chance of guessing the watch. She wrote: "A white translucent glimmering, or shimmering which I knew was not light but rather glass. It was like heat waves radiating in little round pools from a center. . . . Then in the center I saw a vivid black mark. . . . So it was bound to be the watch, and it was."

And here is a fountain. You see that it appears to be in a tub, and is so drawn by Craig. But you note that the "shine" has been got. "These shine!" (figs. 53, 53a):

Fig. 53, Fig. 53a

[p. 110]

Another instance, even more vivid. I made a poor attempt to draw a bass tuba, as one sees them on the stage--a lot of jazz musicians dressed up in white duck, and a row of big brass and nickel horns, polished to blind your eyes. See what Craig drew, and also what she wrote (figs. 54, 54a):

Fig. 54, Fig 54a
Fig. 54, Fig 54a

The comments, continued on the other side of the sheet, are: "Dull gold ring shimmers and stands out with shadow behind it and in center of it. Gleams and moves. Metal. There is a glow of gold light, and the ring or circle is out in the air, suspended, and moves in blur of gold."

You see, she gets the feeling, the emotional content. I draw a child's express-wagon, and she writes: "Children again playing but can't get exactly how they look. Just feel there are children." Or take this one, which she describes as "Egyptian." I don't know if my pillar is real

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Egyptian, but it seems so to me, and evidently to my wife, for you note all the artistry it inspired (figs. 55, 55a):

Fig. 55, Fig. 55a

Sometimes Craig will embody the feeling in some new form of her own invention; as for example, when I draw an old-fashioned cannon on wheels, and she writes: "Black Napoleon hat and red military coat." I draw a running fox --well drawn, because I copy it from a picture; she rises to the occasion with two crossed guns, and a hunting horn with a lot of musical notes coming out of it (figs. 56, 56a):

Fig. 56, Fig. 56a

I draw an auto, and she replies with the hub and spokes of a wheel. Not satisfied with this,

[p. 112]

she sets it aside, and tries again a little later--without looking at the original drawing--and this time she produces a horn, with indication of a noise. I give both her drawings, which are on two sides of the same slip of paper (figs. 57a, 57b):

Fig. 57a, Fig. 57b

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

XIV

AN extraordinary incident occurred in connection with the fourth series of drawings. While my secretary, E. M. Hart, was making the drawings, there came into the office his brother-in-law, R. H. Craig, Jr., a teller of the Security First National Bank of Long Beach, a person entirely unknown to my wife. He heard what was going on, and said, "I'll give her some that'll stump her." He took a pen and drew two pictures, which were duly wrapped in sheets of green paper and sealed in envelopes, and put with the rest of the series. I was not at the office, and nothing was said to me about Mr. Craig having taken part in the matter.

My wife did this series under my eyes; and when she came to the first of Mr. Craig's two drawings, she wrote, "Some sort of grinning monster," and added an elaborate description. Then she opened the envelope, and found a roller skate with a foot and leg attached. This, naturally, was called a failure; but seven drawings

[p. 114]

later in the same series came Mr. Craig's other drawing, which was as follows (fig. 58):

Fig. 58

Now read the amazing description which my wife had written, seven drawings back, when the first of Mr. Craig's drawings had come under her hand:

"Some sort of grinning monster--see only the face and a vague idea of deformed neck and shoulders. It is a man, but it looks like a cat's face, cat eyes and whiskers. Don't know just how I know it is a man--it is a deformity. Not a cat. See color of skin which is deep, flat pink, as of a colored picture. The face of the creature is broad and weird. The flesh of neck, or somewhere, gives effect of rolls or creases."

I asked my secretary what this drawing was meant to be, and he said "a Happy Hooligan."

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] My cultural backwardness is such that I wasn't sure just what a "Happy Hooligan" might be, but my secretary told me it is a comic supplement figure, and I then looked it up in the paper, and found that the face of the figure as printed is a very pale pink, and the little cap on top is a bright red. I called Mr. Craig on the phone and asked him this question: "If you were to think of a color in connection with a 'Happy Hooligan,' what color would it be?" He answered, "Red."

Now I ask you, what chance do you think there is of a person's writing a description such as the above by guess work? To be sure, my wife had eight guesses; but do you think that eight million guesses would suffice? And if we call it telepathy, do we say that my wife's mind has the power to dip into the mind of a young man whom she has never seen, nor even heard of? Or shall we say that his mind affected his brother-in-law's, the brother-in-law's affected mine, and mine affected my wife's? Or, if we decide to call it clairvoyance, or psychometry, then are we going to say there is some kind of vibration or emanation from Mr. Craig's drawing, so powerful that when one of his drawings is handed to my wife, she gets what is in another

[p. 116]

drawing which has been done at the same time?

Whatever may be the explanation, here is the fact: Again and again we find Craig getting, not the drawing she is holding under her hand, but the next one, which she has not yet touched. When she picks up the first drawing, she will say, or write: "There is a little man in this series"; or: "There is a snow scene with sled"; or: "An elephant, also a rooster." I am going to show you these particular cases; but first a word as to how I have counted such "anticipations."

Manifestly, if I grant the right to more than one guess, I am increasing the chances of guesswork, and correspondingly reducing the significance of the totals. What I have done is this: where such cases have occurred, I have called them total failures, except in a few cases, where the description was so detailed and exact as to be overwhelming--as in the case of this "Happy Hooligan." Even so, I have not called it a complete success, only a partial success. In order to be classified as a complete success, my wife's drawing must have been made for the particular drawing of mine which she had in her hand at that time; and throughout this account, the reader is to understand that every

[p. 117]

drawing presented was made in connection with the particular drawing printed alongside it--except in cases where I expressly state otherwise.

Now for a few of the "anticipations." In the course of series six, drawn by me on Feb. 8, 1929, drawing number two was a daisy, and Craig got the elements of it, as you see (figs. 59. 59a):

Fig. 59, Fig. 59a

Her mind then went ahead, and she wrote, "May be snow scene on hill and sled." The next drawing was an axe, which I give later (fig. 145); she got the elements of this very well, and then added, on the back: "I get a feeling again of a snow scene to come in this series--a sled in the snow." That was number three; and when number five came Craig made this annotation: "Opened it by mistake, without concentrating.

[p. 118]

[paragraph continues] It's my expected sled and snow scene." Here is the drawing (fig. 60):

Fig. 60

Series number eight, on Feb. 10, brought even stranger results. This is the series in which the laced-up football was turned into a calf wearing a belly-band (figs. 15, 15a). But even while I was engaged in making the drawings, sitting in my study apart, and with the door closed, Craig's busy magic, whatever it is, was bringing her messages. She called out: "I see a rooster!" I had actually drawn a rooster; but of course I made no reply to her words. She at once drew a rooster and several other things, and after I had brought my drawings into the room, but before she had started co work with them, she wrote as follows:

"While Upton was making these drawings I sat before the fire thinking how to dry felt slippers which I had washed. I had my mind on them. Hung them on grating to see if they would hang there without burning. Suddenly saw rooster crowing. Then thought, 'Can U be drawing rooster?' Decided to make note of this.

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] Did so. Then saw"--and she draws a circle with eight radiating lines, like spokes of a wheel.

In due course came drawing number eight, and before looking at it, Craig wrote: "Rooster." Then she added, "But no--it looks like a picture of coffee-pot--see spout and handle." This is hard on me as an artist, but I give the drawing and let you judge for yourself (fig. 61):

Fig. 61

What about the circle and the radiating spokes? That was, apparently, a fore-glimpse of drawing number five. I give you that, together with what Craig drew for that particular test when it came. Her effort suggests the kind of humor with which the newspaper artists used to delight my childhood; a series of drawings in which one thing turns into some other and quite unexpected thing by gradual changes. You will

[p. 120]

see here how the hub of a wagon-wheel may turn into the muzzle of a deer! (figs. 62, 62a):

Fig. 62, Fig. 62a

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

  

XV

WHAT are the principles upon which I have classified the drawings, as between successes, partial successes, and failures? I will use this series, number eight, to illustrate. There are eight drawings, and I have set them down as one success, six partial successes, one failure. The success is the rooster (fig. 61), called "a rooster," even though it "looks like a coffee pot." The partial successes are, first, an electric light bulb, very crudely imitated as to shape in three drawings. Perhaps this was hardly good enough to be counted; it was a border-line case, and probably the poorest that I admitted to the classification of "partial successes" (fig. 63a).

Second, the ascending sky-rocket, already printed as fig. 38, giving rise to six different drawings of whirligigs and light. Third, the following drawing, for which Craig wrote: "See spider, or some sort of legged pest. If this is

[p. 122]

Fig. 63a

not a spider, there is a spider in the lot somewhere! This I know!" (fig. 64):

Fig. 64'

The fourth partial success was a drawn bow, with arrow fitted, ready to be launched. Craig

[p. 123]

wrote as follows: "Picked this up and saw inside as it dropped on floor--so did not try it. Suddenly recall I have already 'seen' it earlier." Before starting the tests, along with her written mention of "a rooster," she had drawn a bow and crude arrow, and the resemblance is so exact that it seems to me entitled to be called a partial success (figs. 65, 65a):

Fig. 65, Fig. 65a

Fifth, the wagon hub (fig. 60), which became the deer's muzzle. And finally the laced-up football (fig. 15) which became a belly-band on a calf (fig. 15a).

As for the failure in this series, it is a cake of soap, which was called "whirls." There are a couple of other drawings in the series, marked: "Too tired to see it," and "Tired now and excited and keep seeing old things"--meaning, of course, the preceding drawings.

[p. 124]

I tried to avoid drawing the same object more than once, but now and then I slipped up. In series eleven I drew another rooster, and there followed, not one "anticipation," but several. Drawing number one was a tooth; Craig wrote: "First see rooster. Then elephant." Drawing number two was an elephant; and Craig wrote: "Elephant came again. I try to suppress it, and see lines, and a spike sticking some way into something." She drew it, and it seems clear that the "spike" is the elephant's tusk, and the head of the "spike" is the elephant's eye (figs. 66, 66a):

Fig. 66, Fig. 66a

Next, number three, was the rooster. But Craig had set "rooster" down in her mind as a blunder, so now she wrote: "I don't know what, see a bunch, or tuft clearly. Also a crooked arm

[p. 125]

on a body. But don't feel that I'm right." Here are the drawings, and you can see that she was somewhat right (figs. 67, 67a):

Fig. 67, Fig. 67a

This series eleven, containing fourteen drawings, is marked: "Did this lot rapidly, without holding (mind) blank. The chicken and elephant came at once, on a very earnest request to my mind to 'come across.'" I have classified in this series two successes, five partial, and five failures: throwing out numbers twelve and fourteen, because Craig wrote: "Nothing except all the preceding ones come--too many at once--all past ones crowding in memory"; and again, "Nothing but everything in the preceding. Too many of them in my mind."

The anticipations run all through this series in a quite fascinating way. Thus, for number

[p. 126]

four Craig wrote: "Flower. This is a very vivid one. Green spine--leaves like century plant." She drew figure 68a:

Fig. 68a

And then again, for drawing number seven, she did more flowers, with this comment: "This is a real flower, I've seen it before. It's vivid and returns. Century plant? Now it turns into candle stick. See a candle" (fig. 69a).

All this was wrong--so far. Number four was a table, and number seven was the rear half of a cow. But now we come to number eleven, the plant known as a "cat-tail," which seems to resemble rather surprisingly the lower of the two

[p. 127]

Fig. 69a

drawings in figure 69a. My drawing is given as figure 70, and the one Craig made for it is given as 70a.

Fig. 70, Fig. 70a

Comment on the above read: "Very pointed. Am not able to see what. Dog's head?"

Drawing five was a large fish-hook; and this inspired the experimenter to a discourse, as follows:

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] "Dog wagging--see tail in air busy wagging--jolly doggie--tail curled in air." And then: "Now I see a cow. I fear the elephant and chicken got me too sure of animals. But I see these."

Now, a big fish-hook looks not unlike a "tail curled in air." But when we come to number seven, we discover what Craig was apparently anticipating. It is the drawing of what I have referred to as "the rear half of a cow." It is badly done, with a cow's hoof, but I forgot what a cow's tail is like, and this tail that I drew would fit much better on a "jolly doggy," you must admit (fig. 71):

Fig. 71

Drawing number six was a sun, as children draw it, a circle with rays going out all round. Craig wrote: "Setting sun and bird in sky. Big

[p. 129]

bird on wing--seagull or wild goose." This I called a partial success. Number nine was the muzzle end of an old-style cannon, already reported in figs. 46, 46a.

I conclude the study of this particular series with drawing thirteen, to which was added the comment: "Think of a saucer, then of a cup. It's something in the kitchen. Too tired to see" (figs. 72, 72a):

Fig. 72, Fig. 72a

In series fourteen, drawing three, Craig wrote: "Man running, can't draw it." She drew as follows (fig. 73a):

Fig. 73a

[p. 130]

Next came my drawing four, as follows (fig. 73):

Fig. 73

In series thirty-five I first drew a fire hydrant, and Craig wrote, "Peafowl," and added the following drawing, which certainly constitutes a partial success (figs. 74, 74a):

Fig. 74, Fig. 74a

My next drawing was the peafowl, as you see. For this Craig wrote: "Peafowl again," and apparently

[p. 131]

tried to draw the peafowl's neck, and a lot of those spots which I had forgotten are an appurtenance of peafowls (figs. 75, 75a):

Fig. 75, Fig. 75a

In series twenty-nine I drew an elevated railway. If you turn it upside down, as I have done here, it looks like water and smoke-stacks. Anyhow, Craig drew a steamboat (figs. 76, 76a):

Fig. 76, Fig. 76a

[p. 132]

And then came my next drawing--a steamboat! Craig wrote: "Smoke again," and drew the smoke and the stack (figs. 77, 77):

Fig. 77, Fig. 77a

She added two more drawings, which appear to be the wheel of the boat in the water, and the smoke (figs. 77b, 77c):

Fig. 77b, Fig. 77c

[p. 133]

In series thirty I drew a fish-hook with line, and you see it turned into a flower (figs. 78, 78a);

Fig. 78, Fig. 78a

Then came an obelisk, and Craig got it, but with novel effects, thus (figs. 79, 79a):

Fig. 79, Fig. 79a

Now why should an obelisk go on a jag, and have little circles at its base? The answer appears to be: it inherited the curves from the previous fish-hook, and the little circles from the next drawing. You will see that, having used

[p. 134]

up her supply of little circles, Craig did not get the next drawing so well (figs. 80, 80a):

Fig. 80 Fig. 80a

In series twenty-two I first drew a bed, and Craig made two attempts to draw a potted plant. My second drawing was a maltese cross, and Craig turned it into a basket (figs. 81, 81a):

Fig. 81 Fig. 81a

But she could not give up her plant. She added: "There is a flower basket in this lot, or potted plant." The next drawing was a fleur-de-lys,

[p. 135]

which looks not unlike a potted plant or hanging basket (fig. 82):

Fig. 82

In drawing four she got the elements of a door-knob pretty well, and added: "See head of bird, too--eagle beak." Drawing seven was a crane, with beak open.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

XVI

I COULD go through all thirty-five of the series, listing such "anticipations" as this: but I have given enough to show how the thing goes. Such occurrences make it hard for Craig because, when she has once drawn a certain object, she naturally resists the impulse to draw it again, thinking it is nothing but a memory. Thus, in series thirteen, my first drawing was a savage woman carrying a bundle on her head, and Craig drew the profile of a head with a long nose. My next drawing was the profile of a head, with a very conspicuous nose, and Craig wrote: "Face again, but (I) inhibit this. Then come two hands, and below"--and she draws what might be a cross section of a skull, side view.

Yet sometimes she overcomes this handicap triumphantly. Series twelve is marked: "Hastily done," and she adds the general comment: "Several times saw bristles on things of different shapes, some flowers, some bristled brushes. Saw flower, also more than once"--and then she

[p. 137]

appends a drawing of a four-leaf clover. As it happened, this series contained a three-leaf clover, and it contained another flower, and also a cactus-plant--more of one kind of thing than it was fair to put into one set of drawings. Nevertheless, Craig scored one of her successes with the cactus, setting it down as "fuzzy flower" (figs. 83, 83a):

Fig. 83, Fig. 83a

Nor was she afraid to repeat herself when she came to another "fuzzy flower" in this series (figs. 84, 84a):

Fig. 84, Fig. 84a

[p. 138]

Frequently she will make a good drawing of an object, but name it badly. In that same series twelve I drew a hoe, and she got the shape of it, but wrote: "May be scissors, may be spectacles with long stem ears" (figs. 85, 85a):

Fig. 85, Fig. 85a

Also in the same series these reindeer horns, which she calls "holly leaves." It is psychologically interesting to note that reindeer and holly trees were both associated with Christmas in Craig's childhood (figs. 86, 86a):

Fig. 86, Fig. 86a

And in series eighteen, this fat baby bird of mine is hardly recognizable when called "flounder" (figs. 87, 87a):

[p. 139]

Fig. 87, Fig. 87a

This very dim stalk of celery, drawn by me, I must admit looks more like a fish-fork (figs. 88, 88a):

Fig. 88, Fig. 88a

Craig's verbal description of the above reads: "Stone set in platinum; may be diamond, as points seem to be white light--at least it shines, not red shine of fire but white shine." How does a stalk of celery, which looks like a fish-fork, come to have a diamond set in it? You may understand the reason when you hear that three drawings later in the same series is a diamond

[p. 140]

set in a stick. Just why it occurred to me to set a diamond thus I cannot now recall, but the drawing is plain, and it led to a bit of fun. I had been to lunch with Charlie Chaplin that day, and had come home and told my wife about it; so here my sparkling diamond undergoes a transfiguration! "Chaplin," writes my wife, and adds: "I don't see why he has on a halo" (figs. 89, 89):

Fig. 89, Fig. 89a

From the point of view of bad guessing, the most conspicuous series is number twenty. In this I have recorded four successes, seven partial, and one failure; yet there is hardly an object that is correctly named. Here are the three which I call successes; there may be dispute about any one of them, but it seems to me the essential elements have been got. You may be surprised at a necktie which "began to smoke" --but not when you see that the next drawing is

[p. 141]

a burning match! (Figs. 90, 90a; 91, 91a; 92, 92a):

Fig. 90, Fig. 90a

Fig. 91, Fig. 91a

Fig. 92, Fig. 92a

As for the partial successes, I give six of them by way of samples. For the first, Craig's comment was: "The body is vague, but see there is

[p. 142]

a body." You will agree that my mountain landscape looks oddly like a body (figs. 93, 93a):

Fig. 93, Fig. 93a

And the pedals of this harp make a charming pair of lady's feet (figs, 94, 94a):

Fig. 94, Fig. 94a

[p. 143]

This balloon is described in my wife's comment as: "Shines in sunlight, must be metal, a scythe hanging among vines or strings."

Fig. 95, Fig. 95a

This, which is called "front foot and leg of dog, though I don't see the dog," is really drawn more like the spigot of my drawing (figs. 96, 96a):

Fig. 96, Fig. 96a

A butterfly's wings are "got" remarkably well (figs. 97, 97a). And the trade-marks on my little box are called "tiny stars. or sparks" (figs. 98, 98a):

[p. 144]

Fig. 97, Fig. 97a

Fig. 98, Fig. 98a

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

  

XVII

I HAVE referred to the fact that my wife's drawings sometimes contain things which are not in mine, but which were in my mind while I was making them, or while she was "concentrating." One of the most curious of such cases came in series twenty-eight, which was after we had given up, as too great a nuisance, all precautions in the way of sealing the drawings in envelopes. I made eight drawings, and laid them face down on my wife's table, and then went out and took a walk while she did them. So, of course, it was easy for her to do what she pleased--and maybe she "peeked," the skeptic will say. But as it happens, she didn't get a single one right! Instead of reproducing my drawings, what she did was to reproduce my thoughts while I was walking up and down on the ocean front. It seems to me that in so doing, she provided a perfect answer to those who may attribute these results to any form of deception, whether conscious or unconscious.

There was a moon behind a bank of dark

[p. 146]

clouds, and it produced an unusual effect--a well-defined white cross in the sky. I watched it for nearly half an hour, and my continued thought was: "If this were an age of superstition, that would be a portent, and we should hear about it in history." It was so strange that I finally went home and called my wife out onto the street. I did not tell her why. I wanted to see her surprise, so I purposely gave no hint. I said: "Come out! Please come!" Finally she came, and her comment was: "I just drew that!" We went back into the house, and she handed me a drawing. I give it alongside my drawing of an Indian club, which Craig had held while doing hers. You may see exactly how much of her impulse came from that source (figs. 99, 99a):

Fig. 99, Fig. 99a

The "comment" reads: "Light 'fingers'--moonlight." Also: "black shadow."

Let me add also that in the eight drawings I handed to Craig there was neither moon, cloud,

[p. 147]

cross, nor light. Two of these eight my wife failed to mark, and so I cannot identify them as belonging to this series; but we examined all eight at the time, and made sure of this point. Those which I now have are a flag, a bearded man, a chiffonier, a cannon, a dirt-scraper, and the Indian club, given above.

You will ask, perhaps, did Craig look out of the window. As it happened, this sky effect was invisible from any window, and I have her word that she had not moved from her couch. I should add that she is nervous, and keeps the curtains tightly drawn at night, and never goes out at night unless it is to be driven somewhere. It was early in March, with a cold wind off the sea, and I had to labor to persuade her to put a wrap over her dressing gown and step out into the middle of the street to look up at the sky.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

  

XVIII

THE casual reader may be bored by too many of these drawings, but they are easy to skip, or to take in at a glance, and there may be students who will want to examine them carefully. So I will add a selection of the significant drawings, with only brief remarks. I begin with what I have called partial successes, and then add a few more of those I have called "complete."

Let us return to the early drawings, made by my secretary. On the automobile ride to Pasadena, there was an ash-can (fig. 100):

Fig. 100

For the above my wife wrote: "I see a chain dangling from something--resembling little chimney pot on top of house."

And here is design for which the comment

[p. 149]

was: "These somehow belong together but won't get together" (figs. 101, 101a):

Fig. 101, Fig. 101a

Here is a fan, with comment: "Inside seems irregular, as if cloth draped or crumpled" (figs. 102, 102a):

Fig. 102, Fig. 102a

Here is a one-half success (figs. 103, 103a):

Fig. 103, Fig. 103a

Here is a broom, drawn by my secretary (fig. 104),

[p. 150]

and several efforts to reproduce it (figs. 104a, 104b):

Fig. 104, Fig. 104a, Fig. 104b

The comments accompanying these drawings read: "All I'm sure of is a straight line with something curved at end of it; once it came" (here is drawing of the flower). "Then it doubled, or reappeared, I don't know which. (Am not sure of curly edges.) Then it was upside down."

The next drawing was a heart, and my wife got the upper half with what are apparently blood-drops added (figs. 105, 105a):

Fig. 105, Fig. 105a

[p. 151]

The above is interesting, as suggesting that whatever agency furnished the information knew more than it was telling. For if Craig's drawing, a pair of curves, constituted a crude letter N, or had no significance, why add the blood-drops, which were not in the original? On the other hand, if her subconscious mind knew it was a heart, why not give her the whole heart, and let her draw it?

So much for the drawings of my secretary; and now for my own early drawings. When I was a school boy, we used to represent human figures in this way; and, as you see, Craig got the essentials (figs. 106, 106a):

Fig. 106, Fig. 106a

Several weeks later, I drew a pair of such figures in action and the comment was: "It's a whirligig of some sort" (figs. 107, 107a).

After the following drawing, Craig asked me not to do any more hands, for the reason that she "got" this, but thought it was my own hand

[p. 152]

Fig. 107, Fig. 107a

doing the drawing. She guessed something else, and wrote: "Turned into pig's head, then rabbit's" (figs. 108, 108a):

Fig. 108, Fig. 108a

Next, this bat, with very striking comment.

Fig. 109, Fig. 109a

[p. 153]

[paragraph continues] "Looks like ear-shaped something," and again: "Looks like calla lily" (figs. 109, 109a):

A butterfly net (fig. 110, 110a).

Fig. 110, Fig. 110a

A key (figs. 111, 111a):

Fig. 111, Fig. 111a

This highly humorous sunrise (figs. 112, 112a):

Fig. 112, Fig. 112a

A carnation which came after the preceding drawing, and apparently had been anticipated in the "sunrise" (figs. 113, 113a).

Note that this camp-stool, as I drew it, really

[p. 154]

Fig. 113, Fig. 113a

does appear to be standing on water (figs. 114, 114a):

Fig. 114, Fig. 114a

For this little waiter, who follows, no drawing was made by my wife. Her written comment was: "I see at once the profile of human

Fig. 115

[p. 155]

face. Am interrupted by radio tune. Something makes me think of a cow. Now see two things sticking out like horns" (figs. 115).

The following had no comment (figs. 116, 116a):

Fig. 116, Fig. 116a

Nor the next one (figs. 117, 117a):

Fig. 117, Fig. 117a

The comment on this caterpillar was: "Fork --then garden tool--lawn rake. Leaf." I might add that we have a lawn-rake made of bristly bamboo, which looks very much like my drawing (figs. 118, 118a):

Fig. 118, Fig. 118a

In the following case I drew sixteen stars,

[p. 156]

and you may count and see that Craig got twelve of them, and made up the difference with a moon! (figs. 119, 119a):

Fig. 119, Fig. 119a

Comment on the following: "Looks like a monkey wrench, but it may be a yardstick" (figs. 120, 120a):

Fig. 120, Fig. 120a

In the next one, the curve of the worm is amusingly reproduced by the bird's neck. The comment added: "But it may be a snake." Craig says this is an example of how one part of the drawing comes to her, and then, in haste, her memory-trains and associations supply what they think should be the rest (figs. 121, 121a).

The umbrella brings up Craig's reptile "complex" again. I assure you that in her garden, she turns sticks into snakes when they are far

[p. 157]

Fig. 121, Fig. 121a

less snake-like than my drawing. Her comment was: "I feel that it is a snake crawling out of something--vivid feeling of snake, but it looks like a cat's tail" (figs. 122, 122a):

Fig. 122, Fig. 122a

I drew a wall-hook to hang your coat on (figs. 123, 123a):

Fig. 123, Fig. 123a

[p. 158]

A design, evidently felt as a design, though not well got (figs. 124, 124a):

Fig. 124, Fig. 124a

A screw, with comment: "light-house or tower. Too fat at base." If Craig's drawing were made narrower at base, it would reproduce the screw very well. Note that in the right-hand "tower" the screw-like effect of the "set backs" is kept (figs. 125, 125a):

Fig. 125, Fig. 125a
Fig. 125, Fig. 125a

Here is a love story which seems to go wrong, the hearts being turned to opposition (figs. 126, 126a):

Fig. 126, Fig. 126a

[p. 159]

Here is the flag, made simpler--"e pluribus unum!" (figs. 127, 127a):

Fig. 127, Fig. 127a

Here is a cow, as seen by the cubists. Comment: "Something sending out long lines from it" (figs. 128, 128a):

Fig. 128, Fig. 128a

Telegraph wires, apparently seen as waves in the ether (figs. 129, 129a):

Fig. 129, Fig. 129a

[p. 160]

Comment on the following: "Horns. Can't see what they are attached to" (figs. 130, 130a):

Fig. 130, Fig. 130a

And here is a parrot turned into a leaf, with comment. "See veins and stem with sharp vivid bend in it"--which seems to indicate a sense of the parrot's beak (figs. 131, 131a):

Fig. 131, Fig. 131a

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

XIX

THE border-line between successes and failures is not easy to determine. Bear in mind that we are not conducting a drawing class, nor making tests of my wife's eyesight: we are trying to ascertain whether there does pass from my mind to hers, or from my drawing to her mind, a recognizable impulse of some sort. So, if she gets the essential feature of the drawing, we are entitled to call it evidence of telepathy. I think the fan with "crumpled cloth" (fig. 102), and the umbrella handle that may be a "snake crawling out of something," but that "looks like a cat's tail" (fig. 122), and the screw that was called a "tower" (fig. 125)--all these are really successes. I will append a number of examples, about which there seems to me no room for dispute, and which I have called successes. The first is a sample of architecture (figs. 132, 132a):

Fig. 132, Fig. 132a

[p. 162]

And here is an hour-glass, with sand running through it. Not merely did Craig write "white sand," but she made the tree the same shape as the glass. I have turned the hour-glass upside down so that you can get the effect better. It should be obvious that "upside-downness" has nothing to do with these tests, as Craig is as apt to be holding a drawing one way as another (figs. 133, 133a):

Fig. 133, Fig. 133a

And these three circles, with comment: "Feel sure it is," written above the drawing (figs. 134, 134a):

Fig. 134, Fig. 134a

As to the next comment, "Trumpet flower," let me explain that we have them in our garden,

[p. 163]

whereas we do not have any musical trumpets or horns (figs. 135, 135a):

Fig. 135, Fig. 135a

This strange object from my pencil tried to be a conch-shell, but got a bad start, and was left unclassified. Craig made it "life bouy in water," which is good, except for the spelling. She insists upon my pointing out that shells also belong in water (figs. 136, 136a):

Fig. 136, Fig. 136a

[p. 164]

This one, described in good country fashion, "Muley cow with tongue hanging out" (fig. 137):

Fig. 137

This next one was described by the written word: "Goat" (fig. 138):

Fig. 138

And this one is so striking that I give the words in facsimile (figs. 139, 139a):

[p. 165]

Fig. 139, Fig. 139a

For the following, my wife described a wrong thing, and then added: "Now a sudden new thing, cone-shaped or goblet-like. This feels like it" (figs. 140, 140a):

Fig. 140, Fig. 140a

This was correctly named: "2 legs of something running" (figs. 141, 141a):

Fig. 141, Fig. 141a

This Alpine hat with feather seems to me no

[p. 166]

less a success because it is called "Chafing dish" (figs. 142, 142a):

Fig. 142, Fig. 142a

Nor this wind-mill because the sails are left off (figs. 143, 143a):

Fig. 143, Fig. 143a

These concentric circles are called "Horn (very curled), or shell" (figs. 144, 144a):

Fig. 144, Fig. 144a

[p. 167]

And here is a curious one, which came early in the tests. I call attention to the comment about the handle, which ran off the sheet of paper without any ending, just as she says. "Letter A with something long above it. Key or a sword, there seems to be no end to the handle. Think it's a key" (figs. 145, 145a):

Fig. 145, Fig. 145a

[p. 168]

And finally, this still more astonishing one, to serve as a climax. Let me explain that I am not so good an artist as this; I copied my drawing from some magazine (figs. 146, 146a):

Fig. 146, Fig. 146a

You note that my wife "got," not merely the whole top of the drawing, but some impression of the arms, which are crossed in a peculiar way. I ask her about this case--the drawing having been made less than a month ago--and I find that she remembers it well. She saw what she thought was a turban wound about the head, and got the impression of color. She wrote the words "not hair" to make this clear. The rest of the comment written at the time was: "See back of head, ear, and swirling scarf tied around head."

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 169]

  

XX

I HAVE now given nearly all the 65 drawings which I call "successes," and about half the 155 which I call "partial successes." This, I think, is enough for any purpose. No one can seriously claim that such a set of coincidences could happen by chance, and so it becomes necessary to investigate other possible explanations.

First, a hoax. As covering that point, I prepared a set of affidavits as to the good faith of myself, my wife, her sister, and her sister's husband. These affidavits were all duly signed and witnessed; but friends, reading the manuscript, think they use up space to no purpose, and that the reader will ask no more than the statement that this book is a serious one, and that the manuscript was carefully read by all four of the persons mentioned above, and approved by them as representing the exact truth.

That a group of persons should enter into a conspiracy to perpetrate a hoax is conceivable. Whether or not it is conceivable of the group here quoted is something of which the reader is

[p. 170]

the judge. But this much is clear: any reader who, having read the above, still suspects us, will not be convinced by further protestations.

How about the possibility of fraud by one person? No one who knows Mary Craig Sinclair would suspect her; but you who do not know her have, naturally, the right to consider such an hypothesis. Can she be one of those women who enjoy being talked about? The broaching of this idea causes her to take the pencil away from her husband, and you now hear her own authentic voice, as follows:

"I happen to be a daughter of that once very living thing, 'the Old South,' and there are certain ideals which are in my blood. The avoidance of publicity is one of them. But even if I had ever had a desire for publicity, it would have been killed by my actual experiences as the wife of a social crusader. My home is besieged by an endless train of persons of every description, who travel over the place, knocking on doors and windows, and insisting upon having a hearing for their various programs for changing the nature of the universe. I have been driven to putting up barriers and fences around my garden, and threatening to flee to the Himalayas, and become a Yogic mistress, or whatever a Yogic 'master' of my sex is called.

[p. 171]

"Jack London tried to solve this problem by putting a sign on the front door which read, 'Go to the back door,' and on the back door one which read, 'Go to the front door.' But when I tried this, one seeker of inspiration took his seat halfway between the two doors, and declared that he would remain there the rest of his life, or until his wishes were acceded to. Another hid himself in the swimming-pool, and rose up from its depths to confront me in the dusk, when, as it happened, I was alone on the place, and went out into the garden for a breath of air. A third announced that he had a million dollars to present to my husband in person, and would not be persuaded to depart until my brother invited him to go downtown to supper, and so got him into a car. Having faithfully fed the hungry millionaire, my brother drove him to the police-station, where, after a serious talking-to by the chief, he consented to carry his million dollars away. A fourth introduced himself by mail as having just been released from the psychopathic ward in Los Angeles, and intending to call upon us, for reasons not stated. A fifth announced himself by telephone, as intending to come at once and shoot my husband on sight. Yet another, seven feet tall and broad in proportion,

[p. 172]

announced that he had a revelation direct from God, and had come to have the manuscript revised. When politely asked as to its nature, he rose up, towering over my none too husky spouse and declaring that no human eye had ever beheld it, and no human eye would ever be permitted to behold it. Such experiences, as a continuing part of a woman's life, do not lead her to seek publicity; they tend rather to develop a persecution complex.

"Speaking seriously, I consider that I have every evidence of the effect of people's thoughts on each other. And my distrust of human nature, in its present stage of evolution, is so great, that the idea of having many persons concentrate their attention on me is an idea from which I shrink. I agree with Richet that the fact of telepathy is one of the most terrifying in existence; and nothing but a deep love of truth has induced me to let this very personal story be told in print."

Next, what about the possibility of unconscious fraud? This also is a question to be frankly met. All students of psychology know that the subconscious mind has dubious morals. One has only to watch his own dreams to discover this. A person in a trance is similar to one

[p. 173]

talking or walking in sleep, or a drunken man, or one under the influence of a drug. But in this case it must be noted that my wife has never been in a trance. In these mind-reading tests, no matter how intense the "concentration," there is always a part of her mind which knows what she is doing. If you speak to her, she is immediately "all there." When she has her mental pictures, she sits up and makes her drawing, and compares it with mine, and this is a completely conscious act.

Moreover, I point out that a great deal of the most impressive evidence does not depend upon Craig alone. The five drawings with her brother-in-law, figures 1, 16, 17, 18, 19, constitute by themselves evidence of telepathy sufficient to convince any mind which is open to conviction. While it would have been possible for Craig and Bob to hoax Dollie and me, it could certainly not have been done without Bob's connivance. If you suggest that my wife and my brother-in-law may have been fooling me, I reply that there is a still greater mass of evidence which could not have been a hoax without my connivance. When I go into my study alone--a little sun-parlor at the front of a beach-house, with nothing but a couch, a chair and a table--I certainly

[p. 174]

know that I am alone; and when I make a drawing and hold it before my eyes for five or ten minutes, I certainly know whether any other  is seeing it. This covers the drawings presented as figures 2, 20, and 21, with four others told about in the same series. It seems to me these seven cases by themselves are evidence of telepathy sufficient to convince any open mind.

Furthermore, there are the several score drawings which I made in my study and sealed up in envelopes, taking them to my wife and watching her lay them one by one upon her body and write down more or less accurately what was in them. I certainly know whether I was alone when I made the drawings, and whether I made the contents of the envelopes invisible, and whether my wife had any opportunity to open the envelopes before she made her drawings. Of course, I understand the familiar conjuring trick whereby you open one envelope, and hide it in your palm, and pretend to be describing the next one while really describing the one you have seen. But I would stake my life upon the certainty that my wife knows no sleight-of-hand, and anyhow, I made certain that she did not open the first one; I sat and watched her, and after each test she handed me the envelopes and

[p. 175]

drawings, one by one--the envelopes having previously been numbered by me. She would turn out the reading-light which was immediately over her head, but there was plenty of light from other parts of the room, enough so that I could look at drawings as they were shown to me. Often these tests were done in the daytime, and then all we did was to pull down the window-shades back of the couch.

It should be obvious that I stand to lose much more than I stand to gain by publishing a book of this sort. Many have urged me not to take the risk. It is the part of prudence not to believe too many new and strange ideas. Some of my Socialist and materialist friends are going to say --without troubling to read what I have written: "Sinclair has gone in for occultism; he is turning into a mystic in his old age." It is true that I am fifty-one, but I think my mind is not entirely gone; and if what I publish here is mysticism, then I do not know how there can be such a thing as science about the human mind.

We have made repeated tests to see what happens; we have written down our observations as we go along; we have presented the evidence carefully and conscientiously, without theories; and what any scientist can do, or ask to have

[p. 176]

done, more than this, I cannot imagine. Those who throw out these results will not be scientists, but merely another set of dogmatists--of whom new crops are continually springing up, wearing new disguises and new labels. The plain truth is that in science, as in politics and religion, it is a lot easier to believe what you have been taught, than to set out for yourself and ascertain what happens.

Of course the thing would be more convincing if it were done in the presence of strangers. That brings up a question which is bound to be asked, so I will save time by answering it here. The first essential to success in these tests is a state of mind; and at present my wife is a sensitive woman, at the stage of life described as "glandular imbalance." She has never tried these experiments in the presence of a stranger, and has no idea whether she could get the necessary concentration. She learned from her experiments with her sick brother-in-law that the agent can send you pain and fear, as well as chairs and table-forks, and she would certainly not enter lightly into a condition of rapport with those whom she did not know and trust.

She insists that the way for you to be really certain is to follow her example. If you sat and

[p. 177]

watched her do it, you might go away with doubts, as she did after her experiments with Jan. But when you have done it yourself, then you know. One reason the thing has not been proven to the public is that people depend on professional mediums, many of whom are deliberate and conscious cheats. Others are vain and temperamental, difficult to manage; and research is hindered by their instability. That is why Craig set to work and learned to do it, and she believes that others can do the same, if they have the desire and the patience.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

XXI

THE next thing is to carry out our promise and tell you the technique. My wife has, among her notes, a mass of writing on this subject in the form of instructions to Bob, and others who were interested. I tried to condense it, but found I could not satisfy her, and in the end I realized that her point of view is correct. No one objects to repetition of phrases in a legal document, where the one essential is precision; and the same thing applies to descriptions of these complicated mental processes. This was the most difficult writing task she ever undertook, and the reason lies in its newness, and the complexity of the mind itself.

If you want to learn the art of conscious mind-reading, this will tell you how; and if you don't want to learn it, you can easily skip this section of the book. Here is Craig's statement:

"The first thing you have to do is to learn the trick of undivided attention, or concentration. By these terms I mean something quite different from what is ordinarily meant. One

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] 'concentrates' on writing a chapter in a book, or on solving a problem in mathematics; but this is a complicated process of dividing one's attention, giving it to one detail after another, judging, balancing, making decisions. The kind of concentration I mean is putting the attention on one object, or one uncomplicated thought, such as joy, or peace, and holding it there steadily. It isn't thinking; it is inhibiting thought, except for one thought, or one object in thought.

"You have to inhibit the impulse to think things about the object, to examine it, or appraise it, or to allow memory-trains to attach themselves to it. The average person has never heard of such a form of concentration, and so has to learn how to do it. Simultaneously, he must learn to relax, for strangely enough, a part of concentration is complete relaxation.

"There seems to be a contradiction here, in the idea of simultaneous concentration and relaxation. I do not know whether this is due to a contradiction in the nature of the mind itself, or to our misunderstanding of its nature. Perhaps we each have several mental entities, or minds, and one of these can sleep (be blankly unconscious), while another supervises the situation, maintaining the first one's state of unconsciousness

[p. 180]

for a desired period, and then presenting to it some thought or picture agreed on in advance, thus restoring it to consciousness.

"Anyway, it is possible to be unconscious and conscious at the same time! Almost every one has had the experience of knowing, while asleep, that he is having a bad dream and must awaken himself from it. Certainly some conscious entity is watching the dream, and knowing it is a dream; and yet the sleeper is 'unconscious.' Or perhaps there is no such thing as complete relaxation--until death.

"All I can say is this: when I practice this art which I have learned, with my mind concentrated on one simple thing, it is a relaxation as restful, as seemingly 'complete,' as when I am in that state called normal sleep. The attention is not allowed to be on the sensations of the body, or on anything but the one thing it is deliberately 'concentrated' on.

"Undivided concentration, then, means, for purposes of this experiment, a state of complete relaxation, under specified control. To concentrate in this undivided way you first give yourself a 'suggestion' to the effect that you will relax your mind and your body, making the body insensitive and the mind a blank, and yet reserving

[p. 181]

the power to 'break' the concentration in a short time. By making the body insensitive I mean simply to relax completely your mental hold of, or awareness of, all bodily sensation. After giving yourself this suggestion a few times, you proceed to relax both body and mind. Relax all mental interest in everything in the environment; inhibit all thoughts which try to wander into consciousness from the subconsciousness, or from wherever else thoughts come. This is clearly a more thorough affair than 'just relaxing.'

"Also, there is something else to it--the power of supervising the condition. You succeed presently in establishing a blank state of consciousness, yet you have the power to become instantly conscious, also; to realize when you are about to go into a state of sleep, in which you have not the power of instantly returning to consciousness. Also, you control, to a certain degree, what is to be presented to consciousness when you are ready to become conscious. For example, you want a message from the person who is sending you a message; you do not want a train of subconscious 'day dreams.'

"All this is work; and so far, it is a bore. But when you have learned to do it, it is an art worth

[p. 182]

knowing. You can use it, not only for such experiments as telepathy and clairvoyance, but for improving your bodily health. To relax thoroughly several times each day while holding on to a suggestion previously 'planted' in the subconsciousness is more beneficial to health than any other one measure I know.

"The way to relax is to 'let go.' 'Let go' of every tense muscle, every tense spot, in the body. Pain is tension. Pain can be inhibited by suggestion followed by complete relaxation. Drop your body, a dead-weight, from your conscious mind. Make your conscious mind a blank. It is the mind, conscious or subconscious, which holds the body tense. Give to the subconsciousness the suggestion of concentrating on one idea, and then completely relax consciousness. To make the conscious mind a blank it is necessary to 'let go' of the body; just as to 'let go' of the body requires 'letting go' of consciousness of the body. If, after you have practiced 'letting go' of the body, you find that your mind is not a blank, then you have not succeeded in getting your body rid of all tension. Work at it until you can let both mind and body relax completely.

"It may help you to start as follows: Relax the body as completely as possible. Then visualize

[p. 183]

a rose, or a violet--some pleasant, familiar thing which does not arouse emotional memory-trains. Gaze steadily, peacefully, at the chosen object--think only of it--try not to let any memories it may arouse enter your mind. Keep attention steady, just seeing the color, or the shape of the flower and nothing else. Do not think things about the flower. Just look at it. Select one thing about it to concentrate on, such as its shape, or its color, or the two combined in a visual image: 'pink and round.'

"If you find that you are made nervous by this effort, it is apt to be due to the fact that you are thinking things. Maybe the object you have chosen has some buried memories associated with it--something which arouses unconscious memories of past unhappy events Roses may suggest a lost sweetheart, or a vanished garden where you once were happy and to which you long to return. If so, select some other flower to concentrate on. Flowers are usually the most restful, the things which are not so apt to be involved with distressing experiences. A bottle of ink might suggest the strain of mental work, a spoon might suggest medicine, So, find a peace-inspiring object to look at. When

[p. 184]

you have found it, just look at it, with undivided attention.

"If you succeed in doing this, you will find it hard not to drop asleep. But you must distinguish between this and the state you are to maintain. If you drop asleep, the sleep will be what is called auto-hypnotic sleep, and after you have learned to induce it, you will be able to concentrate on an idea, instead of the rose, and to carry this idea into the sleep with you as the idea to dominate the subconsciousness while you sleep. This idea, taken with you into sleep in this way, will often act in the subconsciousness with the same power as the idea suggested by a hypnotist. If you have ever seen hypnotism, you will know what this means. You can learn to carry an idea of the restoration of health into this auto-hypnotic sleep, to act powerfully during sleep. Of course this curative effect is not always achieved. Any idea introduced into the subconsciousness may meet a counter-suggestion which, if you are ill, already exists in the subconsciousness, and a conflict may ensue. Thus, time and perseverance may be necessary to success.

"But this is another matter, and not the state for telepathy--in which you must avoid dropping into a sleep. After you have practiced the

[p. 185]

exercise of concentrating on a flower--and avoiding sleep--you will be able to concentrate on holding the peculiar blank state of mind which must be achieved if you are to make successful experiments in telepathy. There may be strain to start with, but it is getting rid of strain, both physical and mental, which constitutes relaxation, or blankness, of the conscious mind. Practice will teach you what this state is, and after a while you can achieve it without strain.

"The next step: ask some one to draw a half-dozen simple designs for you on cards, or on slips of paper, and to fold them so that you cannot see the contents. They should be folded separately, so that you can handle one at a time. Place them on a table, or chair, beside your couch, or bed, in easy reach of your hand, so that you can pick them up, one at a time, while you are stretched out on the bed, or couch, beside them. It is best at first to experiment in the dark, or at least in a dimly lit room, as light stimulates the eyes and interferes with relaxation. If you experiment at night, have a table lamp within easy reach, so that you can turn the light off and on for each experiment without too much exertion, as you must keep your body and mind as passive as possible for these experiments. If you

[p. 186]

have no reading light near, use a candle. You must have also a writing pad and pencil beside you.

"After you have placed the drawings on the table, turn off the light and stretch your body full length on the couch. Close your eyes and relax your body. Relax completely. Make the mind a complete blank and hold it blank. Do not think of anything. Thoughts will come. Inhibit them. Refuse to think. Do this for several moments. It is essential to induce a passive state of mind and body. If the mind is not passive, it feels body sensations. If the body is not relaxed, its sensations interfere with the necessary mental passivity. Each reacts on the other.

"The next step, after having turned off the light and closed your eyes and relaxed mind and body full length on the couch, is to reach for the top drawing of the pile on the table. Hold it in your hand over your solar plexus. Hold it easily, without clutching it. Now, completely relaxed, hold your mind a blank again. Hold it so for a few moments, then give the mental order to the unconscious mind to tell you what is on the paper you hold in your hand. Keep the eyes closed and the body relaxed, and give the

[p. 187]

order silently, and with as little mental exertion as possible.

"However, it is necessary to give it clearly and positively, that is, with concentration on it. Say to the unconscious mind, 'I want the picture which is on this card, or paper, presented to my consciousness.' Say this with your mind concentrated on what you are saying. Repeat, as if talking directly to another self: 'I want to see what is on this card.' Then relax into blankness again and hold blankness a few moments, then try gently, without straining, to see whatever forms may appear on the void into which you look with closed eyes. Do not try to conjure up something to see; just wait expectantly and let something come.

"My experience is that fragments of forms appear first. For example, a curved line, or a straight one, or two lines of a triangle. But sometimes the complete object appears; swiftly, lightly, dimly-drawn, as on a moving picture film. These mental visions appear and disappear with lightning rapidity, never standing still unless quickly fixed by a deliberate effort of consciousness. They are never in heavy lines, but as if sketched delicately, in a slightly deeper shade of gray than that of the mental canvas. A person

[p. 188]

not used to such experiments may at first fail to observe them on the gray background of the mind, on which they appear and disappear so swiftly. Sometimes they are so vague that one gets only a notion of how they look before they vanish. Then one must 'recall' this first vision. Recall it by conscious effort, which is not the same thing as the method of passive waiting by which the vision was first induced. Instead, it is as if one had seen with open eyes a fragment of a real picture, and now closes his eyes and looks at the memory of it and tries to 'see' it clearly.

"It is necessary to recall this vision and make note of it, so as not to forget it. One is sure to forget it--indeed it is his duty to do so--in the process of the next step, which is one of blankness again. This blankness is, of course, a deliberate putting out of the conscious mind of all pictures, including the one just visioned. One must now order the subconscious not to present it to the conscious mind's picture-film again unless it is the right picture, i.e., the one drawn on the card which is held in hand. Make the conscious mind blank again for a brief space. Then look again on the gray canvas of mind for a vision. This is to test whether the first vision

[p. 189]

came from subconscious guessing, or whether it came from the deeper mind--from some other source than that of the subconscious, which is so apt to offer a 'guess,' or false picture.

"Do this whole performance two or three times, and if the first vision persists in coming back, accept it. As soon as you have accepted it--that is, decided that this is the correct vision --turn on the light, and without looking at the card, or paper, which contains the real picture, pick up the writing pad and pencil and make a sketch of every detail of the vision-picture. This is a nuisance, as it interrupts concentration and the desired passivity. But it is absolutely necessary to record the vision in every detail, before one looks at the real picture, the one on the card he has been holding in hand. If one does not make a record of his vision in advance of looking at the card picture, he is certain to forget at least some part of it--maybe something which is essential. Worse yet, he is apt to fool himself; the mind is given to self-deception. As soon as it sees the real drawing, it not only forgets the vision, but it is apt to imagine that it visioned the picture it now sees on the card, which may or may not be true. Imagination is a far more active function than the average person realizes.

[p. 190]

[paragraph continues] This conscious-subconscious mind is 'a liar,' a weaver of fiction. It is the dream-mind, and also it is the mind of memory trains.

"Do not omit fragments which seem to be out of place in a picture. These fragments may be the real things. If in doubt as to what the object of your vision is, do not try to guess. But if you have a 'hunch' that something you have seen is connected somehow with a watch, for example, or with an automobile, make a note of this 'hunch.' I use this popular word to indicate a real presentation from some true source, something deeper and more dependable than our own subconscious minds. I call this the 'deep mind' in order to have a name for it. I do not know what it is, of course--I am only judging from the behavior of the phenomena.

"Do not fail to record what seems to be a stray fragment, for it may be a perfect vision of some portion of the real picture. Record everything, and then later you can compare it carefully with the real drawing. Of course, do not be fantastic in your conclusions. Do not think you have gotten a correct vision of an automobile because you saw a circle which resembled a wheel. However, I once saw a circle and felt that it was an automobile wheel--felt it so vividly

[p. 191]

that I became overwhelmed with curiosity to see if my 'feeling' was correct, and forthwith turned on the light and examined the real picture in my hand. I found that it was indeed the wheel of an automobile. But I do not do this kind of thing unless I have a very decided 'hunch,' as it tends to lead back to the natural impulse of the mind to 'guess'--and guessing is one of the things one has to strive to avoid. To a certain extent, one comes to know a difference between a guess and a 'hunch.'

"The details of this technique are not to be taken as trifles. The whole issue of success or failure depends on them. At least, this is so in my case. Perhaps a spontaneous sensitive, or one who has a better method, has no such difficulties. I am just an average conscious-minded person, who set out deliberately to find a way to test this tremendously important question of telepathy and clairvoyance, without having to depend on a 'medium,' who might be fooling himself, or me. It was by this method of careful attention to a technique of details that I have found it possible to get telepathic messages and to see pictures on hidden cards, and symbolic pictures of the contents of books.

"This technique takes time, and patience, and

[p. 192]

training in the art of concentration. But this patience is in itself an excellent thing to learn, especially for nervous and sick people. The uses of mental concentration are too various and tremendously beneficial to enumerate here. The average person has almost no power of concentration, as he will quickly discover by trying to hold his undivided attention on one simple object, such as a rose, or a bottle of ink, for just a few minutes. He will find that a thousand thoughts, usually association trains connected with the rose, or the ink, will appear on his mental canvas, interrupting his concentration. He will find that his mind behaves exactly like a moving-picture film, or a fireworks display. It is the division of attention that uses up energy, if I am not mistaken.

"Of course this technique is not 'original.' I got it by selecting from hints here and there in my reading, and from my general study and observation of the behavior of the mind.

"Among the difficulties to be overcome--and this is one which is easily detected--is the appearing of visions of objects one has observed in the environment just before closing the eyes. When I close my eyes to make the next test, I invariably find that the last picture, and my own

[p. 193]

drawing of it, and also the electric light bulb which I have lighted in order to see the last picture--all these immediately appear on the horizon of my mind. It often takes quite a while to banish these memory-ghosts. And sometimes it is a mistake to banish them, as the picture you hold in your hand may be quite similar to the preceding one. If, therefore, a picture resembling the preceding continues obstinately to represent itself, I usually accept it, and often find that the preceding and present cards contain similar pictures.

"Another difficulty is the way things sometimes appear in fragments, or sections, of the whole picture. A straight line may appear, and it may be either only a portion of the whole, or it may be all there is on the card. Then I have to resist the efforts of my imagination to speculate as to what object this fragment may be part of. For instance, I see a series of points, and have the impulse to 'guess' a star. I must say no to this guess-work, unless the indescribable 'hunch' feeling assures me it is a star. I must tell myself it may be indeed a part of a star, but, on the other hand, it may be a complete picture of the drawing in hand, perhaps the letter W, or M, or it may be a part of a pennant,

[p. 194]

or what not. Then I must start over, and hold blank a while. Then repeat the request to the deep mind for the true picture. Now I may get a more complete picture, or maybe this fragment reappears alone, or maybe it repeats itself upside-down, or doubled up in most any way.

"I start all over once more and now I may get a series of fragments which follow each other and jump together as do the comic cartoons which are drawn on the screen with pen and ink. For instance, two points appear, then another appears separately and jumps to the first two, and joins up with them, then two more. The result is a star, and this may be the true picture. It usually is. But sometimes this is the subconscious mind, or perhaps the conscious, trying to finish the object as it has 'guessed' it should be. This error of allowing the conscious or the subconscious mind to finish the object is one to be most careful about. As one experiments, he realizes more and more that these two minds, the conscious and the subconscious, are really one, subconsciousness being only a disorderly store-house of memories. The third, or 'deep mind' is apparently the one which gives us our psychic phenomena. Again I say, I do not know what this 'deep mind' is; I use the words merely

[p. 195]

to have a name for that 'other thing' which brings the message.

"The conscious mind, combined with the subconscious, not only wants to finish the picture, but decides sometimes to eliminate a detail which does not belong to what it has guessed should be there. For example, I will discuss the drawings which have been given as figures 35, 35a, in this book. I 'visioned' what looked like a figure 5, except that at the top where there should be a small vertical line projecting toward the right, there was a flare of very long lines converging at one end. I consciously decided that the long lines were an exaggeration and multiplication of what should properly be at the top of a five, and that I should not accept them. Here was conscious mind making a false decision. But by obeying the rules I had laid down in advance, I was saved from this error of consciousness. I closed my eyes, gave a call for the true picture, and the lines appeared again, so I included them in my drawing. When I opened the envelope and looked at the picture inside, it was an oil derrick. So the flare of long lines was the real thing, while the figure 5 was the interloper--at least, so I now consciously decided. I thought that the figure 5 and the

[p. 196]

flare of lines were entirely separate mental images, one following the other so rapidly that they appeared to belong together.

"But again my conscious decision was in error. Several hours later, after I had put the whole matter out of my mind and had been attending to household duties, I suddenly remembered the paper jacket of a German edition of my husband's novel, 'Oil,' which was on a shelf in the next room to the one in which I had made my experiments. Why did I suddenly remember this book? I had not noticed it for a long time --its jacket drawings were out of sight, as the book was wedged between many others on the book shelves in an inconspicuous place in the room. On one side of the jacket of this book was a picture of three oil derricks; on the other side was a large dollar mark, almost covering one entire side of the book. I had seen this jacket, had indeed taken special notice of it, at the time of its arrival from Germany. So here seems to have been a clear case of the subconscious mind at work during my experiment, adding to my true vision of an oil derrick, the subconsciously remembered dollar mark which looked like a figure 5, partly hidden by the oil derrick in my vision. Here was a grand mix-up of the false

[p. 197]

guesses of consciousness and subconsciousness, and the true presentations from the 'deep mind.'

"But this was not the end. This confusion in regard to the dollar mark went forward, in memory-trains to two other experiments. Several days later, I was trying a new set of drawings, and one of them caused in my mind a vision of the capital letter S. Instantly, two parallel straight lines crossed it, turning it into a dollar mark: $. Then it became an S again without the lines. Then the lines came back. This strange behavior of my vision continued. I was in a quandary as to which to accept, the S or the $. Then there appeared an old-fashioned money-bag, such as I used to see in my father's bank as a child, full of small coins. It took its place in the vision beside the dollar mark. I decided with the usual erroneous consciousness that this money-bag was a hint from my real mind, so I accepted the dollar mark as correct. But it turned out not to be. When I looked at the drawing in hand it was a letter S. My subconsciousness had supplied the money-bag, and the two parallel lines.

"Several days later, in a vision with a third set of drawings, I saw a letter S, and then at once the bag of small change appeared, but there

[p. 198]

were no parallel lines on the S. This time the real drawing was a dollar mark! So, my subconsciousness, as soon as the dollar mark had appeared in subconsciousness, had meddled again; it had remembered the last experiment and the scolding I had given it for its guess work, so it now subtracted the parallel lines from the new vision to make it correct, according to the last experiment. It had remembered the last experiment only, forgetting the first one, of the oil derrick, just as I had ordered it to do on the occasion of the second experiment. So, it subtracted the two parallel lines, but it added the remembered bag of money, which I had included in my scolding. From this kind of interference by the subconsciousness, I realized that it is indeed no simple matter to get things into consciousness from the 'deep mind' without guesses and additions and subtractions made by the subconsciousness. Why the subconscious should meddle, I do not know. But it does. Its behavior is exactly like that of the conscious mind, which is also prone to guessing. All this sounds fantastic--to any one who has not studied his mind. But I tell you how it seems to me.

"Maybe everything comes from the subconscious. Maybe there is no 'deep mind.' Maybe

[p. 199]

the subconscious gets its knowledge of what is on the drawing directly from the drawing, and is merely blundering around, adding details by guess-work to what it has seen incompletely. But I think that these experiments prove that this is not the case. I think a study of them shows that a true vision comes into the subconsciousness, not directly from the drawing, but from another mind which has some means of knowing, and sending to consciousness via the subconsciousness whatever I ask it for. Of course I cannot attempt to prove this here. It was one of the questions to which I was seeking an answer, and the result seems to point to the existence of a deeper mind, showing how its behavior is quite different from that of the subconscious.

"I wanted to find out if the true vision could in any way be distinguished from 'imagination,' or these busy guesses of the subconsciousness. To help myself in this matter, I first made an examination of exactly how these guesses come. I said to myself: every thought that ever comes to consciousness, excepting those due to direct outside stimulation, may proceed from some deeper source, and by subconscious memory-trains attaching to them, appear to be the work

[p. 200]

of subconsciousness. So I shut my eyes and made my mind blank, without calling on my mind to present any definite thing. I had no drawing in my hand. After a brief space of blankness, I relaxed the enforced blankness and waited, dreamily, for what might come. A picture soon came, with a whole memory-train. First a girl in a large garden hat, then a garden path and flowers bordering it, then a spade, a wheelbarrow, and so on--things associated in my memory with a girl in a garden hat. As to where the girl in the hat came from, I know not. As to why she should come instead of any other of billions of things seen by me during my life, I know not. I had not asked my mind for her. The question of why she came is interesting.

"But it was easy to account for the other things--the association-train. I learned from this experiment, and several repetitions of it, that something always came--a girl, or a steamship, or the fact that I had not attended to some household duty, or what not--and a train of associated ideas followed. I learned, in a more or less vague way, how these things behaved, and how I felt about them. This enabled me to notice, when later I got a true vision, that there was a difference between the way this true vision

[p. 201]

came and the way the 'idle' visions came. When the true visions came, there usually came with them a 'something' which I call a 'hunch.' There was, of course, always in my consciousness the question: is this the right thing, or not? When the true vision came, this question seemed to receive an answer, 'yes,' as if some intelligent entity was directly informing me.

"This was not always the case. At times no answer came, or at least, if it came, it was obscured by guesses. But usually it did, after I had watched for it, and a sort of thrill of triumph came with it, quite different from the quiet way in which the money-bag had appeared in answer to my uncertainty. The subconscious answers questions, and its answers are always false; its answers come quietly, like a thief in the night. But the 'other' mind, the 'deep mind' answers questions, too, and these answers come, not quietly, but as if by 'inspiration,' whatever that is--with a rustling of wings, with gladness and conviction. These two minds seem different from each other. One lies and rambles; the other sings, and is truthful.

"But do not misunderstand me. I am not a religious convert. I am searching for knowledge, and recording what I find. Others on this search

[p. 202]

may have found these same things, but the conclusions they have drawn may not turn out to be the ones I shall draw.

"One or two other things of interest should perhaps be mentioned. First, I found that, in doing a series of several drawings, the percentage of successes was higher in the first three attempts. Then there began to be failures, alternating with successes. This may have been due to the fact that the memory-pictures of these first three experiments now constituted a difficulty. So much attention had to be given to inhibiting these memory-pictures, and in deciding whether or not they were to be inhibited. Or it may be due to some other cause, such as fatigue or boredom.

"The second detail is that during the earliest experiments, I developed a headache. I think this was due to the fact that I strained my closed eyes trying to see with them. I mean, of course, trying to see a vision, not the card in my hand. Using the eyes to see with is a habit, and habits are not easily overcome. I soon learned not to use my eyes, at least not in a strained way, and this was the end of the headaches. However, this use of the eyes in telepathy may perhaps mean more than a mere habit. The mental canvas

[p. 203]

on which these 'visions' are projected seems to be spread in the eyes, and it is the eyes which seem to see them--despite the fact that the room may be dark, the eyes closed, and the drawing on the paper be wrapped in thick covering and not within normal range of the eyes. But this may be due to the habit of associating all pictures with your eyes."

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

XXII

SO much for the art of voluntary mind-reading. In conclusion I attempt to say a few words about what these phenomena mean, and how they come about.

This attempt involves me in a verbal duel with my wife, which lasts into the small hours of morning. It involves the everlasting debate between the vitalists and the mechanists, which had best be left to Dr. Watson and Professor McDougall, and the others who are no more able than I am to look at the neurons of the brain in action, to see what happens. But I insist that until Craig and Dr. Watson, Professor Eddington and Mrs. Eddy have found out positively whether the universe is all mind or all matter, I must go on speaking in the old-fashioned way, as if there were two worlds, the physical and the mental, two sets of phenomena which interact one upon the other continuously, even though the manner of this happening is beyond comprehension.

With this much apology, I obtain permission

[p. 205]

to put forth my humble guess as to the part played by mental concentration in the causing of telepathy, clairvoyance, and trance phenomena. It seems to me that the process of intense concentration may cause the nervous energy, or brain energy, whatever it is, to be withdrawn from some of the brain centers and transferred to others; and it may be this displacement and disturbance of balance which accounts for such phenomena as catalepsy, automatism, and somnambulism. Portions of the mind which are ordinarily below the level of consciousness are raised to more intense forms of activity. New levels of mind are tapped, new "personalities" or faculties are brought into action, and persons under hypnotism develop mental powers they do not consciously possess.

That it is intense concentration upon one suggestion--the narrowing of the attention to one focus--which produces the cataleptic trance is something which my wife set out to prove, and by going close to the border-line she feels that she did prove it. The rigidity began at the extremities and crept rapidly over the body. In spite of my protests, Craig insisted that she was going the whole way, and asked me to stand by and make some tests. I was to wait three minutes,

[p. 206]

and then lift her up by the feet. I did so, and found an extraordinary thing--the body was perfectly rigid, like a log of wood, except at the neck! When I lifted her by her feet, the neck bent, so that the head remained on the pillow, while the feet were raised at least a yard in the air. Later, when Craig had relaxed, she told me that she had known what was happening; there had been one point of consciousness left, and she had the belief that she could let that go in another moment, but was afraid to do so, because she might not come out again. For an instant, she had felt that strange terror one feels at the moment he ceases to struggle against the fumes of gas or ether, and plunges into oblivion. The difference is that, in the case of gas or ether, one cannot hold on to consciousness; but in the case of the cataleptic state, he can recall his receding consciousness. Craig, of course, had not concentrated with complete attention to one idea; one portion of her mind was concentrated upon achieving rigidity, while another was watching and protesting against oblivion.

Dr. Morton Prince wrote to Craig: "You are playing with powerful and dangerous forces." And so she dropped this form of experiment. But more should be known about these trances,

[p. 207]

which often occur spontaneously, and can be caused by fear--that is to say, an intense concentration on the idea of escape from danger, which produces a tension amounting to paralysis. In such cases there are a number of new dangers; one being that some doctor will try to restore you with drugs and wrong suggestions. Every suggestion of fear on the part of the onlookers must be avoided in case of trances, for the subconscious mind of the victim hears every word, and believes it; also telepathy has to be remembered. One must not only speak quietly and firmly, repeating that everything is all right, and that the person will come out safely; one must also think this. The trance may last a long time, but keep calm and sure of success, and keep the doctor and the undertaker away. The condition of catalepsy is more common than is realized, and it is unpleasant to think how many persons are embalmed while in this condition.

All this sounds disturbing, but it has nothing to do with our telepathy experiments, in which the state of concentration is not one of tension accompanied by the suggestion of rigidity, or of fear, but on the contrary is a state of relaxation, accompanied by the suggestion of control, or supervision. This matter of supervision has been

[p. 208]

carefully set forth by Craig in her statement. It is one of the mind's great mysteries: how, while thinking about nothing, you can not only remember to give a suggestion, but can also act upon it. Craig insists that we have three minds.; and she has in this the backing of William McDougall, who is probably the "dean" of American psychologists, now that Morton Prince is dead. Professor McDougall talks about the various "monads" of the mind; so let us say that one "monad" gives an order to a second "monad" to become blank, after it has given an order to a third to present to the first a picture.

The psychic Jan gives such "autosuggestions" to himself when he goes into a trance, and tells his trance mind to bring him out at a certain moment. How that trance mind can measure time as exactly as a clock is another of the mysteries; but that it happens is beyond doubt. My wife took Jan to a group of scientists in Boston, and several of them held watches and expressed their surprise at what Jan was able to do. It is obvious that when the psychic lets himself be buried six feet under the ground in an ordinary pine-wood coffin, he is staking his life upon his certainty that he will not come out of the state of lethargy until after he has been dug up.

[p. 209]

He also stakes it upon the hope that the physicians who have the test in charge will have sufficient sense to realize the importance of having him dug out at the time agreed. In one case they were several minutes late, and Jan nearly suffocated. I never saw one of these burials, because Craig obtained his promise not to do them after she knew him; but I have talked with several physicians who watched and directed all the details, and I have a moving-picture film of one.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 210]

  

XXIII

MENTION telepathy in company, and almost every one has a story to tell. You can find a clairvoyant to tell you about yourself for a dollar--and maybe she is a fraud, but then again, maybe she is a person with a gift which she does not understand, and the police throw her into jail because they don't understand it either. I am sorry if I aid the mass of fraud which I know exists in this field, but there is no power of man which may not and will not be abused. The person who invented high explosives and made possible great tunnels and bridges, also made possible the destruction of the Louvain library. The person who makes a dynamo may electrocute himself.

In spite of all fraud, I am convinced that there are thousands of genuine clairvoyants and psychics. My friend Will Irwin told me recently how he spent a year or so collecting material and writing an exposure of fraud, "The Medium Game," published in Collier's Weekly some twenty years ago. At the end of his labors he

[p. 211]

went, on sudden impulse, into a "parlor" on Sixth Avenue, a cheap neighborhood of New York, and a fat old woman in a greasy wrapper took his dollar, and held his hand in hers, and told him things which he believed were known to no human being but Will Irwin.

"What is the use of it?" some will ask. I reply with another question: "What was the use of the lightning which Franklin brought down from the clouds on his kite-string?" No use that Franklin ever knew; yet to-day we make his lightning turn the wheels of industry, and move great railroad systems, and light a hundred million homes, and spread jazz music and cigarette advertising thousands of miles in every direction. It is an axiom of the scientist that every scrap of knowledge will be put to use sooner or later; get it, and let the uses wait. The discovery of the cause of bubonic plague was made possible because some foolish-minded entomologist had thought it worth-while to collect information about the fleas which prey upon the bodies of rats and ground squirrels.

I know a certain Wall Street operator who employed a "psychic" to sit in at his business conferences, and tell him if the other fellow was honest. I believe it didn't work very well; perhaps

[p. 212]

the circumstances were not favorable to concentration. Needless to say, Craig and I have no interest in such uses to be made of our knowledge. What telepathy means to my wife is this: it seems to indicate a common substratum of mind, underlying our individual minds, and which we can learn to tap. Figure the conscious mind as a tree, and the subconscious mind as the roots of that tree: then what of the earth in which the tree grows, and from which it derives its sustenance? What currents run through that earth, affecting all the trees of the forest? If one tree falls, the earth is shaken--and may not the other trees feel the impulse?

In other words, we are apparently getting hints of a cosmic consciousness, or cosmic unconsciousness: some kind of mind stuff which is common to us all, and which we can bring into our individual consciousness. Why is it not sensible to think that there may be a universal mind-stuff, just as there is a universal body-stuff, of which we are made, and to which we return?

When Craig orders her mind, or some portion of it, or faculty of it, to get what is in Bob's mind, while Bob is forty miles away--and when her mind does that, what are we to picture as happening? If I am correct in my guess, that

[p. 213]

mind and body are two aspects of one reality, then we shall find some physical form of energy being manifested, just as we do when we communicate by sound waves. The human brain is a storage battery, capable of sending impulses over the nerves. Why may it not be capable of sending impulses by means of some other medium, known or unknown? Why may there not be such a thing as brain radio?

Certainly we know this, that every particle of energy in the universe affects to some slight extent every other particle. The problem of detecting such energy is merely one of getting a sufficiently sensitive device. Who can say that our thoughts are not causing vibrations? Who can set a limit to the distance they may travel, or to the receiving powers of another brain, in some way or other attuned thereto? Any truly scientific person will admit that this is a possibility, and that it is purely a question of experimenting, to find out if it does happen, and how.

Again, consider the problem of clairvoyance, suggested by Craig's ability to tell what is inside a book she holds in her hand without seeing it, or to reproduce drawings when no human mind knows what drawing she holds. How are we to figure that as happening? Shall we say

[p. 214]

that brain vibrations affect material things such as paper, and leave impressions which endure for a long time, possibly forever? Can these affect another brain, as in the case of a bit of radium giving off emanations? It seems to me correct to say that, theoretically, it is inevitable. Every particle of energy that has ever been manifested in the universe goes on producing its effects somewhere, somehow, and the universe is forever different because of that happening. The soil of Britain is still shaking with the tramp of Caesar's legions, two thousand years old. Who can say that some day we may not have instruments sensitive enough to detect such traces of energy? On the very day that I am reading the galley proofs of this book, I find in my morning paper an Associated Press dispatch, from which I clip a few paragraphs.

"A fundamental discovery in photography that takes the 'pictures' directly on cold, hard untreated metal without the usual photographer's medium of a sensitized plate was made public to-night at Cornell University. It reveals that seemingly impervious metal records on its surface unseen impressions from streams of electrons and that these marks can be brought into visibility by the right kind of a 'developer,'

[p. 215]

exactly as photographic images are brought out on sensitized paper. . . .

"While studying sensitivity of photographic plates to electron rays it suddenly was realized that polished metal surfaces might be able to pick up impressions of these beams, and when tests were made they showed that not only could such records be made on metals, but the amazing fact appeared that some metals are almost as sensitive as photographic film, and for very low velocity electrons much more sensitive. . . .

"This young physicist one day was looking at the rough spots produced on the metal target of an X-ray tube by electron bombardment. Such spots are commonplace, familiar sights to laboratory workers. It occurred to Dr. Carr that perhaps long before the electrons produced the rough place they made an invisible impression, which might be 'developed' in the same manner that the still invisible image on a photo is brought out by putting it into a developing bath. Carr shot the electron rays at gold plates and developed them with mercury vapor, he shot them at silver and developed with iodine, he used hydrochloric acid to develop zinc plates and iodine to develop copper."

And now, if X-rays leave a permanent record

[p. 216]

on metal, why might not brain-rays, or thought-rays, leave a record upon a piece of paper? Why might not such energies be reflected back to another brain, as light is reflected by a mirror? Or perhaps the record might stay as some other form of energy, turned back into brain-rays or thought-rays by the percipient. We are familiar with this in the telephone, where sound vibrations are turned into electrical vibrations, and in this form transported across a continent and under an ocean, and then turned back into sound vibrations once again.

That mental activities do leave some kind of record on matter seems certain; at any rate, it is the basic concept of the materialistic psychologist. For what is memory, to the materialist, but some kind of record upon brain cells? He compares these cells to photoelectric cells, and imagines a lot of stored up records which we can consult. If now it should be found that such memory records are impressed, not merely upon living brain cells, but upon the molecules or electrons which compose any form of matter, what would be so incredible about that?

I have gone this far, in the effort to meet my materialist friends halfway. For my part, I have no metaphysics; I am content to say that

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] I do not know what matter is, nor what mind is, nor how they interact. If you want to realize the inadequacies of the materialistic dogma, so far as concerns this special field, you may consult the work of Dr. Rudolph Tischner, a qualified scientist of Germany, whose book, "Telepathy and Clairvoyance," is published in translation by Harcourt, Brace and Company. The last chapter, called "Theory," deals with the suggested explanations in more detail than I have the space for here.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218]

  

XXIV

April 21, 1929. I am over at the office fixing up this manuscript to send to the publisher; and just as I have it nicely wrapped, it has to be opened again--for this is what has happened. Craig, with her anxiety complex, has had this thought: "Here is Upton committing himself in this public way, on a subject about which people know so little and suspect so much; and suppose this faculty, whatever it is, should be gone in these last few weeks, while I have been fussing over spring housecleaning! Suppose I should find I can never do it again!"

She has to make sure all over again. She has in her desk a fat envelope marked: "To try." A lot of old drawings, left-overs from different series that she has tried and failed on during the past several months; some that she herself has drawn for friends; some that she was interrupted while doing--a job lot, in short. She does not know how many, as she has stuck them in from time to time, and never looked into the envelope; but it is well filled. Now she takes

[p. 219]

out some drawings, with averted eyes, and lies down and tries them. The house is quiet, a good opportunity, so she does nine drawings, and there is only one complete failure in the lot.

One is a marvel--as good as any. It is a drawing I had made, a donkey's head and neck, with a wide collar. Craig writes: "Cow's head in 'stock'"--a "stock" being in Mississippi a wooden yoke made to keep cattle from jumping fences. She draws the head of the so-called "cow" and the "stock"; it is a perfect donkey's head, facing just as mine does.

And then there is a duck, about to eat a snail. Such a jolly duck, and such a wheely snail shell! Craig has made this drawing to amuse the little daughter of Bob and Dolly, who had a pet duck, called "Mary Ann," fed on snails. Craig made this drawing several months ago, to let the child "concentrate" on, and try telepathy like the grown-ups. And now, with this drawing under her hand, Craig writes: "See wheels. Think of children. Has to do with children." The drawing of the snail shell is plainly a lot of "wheels."

Now, of course, Craig had previously seen every one of these drawings, and so they were all in her subconscious mind. But these drawings had never been seen by her at the same time.

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] They were put into the envelope, some at one time, some at another. Now she has taken out a few at random. What a jumble for any subconscious mind to keep track of! How is Craig's mind to know which drawings she has taken out, and which one she is holding under her hand?

Again we have something more than telepathy. For no human mind knows what drawings she has taken from that envelope. No human mind but her own even knows that she is trying an experiment. Either there is some superhuman mind, or else there is something that comes from the drawings, some way of "seeing," other than the way we know and use all the time. Make what you can of this, but don't laugh at it, for most certainly it happens.

     
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

  

XXV

October, 1929. At my wife's insistence, I have held up this book for six months, in order to think it over, and have the manuscript read by friends whose opinions we value. A score or more have read it, and made various suggestions, many of which I have accepted. Some of the reactions of these friends may be of interest to the reader.

The news that I was taking up "psychic" matters brought me letters both of curiosity and protest. My friend Isaac Goldberg of Boston reported the matter in the Haldeman-Julius publications under the title: "Sinclair Goes Spooky." I hope that when he has read this book, he will find another adjective. My friends, both radical and respectable, must realize that I have dealt here with facts, in as patient and thorough a manner as I have ever done in my life. It is foolish to be convinced without evidence, but it is equally foolish to refuse to be convinced by real evidence.

There came to me a letter of warning from a good comrade, T. H. Bell of Los Angeles, an

[p. 222]

elderly Scotchman who has grown up in the revolutionary movement, and known the old fighters of the days when I was a child. He begged me not to jeopardize my reputation; so I thought he would be a good test for the manuscript, and asked him to read it. Some of his suggestions I accepted, and the work is the better for them. But Comrade Bell was not able to believe that Craig's drawings could have come by telepathy, for the reason that it would mean that he was "abandoning the fundamental notions" on which his "whole life has been based."

Comrade Bell brought many arguments against my thesis, and this was a service, because it enables me to answer my critics in advance. First, what is the value of my memory? Can I be sure that it does not "accommodate itself too easily to the statement Sinclair wishes to believe?" My answer is that few of the important cases in the book rest upon my memory; they rest upon records written down at once. They rest upon drawings which were made according to a plan devised in advance, and then duly filed in envelopes numbered and dated. Also, my memory has been checked by my wife's, who is a fanatic for accuracy, and has caused me torment, through a good part of our married life,

[p. 223]

by insisting upon going over my manuscripts and censoring every phrase. Also Bob and Dollie and my secretary have read this narrative, and checked the statements dealing with them.

Next objection, that I am "a man without scientific training." The acceptance of that statement depends upon the definition of the word "scientific." If it includes the social sciences, then I have had twenty-five years of very rigid training. I have made investigations and published statements, literally by thousands, which were criminal libels unless they were true and exact; yet I have never had any kind of libel suit brought against me in my life. As to the scientific value of the particular experiments described in this book, the reader can do his own judging, for they have been described in detail. I don't see how scientific training could have increased our precautions. We have outlined our method to scientists, and none has suggested any change.

Next, the fact that in the past I have shown myself "naive and credulous at times." No doubt I have; but I have learned by such experiences, and I am not so naive and credulous as when I was younger. Neither do I see how these qualities can play much part in the present

[p. 224]

matter. I surely know the conditions under which I made my drawings, and whether I had them under my eyes while my wife was making her drawings in another room; I know about the ones I sealed in envelopes, and which were never out of my sight. As for my wife, she certainly has nothing of the qualities of naivete and credulity. She was raised in a family of lawyers, and was given the training and skeptical point of view of a woman of the world. "Trust people, but watch them," was old Judge Kimbrough's maxim; and following it too closely has almost made a pessimist of his daughter.

Next, that Craig is "in poor health." That is true, but I do not see how it matters here. She has often been in pain, but it has never affected her judgment. She chose her own times for experimenting, when she felt in the mood, and her mind was always clear and keen for the job.

Next, "a husband and wife are a bad pair to make telepathic experiments. Living so much together, their common life does tend to make them think of the same thing at the same time." This is true; but how does it account for the half-dozen successes with a brother-in-law, twenty or thirty with a secretary, and many with Jan? How does it account for the covers and

[p. 225]

jackets of books in which I had no interest, but which had come to me by chance, and which Craig had never even glanced at, so far as she remembers?

It is true that in the early days most of our drawings were of obvious things which lay about the house, scissors, table-forks, watches, chairs, telephones; so there was a better chance of guess work. How much chance, was determined by my son and his wife, who, hearing that Craig and I were trying telepathy experiments, decided to try a few also--without knowing anything about the technique. They also drew scissors, table-forks, watches, chairs, telephones, and such common objects. The only trouble was that when David tried to reproduce Betty's drawings, he drew the chair where she had drawn the scissors, and drew the watch where she had drawn the table-fork, and so on. They did not get a single success.

I think that if you will go back and look over those drawings as a whole, you must admit that the objects were as varied as the imagination could make them. I do not see how any one could choose a set of objects less likely to be guessed than the series which I have numbered from 5 to 12--a bird's nest full of eggs and surrounded

[p. 226]

by leaves, a spiked helmet, a desert palm-tree, a star with eight double points, a coconut palm, a puppy chasing a string, a flying bat, a Chinese mandarin, and a boy's foot with a roller-skate on it. None of these objects has any relationship whatever to my life, or to Craig's, or to our common life. To say that a wife can guess such a series, because she knows her husband's mind so well, seems to me out of all reason.

Next, the point that some of the cases are not convincing by themselves. I am familiar with this method of argument, having encountered it with others of my books. Let me beg you to note that the cases are not taken by themselves, but are taken as a whole. I can think, for example, of several ways by which Craig might have known that I had put my little paper of written notes into the pocket of my gray coat, or that I had left some medical apparatus under the bathtub at the office. She might have seen these things, and then have forgotten it, and her subconscious mind might have brought back to her the location of the objects, but failed to remind her of the previous seeing. If such cases had stood alone, I would not have thought it worth while to write this book.

[p. 227]

The same thing applies to Craig's production of German words. Having spent several weeks with me in Germany, and having known many Germans, she no doubt has German words in her subconscious mind. This also applies to certain dream cases. Any one who wants to can go through the book and pick out a score of cases which can be questioned on various grounds. Perhaps it would be wiser for me to cut out all except the strongest cases. But I rely upon your common sense, to realize that the strongest cases have caused me to write the book; and that the weaker ones are given for whatever additional light they may throw upon the problem.

If you want to deal fairly with the book, here is what you have to explain. How did it happen that at a certain agreed hour when Bob at Pasadena drew a table-fork and dated and signed the drawing, Craig in Long Beach wrote: "See a table-fork, nothing else," and dated and signed her words? If you call this a coincidence, how are you going to account for the chair, and the watch, and the circle with the hole in the middle, and the sense of pain and fear, and the spreading black stain called blood, all reproduced under the same perfect conditions? I say that if you call all this coincidence, you are violating the

[p. 228]

laws of probability as we know them. I say that there are only two possible explanations,--either telepathy, or that my wife and her brother-in-law were hoaxing me.

But if you want to assume a hoax, you have to face the fact that my wife a few days later was reproducing a series of drawings which I made and kept in front of my eyes in a separate room from her, in such a position that she could not see them if she wanted to. If I thought it worth while, I could draw you a diagram of the place where she sat and the place where I sat, and convince you that neither mirrors, nor a hole in the wall, nor any other device would have enabled my wife to see my drawings, until I took them to her and compared them with her drawings. The only way you can account for that series of successes is to say that I am in on the hoax.

My good friend and comrade, Tom Bell, does not suggest that I am in it; but others may say it, so I will answer. Let me assure you, there is no reason in the world why I should take the field on behalf of the doctrine of telepathy--except my conviction that it has been proved. I don't belong to any church which teaches telepathy. I don't hold any doctrine which is helped

[p. 229]

by it. I don't make any money by advocating or practicing it. There is no more reason why I should be concerned to vindicate telepathy, than there is for my coming out in support of the Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, or the Mormon doctrine of Urim and Thummim, or the Koreshan doctrine that the earth is a hollow sphere and we live on the inside of it.

I assure you I am as cold-blooded about the thing as a man can be. In fact, I don't like to believe in telepathy, because I don't know what to make of it, and I don't know to what view of the universe it will lead me, and I would a whole lot rather give all my time to my muckraking job which I know by heart. I don't expect to sell especially large quantities of this book; I am sure that by giving the same amount of time and energy to other books I have in mind, I could earn several times as much money. In short, there isn't a thing in the world that leads me to this act, except the conviction which has been forced upon me that telepathy is real, and that loyalty to the nature of the universe makes it necessary for me to say so.

My friend and publisher Charles Boni thinks that I should write this book without protestations; taking a dignified position, sure that my

[p. 230]

readers will trust me. But as it happens, I have read, not merely the literature of psychic research, but also the literature in opposition to it, and I know the arguments advanced by persons who are unwilling to change their "fundamental notions." It seems common sense to answer here the objections which are certain to be made.

I submitted this manuscript to the two leading psychologists of America, Morton Prince and William McDougall. Dr. Prince was taken by death before he found time to read it, but Professor McDougall read it, and has stated his reactions in the preface. In writing to me, he expressed the hope that my wife would be able to make some of these telepathy tests under the observation of well-known scientists. In replying, I assured him that my wife and I shared this hope; but whether it can ever be realized is a problem for the future. All Craig's work so far has depended upon a state of complete peace and relaxation. As she has pointed out, it is a matter of "undivided concentration," and even such disturbing things as light and noise are an interference. One friend who has tried to experiment lately at our instigation gave it up because of automobile horns in the street outside. She

[p. 231]

declared that these had never disturbed her before, but that the effort not to hear them when concentrating only caused her to concentrate on the horns, and so threatened to give her a case of "nerves."

Whether Craig would be able to get the necessary state of mind in the presence of strangers, skeptical or possibly hostile, is a problem yet to be solved. Unless we are going to beg the question, we have to assume that telepathy may be a reality; and if it be a reality, then certainly what is in the other person's mind makes a difference, and certainly it is a serious matter to ask a woman in delicate health to open her mind to the moods of strangers. Some day in the future Craig is going to make the test, but whether it succeeds or fails will not alter, so far as I am concerned, what has already happened in my presence.

Another of my friends who read the manuscript was Floyd Dell, and he thinks that readers of my books will wish to know to what extent, if any, my interest in the subject of telepathy is going to change my attitude to the struggle for social justice. To that I reply that I have been interested in psychic research for the past thirty-five years, ever since, as a youth, I met Minot J.

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Savage; but this has not kept me from believing ardently in the abolition of parasitism, exploitation, and war. While the telepathy experiments were going on I wrote "Boston," a novel of some 325,000 words, in less than a year. While I am consulting with my friends about this manuscript, I am writing a novel, "Mountain City," which I hope my Socialist friends will find of interest. The only discovery that can weaken my interest in the economic problem will be one which enables human beings to live without food, clothing, and shelter. But in the meantime, I see no reason why Socialists are required to be ignorant of psychology.

James Fuchs, another patient critic of my writings, thinks I appear naive in this book, and should reveal some knowledge of the vast literature on the subject. My reason for not doing so is that very vastness; one would need several volumes to handle it. In the Proceedings of the American and British Societies for Psychical Research lies buried endless evidence on the subject; but scientific authority remains for the most part uninterested in that evidence, and would not be interested in my rehash of it. I have written this book to tell my readers and friends what I myself have seen with my own

[p. 233]

eyes. That is my job, and I leave the rest to others who are better qualified.

Fuchs reminds me that "umbilical sensory perception" is a well-known psychic phenomenon, and that Craig, in holding the drawings over her solar plexus, is repeating the method of Justinus Kerner (1786-1862), about whom you will find an article in the "Encyclopedia Britannica." Craig knew about that from various sources, and some of her experiments were designed to test the explanation. I made eight drawings and laid them face down on the table by her couch, perhaps three feet from her head. I put them there while she was out of the room, and I sat and watched, to be sure she did not ever touch them. She lay on the couch and made some notes and drawings which reproduced the essential features of half a dozen of my drawings--all at once! So, if Craig has an umbilical eye, she must also have one in the side of her head which can see through several thicknesses of paper.

My daughter-in-law, Bettina Sinclair, also made suggestions which I accepted. She speaks for the new generation of radicals, saying: "The book aroused a storm of metaphysical speculation

[p. 234]

in my mind, and I could wax eloquent with slight provocation." This is different from refusing to "abandon the fundamental notions on which my whole life has been based."

    
Mental Radio, by Upton Sinclair, [1930], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 235]

  

XXVI

ONE interesting point I observe: in any company where the subject of this manuscript is brought up, invariably some person declares that he or she has had such experiences. One lady, highly educated, assured me that she and her husband had developed telepathy to a point where it served them on a lonely ranch in the place of telegraph and telephone. Only a few days ago I met at luncheon Bruno Walter, orchestra leader, who had come from Germany to conduct concerts in the Hollywood Bowl. Mr. Walter narrated to me the incident which follows:

While conducting in some middle western city, he was a guest at a luncheon, and found himself becoming very ill. He explained matters to his host, who called a taxicab, but this cab did not arrive, and Mr. Walter, in great distress, took his hat and left the house, saying that he would look for a cab. Turning the corner of the street, he came upon his manager, driving a car, and hailed him. "A most fortunate accident!" exclaimed

[p. 236]

the sick man, but the manager assured him that it was no accident; about half an hour previously, the manager had been seized by an intense feeling that Mr. Walter was in trouble, and had been moved to get into his car and drive. He did not know where Mr. Walter had gone, but simply followed his impulse to drive in a certain direction.

Another incident, told me by Fremont Older, editor of the San Francisco Call, and a veteran fighter in the cause of social justice. Older has seen many demonstrations of telepathy, and is completely convinced of its reality. A friend of his, living on a ranch, employed a cook named Sam who had the gift, and agreed to give a demonstration for the Olders. Sam asked Older to get a book and wrap it in thick paper, and Sam would tell the name of the book and the author. Older went out to his car, but could find no book, only a folder of maps, which he wrapped in several thicknesses of paper. Sam put the package to his head, and after a minute or two said, "This is not a book, it is a map or something. Why don't you get me a regular book?" So Older went to his car again and found a book belonging to his wife, and wrapped it with care and tied it. Sam put it to his head,

[p. 237]

and began to spell letters, and finally stated as follows: "Julia France and her Times, by Gertrude Atherton, published by the Macmillan Company." This was correct. Sam added: "I get another name. What has Ernest Hopkins got to do with this book?" Older and his wife were dumbfounded; for the name was that of a member of the newspaper staff who had been asked to review the book, but Mrs. Older had taken the copy from him because at the last moment she wanted something to read on her trip.

As this book is going to the printer, my attention is called to the fact that Dr. Carl Bruck of Berlin has published a book entitled "Experimentelle Telepathie," in which he reports a series of tests closely resembling those here described. The main difference is that he used hypnotized subjects, four different young men, as the recipients of his telepathic messages. He made drawings at home, and locked them in a large portfolio, which he placed in an adjoining room from the subject, two or three yards distant through a wall. He himself sat in front of the hypnotized subject, and concentrated upon "sending" one of the drawings. Under these conditions, in a total of 111 experiments, one-third

[p. 238]

were successful. The Berlin correspondent of the "Scientific American" reported these tests in the issue of May, 1924, where those interested may read the details, and inspect twelve of the drawings. The tests were conducted in the presence of various physicians and scientists; and I am interested in a recent comment on the matter by a German physician living in Mexico City: "Bruck's work has gone almost wholly unnoticed."

I say to scientific men, that such work deserves to be noticed. There is new knowledge here, close to the threshold, waiting for us; and we should not let ourselves be repelled by the seeming triviality of the phenomena, for it is well known that some of the greatest discoveries have come from the following up of just such trivial dews.

What did Benjamin Franklin have to go on when he brought the lightning down from the clouds on the string of a kite? Just a few hints, picked up in the course of the previous hundred years; a few traces of electricity noted by accident. The fact that you got a spark if you stroked a cat's fur; the fact that you got the same kind of a spark by rubbing amber, and a bigger one by storing the energy in a glass jar

[p. 239]

lined with tinfoil--that was all men had as promise of the miracles of our time, dynamos and superpower, telegraph and telephone, x-ray surgery, radio, wireless, television, and new miracles just outside our door. If now it be a fact that there is a reality behind the notions of telepathy and clairvoyance, to which so many investigators are bearing testimony all over the world, who can set limits to what it may mean to the future? What new powers of the human mind, what ability to explore the past and future, the farthest deeps of space, and those deeps of our own minds, no less vast and marvelous?

To set limits to such possibilities is not to be scientific, it is merely to be foolish. The true scientist sets no limits to human powers, he merely asks that we verify our facts. This my wife and I have tried to do, and I think that, so far as concerns telepathy at least, we can claim success. We present here a mass of real evidence, and we shall not be troubled by any amount of ridicule from the ignorant. I tell you--and because it is so important, I put it in capital letters: TELEPATHY HAPPENS!

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: msn.txt =====


    
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book I.

 PROLOGUE.

 HEARKEN to the reed-flute, how it complains,
 Lamenting its banishment from its home:
 "Ever since they tore me from my osier bed,
 My plaintive notes have moved men and women to tears.
 I burst my breast, striving to give vent to sighs,
 And to express the pangs of my yearning for my home.
 He who abides far away from his home
 Is ever longing for the day ho shall return.
 My wailing is heard in every throng,
 In concert with them that rejoice and them that weep.
 Each interprets my notes in harmony with his own feelings,
 But not one fathoms the secrets of my heart.
 My secrets are not alien from my plaintive notes,
 Yet they are not manifest to the sensual eye and ear.
 Body is not veiled from soul, neither soul from body,
 Yet no man hath ever seen a soul."
 This plaint of the flute is fire, not mere air.
 Let him who lacks this fire be accounted dead!
 'Tis the fire of love that inspires the flute,l
 'Tis the ferment of love that possesses the wine.
 The flute is the confidant of all unhappy lovers;
 Yea, its strains lay bare my inmost secrets.
 Who hath seen a poison and an antidote like the flute?
 Who hath seen a sympathetic consoler like the flute?
 The flute tells the tale of love's bloodstained path,
 It recounts the story of Majnun's love toils.
 None is privy to these feelings save one distracted,
 As ear inclines to the whispers of the tongue.
 Through grief my days are as labor and sorrow,
 My days move on, hand in hand with anguish.
 Yet,, though my days vanish thus, 'tis no matter,
 Do thou abide, O Incomparable Pure One! 2
 But all who are not fishes are soon tired of water;
 And they who lack daily bread find the day very long;
 So the "Raw" comprehend not the state of the "Ripe;" 3
 Therefore it behoves me to shorten my discourse.
 Arise, O son! burst thy bonds and be free!
 How long wilt thou be captive to silver and gold?
 Though thou pour the ocean into thy pitcher,
 It can hold no more than one day's store.
 The pitcher of the desire of the covetous never fills,
 The oyster-shell fills not with pearls till it is content;
 Only he whose garment is rent by the violence of love
 Is wholly pure from covetousness and sin.
 Hail to thee, then, O LOVE, sweet madness!
 Thou who healest all our infirmities!
 Who art the physician of our pride and self-conceit!
 Who art our Plato and our Galen!
 Love exalts our earthly bodies to heaven,
 And makes the very hills to dance with joy!
 O Iover, 'twas love that gave life to Mount Sinai, 4
 When "it quaked, and Moses fell down in a swoon."
 Did my Beloved only touch me with his lips,
 I too, like the flute, would burst out in melody.
 But he who is parted from them that speak his tongue,
 Though he possess a hundred voices, is perforce dumb.
 When the rose has faded and the garden is withered,
 The song of the nightingale is no longer to be heard.
 The BELOVED is all in all, the lover only veils Him; 5
 The BELOVED is all that lives, the lover a dead thing.
 When the lover feels no longer LOVE's quickening,
 He becomes like a bird who has lost its wings. Alas!
 How can I retain my senses about me,
 When the BELOVED shows not the light of His countenance?
 LOVE desires that this secret should be revealed,
 For if a mirror reflects not, of what use is it?
 Knowest thou why thy mirror reflects not?
 Because the rust has not been scoured from its face.
 If it were purified from all rust and defilement,
 It would reflect the shining of the SUN Of GOD.6
 O friends, ye have now heard this tale,
 Which sets forth the very essence of my case.
 *NOTES:
 1. Love signifies the strong attraction that draws all creatures back to reunion with their Creator. 
 2. Self-annihilation leads to eternal life in God the universal Noumenon, by whom all phenomena subsist. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 400. 
 3. "Raw" and "Ripe" are terms for "Men of externals" and "Men of heart" or Mystics. 
 4. Alluding to the giving of the law on Mount Sinai. Koran vii. 139. 
 5. All phenomenal existences (man included) are but "veils" obscuring the face of the Divine Noumenon, the only real existence, and the moment His sustaining presence is withdrawn they at once relapse into their original nothingness. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 165. 
 6. So Bernard of Clairvaux. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 435.

 STORY I.
 The Prince and the Handmaid.
 A prince, while engaged on a hunting excursion, espied a fair maiden, and by promises of gold induced her to accompany him. After a time she fell sick, and the prince had her tended by divers physicians. As, however, they all omitted to say, "God willing,1 we will cure her," their treatment was of no avail. So the prince offered prayer, and in answer thereto a physician was sent from heaven. He at once condemned his predecessors' view of the case, and by a very skilful diagnosis, discovered that the real cause of the maiden's illness was her love for a certain goldsmith of Samarcand. In accordance with the physician's advice, the prince sent to Samarcand and fetched the goldsmith, and married him to the lovesick maiden, and for six months the pair lived together in the utmost harmony and happiness. At the end of that period the physician, by divine command, gave the goldsmith a poisonous draught, which caused his strength and beauty to decay, and he then lost favour with the maiden, and she was reunited to the king. This Divine command was precisely similar to God's command to Abraham to slay his son Ishmael, and to the act of the angel in slaying the servant of Moses,2 and is therefore beyond human criticism.
 Description of Love.
 A true lover is proved such by his pain of heart;
 No sickness is there like sickness of heart.
 The lover's ailment is different from all ailments;
 Love is the astrolabe of God's mysteries.
 A lover may hanker after this love or that love,
 But at the last he is drawn to the KING of love.
 However much we describe and explain love,
 When we fall in love we are ashamed of our words.
 Explanation by the tongue makes most things clear,
 But love unexplained is clearer.
 When pen hasted to write,
 On reaching the subject of love it split in twain.
 When the discourse touched on the matter of love,
 Pen was broken and paper torn.
 In explaining it Reason sticks fast, as an ass in mire;
 Naught but Love itself can explain love and lovers!
 None but the sun can display the sun,
 If you would see it displayed, turn not away from it.
 Shadows, indeed, may indicate the sun's presence,
 But only the sun displays the light of life.
 Shadows induce slumber, like evening talks,
 But when the sun arises the "moon is split asunder." 3
 In the world there is naught so wondrous as the sun,
 But the Sun of the soul sets not and has no yesterday.
 Though the material sun is unique and single,
 We can conceive similar suns like to it.
 But the Sun of the soul, beyond this firmament,
 No like thereof is seen in concrete or abstract.4
 Where is there room in conception for His essence,
 So that similitudes of HIM should be conceivable?
 Shamsu-'d-Din of Tabriz importunes Jalalu-'d-Din
 to compose the Masnavi.
 The sun (Shams) of Tabriz is a perfect light,
 A sun, yea, one of the beams of God!
 When the praise was heard of the "Sun of Tabriz,"
 The sun of the fourth heaven bowed its head.
 Now that I have mentioned his name, it is but right
 To set forth some indications of his beneficence.
 That precious Soul caught my skirt,
 Smelling the perfume of the garment of Yusuf;
 And said, "For the sake of our ancient friendship,
 Tell forth a hint of those sweet states of ecstasy,
 That earth and heaven may be rejoiced,
 And also Reason and Spirit, a hundredfold."
 I said, "O thou who art far from ' The Friend,'
 Like a sick man who has strayed from his physician,
 Importune me not, for I am beside myself;
 My understanding is gone, I cannot sing praises.
 Whatsoever one says, whose reason is thus astray,
 Let him not boast; his efforts are useless.
 Whatever he says is not to the point,
 And is clearly inapt and wide of the mark.
 What can I say when not a nerve of mine is sensible?
 Can I explain 'The Friend' to one to whom He is no Friend?
 Verily my singing His praise were dispraise,
 For 'twould prove me existent, and existence is error.5
 Can I describe my separation and my bleeding heart?
 Nay, put off this matter till another season."
 He said, " Feed me, for I am an hungered,
 And at once, for 'the time is a sharp sword.'
 O comrade, the Sufi is 'the son of time present.' 6
 It is not the rule of his canon to say, 'To-morrow.'
 Can it be that thou art not a true Sufi?
 Ready money is lost by giving credit."
 I said, "'Tis best to veil the secrets of 'The Friend.'
 So give good heed to the morals of these stories.
 That is better than that the secrets of 'The Friend'
 Should be noised abroad in the talk of strangers."
 He said, "Without veil or covering or deception,
 Speak out, and vex me not, O man of many words!
 Strip off the veil and speak out, for do not I
 Enter under the same coverlet as the Beloved?"
 I said, "If the Beloved were exposed to outward view,
 Neither wouldst thou endure, nor embrace, nor form.
 Press thy suit, yet with moderation;
 A blade of grass cannot, pierce a mountain.
 If the sun that illumines the world
 Were to draw nigher, the world would be consumed.7
 Close thy mouth and shut the eyes of this matter,
 That, the world's life be not made a bleeding heart.
 No longer seek this peril, this bloodshed;
 Hereafter impose silence on the 'Sun of Tabriz.'"
 He said, "Thy words are endless. Now tell forth
 All thy story from its beginning."
 *NOTES:
 1. As enjoined in Koran xviii. 23. One cannot converse with a strict Mosalman for five minutes without hearing the formula, "In sha Allah Ta'alla," or D. V. 
 2. Koran xviii. 73. 
 3. Koran liv. I. 
 4. There is a tradition, "I know my Lord by my Lord." 
 5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 400. In the state of union self remains not. 
 6. The Sufi is the "son of the time present," because he is an Energumen, or passive instrument moved by the divine impulse of the moment. "The time present is a sharp sword," because the divine impulse of the moment dominates the Energumen, and executes its decrees sharply. See Sohravardi quoted in Notices et Extraits des MSS., xii. 371 note. 
 7. "When its Lord appears in glory to the Mount of existence, Existence is laid low, like the dust of the road." Gulshan i Raz, I. 195. 

 STORY II.
 The Oilman and his Parrot.
 An oilman possessed a parrot which used to amuse him with its agreeable prattle, and to watch his shop when he went out. One day, when the parrot was alone in the shop, a cat upset one of the oil-jars. When the oilman returned home he thought that the parrot had done this mischief, and in his anger he smote the parrot such a blow on the head as made all its feathers drop off, and so stunned it that it lost the power of speech for several days. But one day the parrot saw a bald-headed man passing the shop, and recovering its speech, it cried out, "Pray, whose oil-jar did you upset?" The passers-by smiled at the parrot's mistake in confounding baldness caused by age with the loss of its own feathers due to a blow.
 Confusion of saints with hypocrites.
 Worldly senses are the ladder of earth,
 Spiritual senses are the ladder of heaven.
 The health of the former is sought of the leech,
 The health of the latter from "The Friend."
 The health of the former arises from tending the body,
 That of the latter from mortifying the flesh.
 The kingly soul lays waste the body,
 And after its destruction he builds it anew.
 Happy the soul who for love of God
 Has lavished family, wealth, and goods!
 Has destroyed its house to find the hidden treasure,
 And with that treasure has rebuilt it in fairer sort;
 Has dammed up the stream and cleansed the channel,
 And then turned a fresh stream into. the channel;
 Has cut its flesh to extract a spear-head,1
 Causing a fresh skin to grow again over the wound;
 Has razed the fort to oust, the infidel in possession,
 And then rebuilt it with a hundred towers and bulwarks.
 Who can describe the unique work of Grace?
 I have been forced to illustrate it by these similes.
 Sometimes it presents one appearance, sometimes another.
 Yea, the affair of religion is only bewilderment.
 Not, such as occurs when one turns one's back on God,
 But such as when one is drowned and absorbed in Him.
 The latter has his face ever turned to God,
 The former's face shows his undisciplined self-will.
 Watch the face of each one, regard it well,
 It may be by serving thou wilt recognize Truth's face.
 As there are many demons with men's faces,
 It is wrong to join hand with every one.
 When the fowler sounds his decoy whistle,
 That the birds may be beguiled by that snare,
 The birds hear that call simulating a bird's call,
 And, descending from the air, find net and knife.
 So vile hypocrites steal the language of Darveshes,
 In order to beguile the simple with their trickery.
 The works of the righteous are light and heat,
 The works of the evil treachery and shamelessness.
 They make stuffed lions to scare the simple,
 They give the title of Muhammad to false Musailima.
 But Musailma retained the name of "Liar,"
 And Muhammad that of "Sublimest of beings."
 That wine of God (the righteous) yields a perfume of musk;
 Other wine (the evil) is reserved for penalties and pains.
 *NOTES:
 1. These are all figures and types of self-annihilation in order to the acquisition of eternal life in God. 

 STORY III.
 The Jewish King, his Vazir, and the Christians.
 A certain Jewish king used to persecute the Christians, desiring to exterminate their faith. His Vazir persuaded him to try a stratagem, namely, to mutilate the Vazir himself, and expel him from his court, with the intent that he might take refuge with the Christians, and stir up mutual dissensions amongst them. The Vazir's suggestion was adopted.1 He fled to the Christians, and found no difficulty in persuading them that he had been treated in that barbarous way on account of his attachment to the Christian faith. He soon gained complete influence over them, and was accepted as a saintly martyr and a divine teacher. Only a few discerning men divined his treachery ; the majority were all deluded by him. The Christians were divided into twelve legions, and at the head of each was a captain. To each of these captains the Vazir gave secretly a volume of religious directions, taking care to make the directions in each volume different from and contradictory to those in the others. One volume enjoined fasting, another charity, another faith, another works, and so on. Afterwards the Vazir withdrew into a cave, and refused to come out to instruct his disciples, in spite of all their entreaties. Calling the captains to him, he gave secret instructions to each to set himself up as his successor, and to be guided by the instructions in the volume secretly confided to him, and to slay all other claimants of the apostolic office. Having given these directions, he slew himself. In the event each captain set himself up as the Vazir's successor, and the Christians were split up into many sects at enmity with one another, even as the Vazir had intended. But the malicious scheme did not, altogether succeed, as one faithful band cleaved to the name of "Ahmad," mentioned in the Gospel,2 and were thus saved from sharing the ruin of the rest.
 The Vazir's Teaching.
 Myriads of Christians flocked round him,
 One after another they assembled in his street.
 Then he would preach to them of mysteries,
 Mysteries of the Gospel, of stoles, of prayers.
 He would preach to them with eloquent words
 Concerning the words and acts of the Messiah.
 Outwardly he was a preacher of religious duties,
 But within a decoy call and a fowler's snare.
 Therefore the followers of the Prophet ('Isa)
 Were beguiled by the fraud of that demon soul.
 He mingled in his discourses many secret doctrines
 Concerning devotion and sincerity of soul.
 He taught them to make a fair show of devotion,
 But to say of secret sins, "What do they matter?"
 Hair by hair and jot by jot they learned of him
 Fraud of soul, as roses might learn of garlic.
 Hair-splitters and all their disciples
 Are darkened by similar preaching and discourse.
 The Christians gave their hearts to him entirely,
 For the blind faith of the vulgar has no discernment.
 In their inmost breasts they planted love of him,
 And fancied him to be the Vicar of Christ;
 Yea, him, that one-eyed and cursed Dajjal! 3
 Save us. O God ! who art our only defender!
 O God, there are hundreds of snares and baits,
 And we are even as greedy and foolish birds;
 Every moment our feet are caught in a fresh snare ;
 Yea, each one of us, though he be a falcon or Simurgh!
 Thou dost release us every moment, and straightway
 We again fly into the snare, O Almighty One!
 Sleep of the body the soul's awakening.
 Every night Thou freest our spirits from the body
 And its snare, making them pure as rased tablets.
 Every night spirits are released from this cage,
 And set free, neither lording it nor lorded over.
 At night prisoners are unaware of their prison,
 At night kings are unaware of their majesty.
 Then there is no thought or care for loss or gain,
 No regard to such an one or such an one.
 The state of the "Knower" is such as this, even when awake.
 God says,4 "Thou wouldst deem him awake though asleep,
 Sleeping to the affairs of the world, day and night,
 Like a pen in the directing hand of the writer.
 He who sees not the hand which effects the writing
 Fancies the effect proceeds from the motion of the pen.
 If the "Knower" revealed the particulars of this state,
 'Twould rob the vulgar of their sensual sleep.
 His soul wanders in the desert that has no similitude;
 Like his body, his spirit is enjoying perfect rest;
 Freed from desire of eating and drinking,
 Like a bird escaped from cage and snare.
 But when he is again beguiled into the snare,
 He cries for help to the Almighty.
 Laila and the Khalifa.
 The Khalifa said to Laila, "Art thou really she
 For whom Majnun lost his head and went distracted?
 Thou art not fairer than many other fair ones."
 She replied, "Be silent; thou art not Majnun!"
 If thou hadst Majnun's eyes,
 The two worlds would be within thy view.
 Thou art in thy senses, but Majnun is beside himself.
 In love to be wide awake is treason.
 The more a man is awake, the more he sleeps (to love);
 His (critical) wakefulness is worse than slumbering.
 Our wakefulness fetters our spirits,
 Then our souls are a prey to divers whims,
 Thoughts of loss and gain and fears of misery.
 They retain not purity, nor dignity, nor lustre,
 Nor aspiration to soar heavenwards.
 That one is really sleeping who hankers after each whim
 And holds parley with each fancy.
 The twelve volumes of theology.

 He drew up a separate scroll to the address of each,
 The contents of each scroll of a different tenor;
 The rules of each of a different purport,
 This contradictory of that, from beginning to end.
 In one the road of fasting and asceticism
 Was made the pillar and condition of right devotion.
 In one 'twas said, "Abstinence profits not;
 Sincerity in this path is naught but charity."
 In one 'twas said, "Thy fasting and thy charity
 Are both a making thyself equal with God;
 Save faith and utter resignation to God's will
 In weal and woe, all virtues are fraud and snares."
 In one 'twas said, "Works are the one thing needful;
 The doctrine of faith without works is a delusion."
 In one 'twas said, "Commands and prohibitions are
 Not for observance, but to demonstrate our weakness,
 That we may see our own weakness (to carry them out),
 And thereby recognize and confess God's power." 5
 In one 'twas said, "Reference to thine own weakness
 Is ingratitude for God's mercies towards us.
 Rather regard thy power, for thou hast power from God.
 Know thy power to be God's grace, for 'tis of Him."
 In one 'twas said, "Leave power and weakness alone;
 Whatever withdraws thine eyes from God is an idol."
 In one 'twas said, "Quench not thy earthy torch,6
 That it may be a light to lighten mankind.
 If thou neglectest regard and care for it,
 Thou wilt quench at midnight the lamp of union."
 In one 'twas said, "Quench that torch without fear,
 That in lieu of one thou may'st see a thousand joys,
 For by quenching the light the soul is rejoiced,
 And thy Laila is then as bold as her Majnun.
 Whoso to display his devotion renounces the world,
 The world is ever with him, before and behind."
 In one 'twas said, "Whatsoever God has given thee
 In His creation, that He has made sweet to thee;
 Yea, pleasant to thee and allowable. Take it, then,
 And cast not thyself into the pangs of abstinence."
 In one 'twas said, "Give up all thou possessest,
 For to be ruled by covetousness is grievous sin."
 (Ah! how many diverse roads are pointed out,
 And each followed by some sect for dear life!
 If the right road were easily attainable,
 Every Jew and Gueber would have hit on it!)
 In one 'twas said, "The right road is attainable,
 For the heart's life is the food of the soul.
 Whatever is enjoyed by the carnal man
 Yields no fruit, even as salt and waste land.
 Its result is naught but remorse,
 Its traffic yields only loss.
 It is not profitable in the long run;
 Its name is called 'bankrupt' in the upshot.
 Discern, then, the bankrupt from the profitable,
 Consider the eventual value of this and that."
 In one 'twas said, "Choose ye a wise Director,
 But foresight of results is not found in dignities."
 (Each sect looked to results in a different way,
 And so, perforce, became captive to errors.
 Real foresight of results is not simple jugglery,
 Otherwise all these differences would not have arisen.
 In one 'twas said, "Thyself art thy master,
 Inasmuch as thou art acquainted with the Master of all;
 Be a man, and not another man's beast of burden!
 Follow thine own way and lose not thy head!"
 In one 'twas said, "All we see is One.
 Whoever says 'tis two is suffering from double vision."
 In one 'twas said, "A hundred are even as one."7
 But whoso thinks this is a. madman.
 Each scroll had its contrary piece of rhetoric,
 In form and substance utterly opposed to it;
 This contrary to that, from first to last,
 As if each was compounded of poison and antidotes.
 *NOTES:
 1. Compare the story of Zopyrus, Herodotus, iii. 155. 
 2. John xiv. 26: "But the Comforter (parakletos) shall teach you all things." Mosalmans read periklytos, "praised" = Muhammad. 
 3. Dajjal, i.e., Antichrist. Sale, Prelim. Discourse, p. 57. 
 4. Said of the Seven Sleepers in the cave. Koran xviii. 17; "Knower" = the Gnostic who through ecstasy beholds divine verities. 
 5. This was the doctrine of the Jabriyan or extreme predestinarians. 
 6. i.e.. Hide not thy light (of good works or of self-denial) under a bushel. 
 7. Alluding to the doctrine of the Trinity. 

 STORY IV.
 Another Tyrannical Jewish King.
 A certain Jewish king, the same who is referred to in the Sura "Signs of the Zodiac," I made up his mind to utterly exterminate the Christian faith, and with that view he set up a huge idol, and issued commands that all who refused to worship it should be cast into the fire. Thereupon his officers seized a Christian woman with her babe, and as she refused to worship it, they cast the babe into the fire. But the babe cried out to its mother, "Be not afraid, the fire has no power to burn me; it is as cool as water!" Hearing this, the rest of the Christians leapt into the fire, and found that it did not burn them. The king reproached the fire for failing to do its office, but the fire replied that it was God's servant, and that its consuming properties were not to be used for evil purposes. It then blazed up and consumed the king, and all his Jews with him.
 Second causes only operate in subordination to, 
 and form the impulsion of, the First Cause.
 Air, earth, water, and fire are God's servants.
 To us they seem lifeless, but to God living.
 In God's presence fire ever waits to do its service,
 Like a submissive lover with no will of its own.
 When you strike steel on flint fire leaps forth;
 But 'tis by God's command it thus steps forth.
 Strike not together the flint and steel of wrong,
 For the pair will generate more, like man and woman.
 The flint and steel are themselves causes, yet
 Look higher for the First Cause, O righteous man!
 For that Cause precedes this second cause.
 How can a cause exist of itself without precedent cause?
 That Cause makes this cause operative,
 And again helpless and inoperative.
 That Cause, which is a guiding light to the prophets,
 That, I say, is higher than these second causes.
 Men's minds recognize these second causes,
 But only prophets perceive the action of the First Cause.
 Praise compared to vapour drawn upwards, 
 and then descending in rain.
 Though water be enclosed in a reservoir,
 Yet air will absorb it, for 'tis its supporter;
 It sets it free and bears it to its source,
 Little by little, so that you see not the process.
 In like manner this breath of ours by degrees
 Steals away our souls from the prison-house of earth.
 " The good word riseth up to Him,"2
 Rising from us whither He knoweth.
 Our breathings are lifted up in fear of God,
 Offerings from us to the throne of Eternity.
 Then come down to us rewards for our praises,
 The double thereof, yea, mercies from the King of Glory.
 Therefore are we constrained to utter these praises
 That slaves may attain the height of God's gifts.
 And so this rising and descent go on evermore,
 And cease not forever and aye.
 To speak in plain Persian, this attraction
 Comes from the same quarter whence comes this sweet savour.3
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxxxv. 
 2. Koran, xxxv. II. 
 3. Sweet savour, i.e., the joy of heart experienced by the offerer of prayer when his prayer is accepted of God. See Book II. Story XVII. 

 STORY V.
 The Lion and the Beasts.
 In the book of Kalila and Damna a story is told of a lion who held all the beasts of the neighborhood in subjection, and was in the habit of making constant raids upon them, to take and kill such of them as he required for his daily food. At last the beasts took counsel together, and agreed to deliver up one of their company every day, to satisfy the lion's hunger, if he, on his part, would cease to annoy them by his continual forays. The lion was at first unwilling to trust to their promise, remarking that he always preferred to rely on his own exertions; but the beasts succeeded in persuading him that he would do well to trust Providence and their word. To illustrate the thesis that human exertions are vain, they related a story of a man who got Solomon to transport him to Hindustan to escape the angel of death, but was smitten by the angel the moment he got there. Having carried their point, the beasts continued for some time to perform their engagement. One day it came to the turn of the hare to be delivered up as a victim to the lion; but he requested the others to let him practice a stratagem. They scoffed at him, asking how such silly beast as he could pretend to outwit the lion. The hare assured them that wisdom was of God, and God might choose weak things to confound the strong. At last they consented to let him try his luck. He took his way slowly to the lion, and found him sorely enraged. In excuse for his tardy arrival he represented that he and another hare had set out together to appear before the lion, but a strange lion had seized the second hare, and carried it off in spite of his remonstrances. On hearing this, the lion was exceeding wroth, and commanded the hare to show him the foe who had trespassed on his preserves. Pretending to be afraid, the hare got the lion to take him upon his back, and directed him to a well. On looking down the well, the lion saw in the water the reflection of himself and of the hare on his back; and thinking that he saw his foe with the stolen hare, he plunged in to attack him, and was drowned, while the hare sprang off his back and escaped. This folly on the part, of the lion was predestined to punish him for denying God's ruling providence. So Adam, though he knew the names of all things, in accordance with God's predestination, neglected to obey a single prohibition, and his disobedience cost him dearly.
 Trust in God, as opposed to human exertions.
 The beasts said, "O enlightened sage,
 Lay aside caution; it cannot help thee against destiny;
 To worry with precaution is toil and moil;
 Go, trust in Providence, trust is the better part.
 War not with the divine decree, O hot-headed one,
 Lest that decree enter into conflict with thee.
 Man should be as dead before the commands of God
 Lest a blow befall him from the Lord of all creatures."
 He said, "True; but though trust be our mainstay,
 Yet the Prophet teaches us to have regard to means.
 The Prophet cried with a loud voice,
 'Trust in God, yet tie the camel's leg.' l
 Hear the adage, 'The worker is the friend of God;'2
 Through trust in Providence neglect not to use means.
 Go, O Quietists, practice trust with self-exertion,
 Exert yourself to attain your objects, bit by bit.
 In order to succeed, strive and exert yourselves;
 If ye strive not for your objects, ye are fools."
 They said, "What is gained from the poor by exertions
 Is a fraudulent morsel that will bring ill luck.
 Again, know that self-exertion springs from weakness;
 Relying on other means is a blot upon perfect trust.
 Self-exertion is not more noble than trust in God.
 What is more lovely than committing oneself to God?
 Many there are who flee from one danger to a worse;
 Many flee from a snake and meet a dragon.
 Man plans a stratagem, and thereby snares himself;
 What he takes for life turns out, to be destruction.
 He shuts the door after his foe is in the house.
 After this sort were the schemes of Pharaoh.
 That jealous king slew a myriad babes,
 While Moses, whom he sought, was in his house.
 Our eyes are subject to many infirmities;
 Go! annihilate your sight in God's sight.
 For our foresight His foresight is a fair exchange;
 In His sight is all that ye can desire.
 So long as a babe cannot grasp or run,
 It takes its father's back for its carriage.
 But when it becomes independent and uses its hands,
 It falls into grievous troubles and disgrace.
 The souls of our first parents, even before their hands,
 Flew away from fidelity after vain pleasure.
 Being made captives by the command, 'Get down hence,' 3
 They became bond-slaves of enmity, lust, and vanity.
 We are the family of the Lord and His sucking babes.
 The Prophet said, 'The people are God's family;'
 He who sends forth the rain from heaven,
 Can He not also provide us our daily bread?"
 The lion said, "True; yet the Lord of creatures
 Sets a ladder before our feet.
 Step by step must we mount up to the roof!
 The notion of fatalism is groundless in this place.
 Ye have feet why then pretend ye are lame?
 Ye have hands why then conceal your claws?
 When a master places a spade in the hand of a slave,
 The slave knows his meaning without being told.
 Like this spade, our hands are our Master's hints to us;
 Yea, if ye consider, they are His directions to us.
 When ye have taken to heart His hints,
 Ye will shape your life in reliance on their direction;
 Wherefore these hints disclose His intent,
 Take the burden from you, and appoint your work.
 He that bears it makes it bearable by you,
 He that is able makes it within your ability.
 Accept His command, and you will be able to execute it;
 Seek union with Him, and you will find yourselves united.
 Exertion is giving thanks for God's blessings;
 Think ye that your fatalism gives such thanks?
 Giving thanks for blessings increases blessings,
 But fatalism snatches those blessings from your hands.
 Your fatalism is to sleep on the road; sleep not
 Till ye behold the gates of the King's palace.
 Ah! sleep not, O unreflecting fatalists,
 Till ye have reached that fruit-laden Tree of Life
 Whose branches are ever shaken by the wind,
 And whose fruit is showered on the sleepers' heads.
 Fatalism means sleeping amidst highwaymen.
 Can a cock who crows too soon expect peace?
 If ye cavil at and accept not God's hints,
 Though ye count yourselves men, see, ye are women.
 The quantum of reason ye possessed is lost,
 And the head whose reason has fled is a tail.
 Inasmuch as the unthankful are despicable,
 They are at last cast into the fiery pit.
 If ye really have trust in God, exert yourselves,
 And strive, in constant reliance on the Almighty."
 Wisdom is granted often times to the weak.
 He said, "O friends, God has given me inspiration.
 Often times strong counsel is suggested to the weak.
 The wit taught by God to the bee
 Is withheld from the lion and the wild ass.
 It fills its cells with liquid sweets,
 For God opens the door of this knowledge to it.
 The skill taught by God to the silkworm
 Is a learning beyond the reach of the elephant.
 The earthly Adam was taught of God names, 4
 So that his glory reached the seventh heaven.
 He laid low the name and fame of the angels, 5
 Yet blind indeed are they whom God dooms to doubt!
 The devotee of seven hundred thousand years (Satan)
 Was made a muzzle for that yearling calf (Adam), 6
 Lest he should suck milk of the knowledge of faith,
 And soar on high even to the towers of heaven.
 The knowledge of men of external sense is a muzzle
 To stop them sucking milk of that sublime knowledge.
 But God drops into the heart a single pearl-drop
 Which is not bestowed on oceans or skies!"
 "How long regard ye mere form, O form-worshippers?
 Your souls, void of substance, rest still in forms.
 If the form of man were all that made man,
 Ahmad and Abu Jahl would be upon a par.
 A painting on a wall resembles a man,
 But see what it is lacking in that empty form.
 'Tis life that is lacking to that mere semblance of man.
 Go! seek for that pearl it never will find.
 The heads of earth's lions were bowed down
 When God gave might to the Seven Sleepers' dog. 7
 What mattered its despised form
 When its soul was drowned in the sea of light?"
 Human wisdom, the manifestation of divine.
 On his way to the lion the hare lingered,
 Devising a stratagem with himself.
 He proceeded on his way after delaying long,
 In order to have a secret or two for the lion.
 What worlds the principle of Reason embraces!
 How broad is this ocean of Reason!
 Yea, the Reason of man is a boundless ocean.
 O son, that ocean requires, as it were, a diver. 8
 On this fair ocean our human forms
 Float about, like bowls on the surface of water;
 Yea like cups on the surface, till they are. filled;
 And when filled, these cups sink into the water.
 The ocean of Reason is not seen ; reasoning men are seen;
 But our forms (minds) are only as waves or spray thereof.
 Whatever form that ocean uses as its instrument,
 Therewith it casts its spray far and wide. 9
 Till the heart sees the Giver of the secret,
 Till it espies that Bowman shooting from afar,
 It fancies its own steed lost, while in bewilderment
 It is urging that steed hither and thither; 10
 It fancies its own steed lost, when all the while
 That swift steed is bearing it on like the wind.
 In deep distress that blunder head
 Runs from door to door, searching and inquiring,
 "Who and where is he that hath stolen my steed?"
 They say, "What is this thou ridest on, O master?"
 He says, "True, 'tis a steed; but where is mine?"
 They say, "Look to thyself, O rider; thy steed is there."
 The real Soul is lost to view, and seems far off; 11
 Thou art like a pitcher with full belly but dry lip;
 How canst thou ever see red, green, and scarlet
 Unless thou seest the light first of all?
 When thy sight is dazzled by colors,
 These colors veil the light from thee.
 But when night veils those colors from thee,
 Thou seest that colors are seen only through light.
 As there is no seeing outward colors without light,
 So it is with the mental colors within.
 Outward colors arise from the light of sun and stars,
 And inward colors from the Light on high.
 The light that lights the eye is also the heart's Light;
 The eye's light proceeds from the Light of the heart.
 But the light that lights the heart is the Light of God,
 Which is distinct from the light of reason and sense.
 At night there is no light, and colors are not seen;
 Hence we know what light is by its opposite, darkness.
 At night no colors are visible, for light is lacking.
 How can color be the attribute of dark blackness?
 Looking on light is the same as looking on colors;
 Opposite shows up opposite, as a Frank a Negro.
 The opposite of light shows what is light,
 Hence colors too are known by their opposite.
 God created pain and grief for this purpose,
 To wit, to manifest happiness by its opposites. 12
 Hidden things are manifested by their opposites;
 But, as God has no opposite. He remains hidden.
 God's light has no opposite in the range of creation
 Whereby it may be manifested to view.
 Perforce "Our eyes see not Him, though He sees us." 13
 Behold this in the case of Moses and Mount Sinai. 14
 Discern form from substance, as lion from desert,
 Or as sound and speech from the thought they convey.
 The sound and speech arise from the thought;
 Thou knowest not where is the Ocean of thought;
 Yet when thou seest fair waves of speech,
 Thou knowest there is a glorious Ocean beneath them.
 When waves of thought arise from the Ocean of Wisdom,
 They assume the forms of sound and speech.
 These forms of speech are born and die again,
 These wa,ves cast themselves back into the Ocean.
 Form is born of That which is without form,
 And goes again, for, "Verily to Him do we return." 15
 Wherefore to thee every moment come death and "return."
 Mustafa saith, "The world endureth only a moment."
 So, thought is an arrow shot by God into the air.
 How can it stay in the air? It returns to God.
 Every moment the world and we are renewed, 16
 Yet we are ignorant of this renewing forever and aye.
 Life, like a stream of water, is renewed and renewed,
 Though it wears the appearance of continuity in form.
 That seeming continuity arises from its swift renewal,
 As when a single spark of fire is whirled round swiftly. 17
 If a single spark be whirled round swiftly,
 It seems to the eye a continuous line of fire.
 This apparent extension, owing to the quick motion,
 Demonstrates the rapidity with which it is moved.
 If ye seek the deepest student of this mystery,
 Lo! 'tis Husamu-'d-Din, the most exalted of creatures!
 *NOTES:
 1. "Trust in God and keep your powder dry." 
 2. "Laborare est orare." 
 3. Koran ii. 341. 
 4. "And He taught Adam the names of all things" (Koran ii. 29). 
 5. The angels said, "We have no knowledge but what thou hast given us to know" (Koran ii. 30). 
 6. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 543. 
 7. Koran xviii. 17. 
 8. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 575: The ocean of Reason is the same as what is elsewhere called the ocean of Being, viz., the Noumenon, or Divine substratum of all phenomenal being and thought. 
 9. "Those arrows were God's, not vours" (Koran viii. 17); i.e., Man's reason proceeds from God, the "Only Real Agent." 
 10. Alluding to the "Believer's lost camel " (Book II. Story XII., infra.). Men seek wisdom, and do not know that in themselves is the reflected wisdom of God (Gulshan i Raz, I. 435). 
 11. The real Soul, i.e., the spirit which God "breathed into man" (Koran xv. 29). "In yourselves are signs; will ye not behold them?" (Koran li, 21). 
 12. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 92. Mr. Mansel (Bampton Lectures, p. 49) says: "A thing can be known as that which it is only by being distinguished from that which it is not." But the Infinite Deity ex hypothesi includes all things; so there is nothing to contrast Him with. 
 13. Koran vi. 103. 
 14. Koran vii. 139: "He said, 'Thou shalt not see me.'" 
 15. Koran ii. 151. 
 16. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 645: All phenomena are every moment renewed by fresh effluxes of being from the Divine Noumenon. 
 17. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 710.

 STORY VI.
 Omar and the Ambassador.
 The hare, having delivered his companions from the tyranny of the lion, in the manner just described, proceeds to improve the occasion by exhorting them to engage in a greater and more arduous warfare, viz., the struggle against their inward enemy, the lusts of the flesh. He illustrates his meaning by the story of an ambassador who was sent by the Emperor of Rum to the Khalifa 'Omar. On approaching Medina this ambassador inquired for 'Omar's palace, and learned that 'Omar dwelt in no material palace, but in a spiritual tabernacle, only visible to purified hearts. At last he discerned 'Omar lying under a palm-tree, and drew near to him in fear and awe. 'Omar received him kindly, and instructed him in the doctrine of the mystical union with God. The ambassador heard him gladly, and asked him two questions, first, How can souls descend from heaven to earth? and secondly, With what object are souls imprisoned in the bonds of flesh and blood? 'Omar responded, and the ambassador accepted his teaching, and became a pure-hearted Sufi. The hare urged his companions to abjure lust and pride, and to go and do likewise.
 God's agency reconciled with man's freewill.
 The ambassador said, "O Commander of the faithful,
 How comes the soul down from above to earth?
 How can so noble a bird be confined in a cage?"
 He said, "God speaks words of power to souls,
 To things of naught, without eyes or ears,
 And at these words they all spring into motion;
 At His words of power these nothings arise quickly,
 And strong impulse urges them into existence.
 Again, He speaks other spells to these creatures,
 And swiftly drives them back again into Not-being.
 He speaks to the rose's ear, and causes it to bloom;
 He speaks to the tulip, and makes it blossom.
 He speaks a spell to body, and it becomes soul;
 He speaks to the sun, and it becomes a fount of light.
 Again, in its ear He whispers a word of power,
 And its face is darkened as by a hundred eclipses.
 What is it that God says to the ear of earth,
 That it attends thereto and rests steadfast?
 What is it that Speaker says to the cloud,
 That it pours forth rain-water like a water-skin?
 Whosoever is bewildered by wavering will, l
 In his ear hath God whispered His riddle,
 That He may bind him on the horns of a dilemma;
 For he says, 'Shall I do this or its reverse?'
 Also from God comes the preference of one alternative;
 'Tis from God's impulsion that man chooses one of the two.
 If you desire sanity in this embarrassment,
 Stuff not the ear of your mind with cotton.
 Take the cotton of evil suggestions from the mind's ear, 2
 That the heavenly voice from above may enter it,
 That you may understand that riddle of His,
 That you may be cognisant of that open secret.
 Then the mind's ear becomes the sensorium of inspiration;
 For what is this Divine voice but the inward voice? 3
 The spirit's eye and ear possess this sense,
 The eye and ear of reason and sense lack it.
 The word 'compulsion' makes me impatient for love's sake;
 'Tis he who loves not who is fettered by compulsion.
 This is close communion with God, not compulsion,
 The shining of the sun, and not a dark cloud.
 Or, if it be compulsion, 'tis not common compulsion,
 It is not the domination of wanton wilfulness.
 O son, they understand this compulsion
 For whom God opens the eyes of the inner man.
 Things hidden and things future are plain to them;
 To speak of the past seems to them despicable.
 They possess freewill and compulsion besides, 4
 As in oyster-shells raindrops are pearls.
 Outside the shell they are raindrops, great and small;
 Inside they are precious pearls, big and little.
 These men also resemble the musk deer's bag;
 Outside it is blood, but inside pure musk;
 Yet, say not that outside 'twas mere blood,
 Which on entering the bag becomes musk.
 Nor say that outside the alembic 'twas mere copper,
 And becomes gold inside, when mixed with elixir.
 In you freewill and compulsion are vain fancies,
 But in them they are the light of Almighty power.
 On the table bread is a mere lifeless thing,
 When taken into the body it is a life-giving spirit.
 This transmutation occurs not in the table's heart,
 'Tis soul effects this transmutation with water of life.
 Such is the power of the soul, O man of right views!
 Then what is the power of the Soul of souls? (God).
 Bread is the food of the body, yet consider,
 How can it be the food of the soul, O son?
 Flesh-born man by force of soul
 Cleaves mountains with tunnels and mines.
 The might of Ferhad's soul cleft a hill;
 The might of the Soul's soul cleaves the moon; 5
 If the heart opens the mouth of mystery's store,
 The soul springs up swiftly to highest heaven.
 If tongue discourses of hidden mysteries,
 It kindles a fire that consumes the world.
 Behold, then, God's action and man's action;
 Know, action does belong to us ; this is evident.
 If no actions proceeded from men,
 How could you say, 'Why act ye thus?'
 The agency of God is the cause of our action,
 Our actions are the signs of God's agency;
 Nevertheless our actions are freely willed by us,
 Whence our recompense is either hell or 'The Friend.'"
 *NOTES:
 1. The poet's insistence on the doctrine of God being the Fa'il i Hakiki, or Only Real Agent, without whose word no being and no action can be, leads him to the question of freewill and compulsion of man's will (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 555). 
 2. So Gulshan i Raz, I. 442. 
 3. The leading principle of all mysticism is that, independently of sense and reason, man possesses an inward sense, or intuition, which conveys to him a knowledge of God by direct apprehension (see Gulshan i Raz. I. 431). 
 4. Their wills are identified with God's will, as in the case of the saint Daquqi (infra, Book III. Story XII.) 
 5. As a sign of the last day (Koran liv. 1). 

 STORY VII.
 The Merchant and his Clever Parrot.
 There was a certain merchant who kept a parrot in a cage. Being about to travel to Hindustan on business, he asked the parrot if he had any message to send to his kinsmen in that country, and the parrot desired him to tell them that he was kept confined in a cage. The merchant promised to deliver this message, and on reaching Hindustan, duly delivered it to the first flock of parrots he saw. On hearing it one of them at once fell down dead. The merchant was annoyed with his own parrot for having sent such a fatal message, and on his return home sharply rebuked his parrot for doing so. But the parrot no sooner heard the merchant's tale than ho too fell down dead in his cage. The merchant, after lamenting his death, took his corpse out of the cage and threw it away; but, to his surprise, the corpse immediately recovered life, and flew away, explaining that the Hindustani parrot had only feigned death to suggest this way of escaping from confinement in a cage.
 Saints are preserved from all harm 1.
 As to a "man of heart," he takes no hurt,
 Even though he should eat deadly poison.
 He who gains health from practicing abstinence is safe;
 The poor disciple is safe in the midst of fever.
 The prophet said, "O disciple, though you be bold,
 Yet enter not into conflict with every foe."
 Within you is a Nimrod; enter not his fire;
 But if you must do so, first become an Abraham. 2
 If you are neither swimmer nor seaman,
 Cast not yourself into the sea out of self-conceit.
 A swimmer brings pearls from the deep sea;
 Yea, he plucks gain from the midst of perils.
 If the saint handles earth, it becomes gold;
 If a sinner handles gold, it turns to dust.
 Whereas the saint is well-pleasing to God,
 In his actions his hand is the hand of God.
 But the sinner's hand is the hand of Satan and demons,
 Because he is ensnared in falsity and fraud.
 If folly meets him, he takes it for wisdom;
 Yea, the learning gained by the wicked is folly.
 Whatever a sick man eats is a source of sickness,
 But if a saint imbibe infidelity it becomes faith.
 Ah! footman who contendest with horsemen,
 Thou wilt not succeed in carrying the day!
 The jealousy of God 3.
 The whole world is jealous for this cause,
 That God surpasseth the world in jealousy.
 God is as a soul and the world as a body,
 And bodies derive their good and evil from souls.
 He to whom the sanctuary of true prayer is revealed
 Deems it shameful to turn back to mere formal religion.
 He who is master of the robes of a king
 Brings shame on his lord by petty huckstering.
 He who is admitted to the king's presence-chamber
 Would show disrespect by tarrying at the doorway.
 If the king grants him license to kiss his hand,
 He would err were he to kiss merely the king's foot.
 Though to lay head at the king's feet is due obeisance,
 In the case supposed it would be wrong to kiss the feet.
 The king's jealousy would be kindled against him
 Who, after he had seen his face, preferred his mere perfume.
 God's jealousy may be likened to a grain of wheat,
 But man's jealousy is but empty chaff.
 For know ye that the source of jealousy is in God,
 And man's jealousy is only an offshoot from God's.
 But, let me now quit this subject, and make complaint
 Of the severity of That Fickle Fair One.
 Complaints of God's harsh dealings with His adoring slaves.
 "Wherefore dost thou abandon thy creed and faith?
 What matters it if it be heathen or true?
 Why hast thou forsaken thy Beloved?
 What matters it if she be fair or ugly?" 4
 Let me then, I say, make complaint
 Of the severity of That Fickle Fair One.
 I cry, and my cries sound sweet in His ear;
 He requires from the two worlds cries and groans.
 How shall I not wail under His chastening hand?
 How shall I not be in the number of those bewitched by Him?
 How shall I be other than night without His day?
 Without the vision of His face that illumes the day?
 His bitters are very sweets to my soul,
 My sad heart is a lively sacrifice to my Beloved.
 I am enamoured of my own grief and pain,
 For it makes me well-pleasing to my peerless King.
 I use the dust of my grief as salve for my eyes,
 That my eyes, like seas, may teem with pearls.
 The tears which are shed because of His chastening
 Are very pearls, though men deem them mere tears.
 'Tis "The Soul of souls" of whom I am making complaint;
 Yet I do not complain; I merely state my case.
 My heart says, "He has injured me,"
 But I laugh at these pretended injuries.
 Do me justice, O Thou who art the glory of the just,
 Who art the throne, and I the lintel of Thy door!
 But, in sober truth, where are throne and doorway?
 Where are "We" and "I?" There where our Beloved is!
 O Thou, who art exempt from "Us" and "Me,"
 Who pervadest the spirits of all men and women;
 When man and woman become one, Thou art that One!
 When their union is dissolved, lo! Thou abidest!
 Thou hast made these "Us" and "Me" for this purpose,
 To wit, to play chess with them by Thyself. 5
 When Thou shalt become one entity with "Us" and "You."
 Then wilt Thou show true affection for these lovers.
 When these "We" and "Ye" shall all become one Soul,
 Then they will be lost and absorbed in the "Beloved."
 These are plain truths. Come then, O Lord!
 Who art exalted above description and explanation!
 Is it possible for the bodily eye to behold Thee?
 Can mind of man conceive Thy frowns and Thy smiles?
 Are hearts, when bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns, 6
 In a fit state to see the vision of Thyself?
 When our hearts are bewitched by Thy smiles and frowns,
 Can we gain life from these two alternating states?
 The fertile garden of love, as it is boundless,
 Contains other fruits besides joy and sorrow.
 The true lover is exalted above these two states,
 He is fresh and green independently of autumn or spring!
 Pay tithe on Thy beauty, O Beauteous One!
 Tell forth the tale of the Beloved, every whit!
 For through coquetry His glances
 Are still inflicting fresh wounds on my heart.
 I gave Him leave to shed my blood, if He willed it;
 I only said, "Is it right? " and He forsook me.
 Why dost Thou flee from the cries of us on earth?
 Why pourest Thou sorrow on the heart of the sorrowful?
 O Thou who, as each new morn dawns from the east,
 Art seen uprising anew, like a bright fountain!
 What excuse makest Thou for Thy witcheries?
 O Thou whose lips are sweeter than sugar,
 Thou that ever renewest the life of this old world,
 Hear the cry of this lifeless body and heart!
 But, for God's sake, leave off telling of the Rose;
 Tell of the Bulbul who is severed from his Rose.
 My ardour arises not from joy or grief,
 My sense mates not with illusion and fancy.
 My condition is different, for it is strange.
 Deny it not ! God is all-powerful.
 Argue not from the condition of common men,
 Stumble not at severity and at mercy.
 For mercy and severity, joy and sorrow, are transient,
 And transient things die; "God is heir of all." 7
 "Tis dawn! O Protector and Asylum of the dawn!
 Make excuse for me to my lord Husamu-'d-Din!
 Thou makest excuses for c(Universal Reason and Soul; 8
 Soul of souls and Gem of life art Thou!
 The light of my dawn is a beam from Thy light,
 Shining in the morning draught of Thy protection!
 Since Thy gift keeps me, as it were, intoxicated,
 What is this spiritual wine that causes me this joy?
 Natural wine lacks the ferment in my breast,
 The spheres lag behind me in revolutions!
 Wine is intoxicated with me, not I with it!
 The world takes its being from me, not I from it!
 I am like bees, and earthly bodies like wax, 9
 I build up these bodies as with my own wax!
 *NOTES:
 1. This is a comment on the saying of Faridu-'d-Din Attar, "Thou art a man of lusts, O fool! In dust eat blood! but if a man of heart eats poison, 'tis as honey." 
 2. See Koran xxi. 68, and Rodwell's note. 
 3. This is a comment on the Hadis, "Verily Sa'd is a jealous man, and I am more jealous than he, and God is more jealous than I, and of His jealousy He prohibits 'All pollutions, both outward and inward.'" (Koran vi. 152.) 
 4. This is a quotation from Hakim Sanai, and forms the text of the following discourse. 
 5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 140, and Omar Khayyam Quatr., 270. 
 6. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 745: Frowns are the occultation of the Beloved by the veil of phenomena; smiles, the revelation of Absolute Being to its votaries. Sa'di (Gulistan, Book II. Story XI.) says: "The vision, of God to the pious consists of manifestation and occultation; He shows Himself, and again withdraws Himself from our sight." 
 7. Koran xv. 23. 
 8. i.e., the Logos, and First Soul, upposed to be referred to in the text: "O men, fear your Lord, who hath created you from one Soul, and of him created his wife" (Koran iv. I). See Gulshan i Raz, I. 203. 
 9. i.e., in his spiritual exaltation he feels himself as the Logos, where from tho whole material creation emanates. 

 STORY VIII.
 The Harper.

 In the time of the Khalifa 'Omar there lived a harper, whose voice was as sweet as that of the angel Israfil, and who was in great request at all feasts. But he grew old, and his voice broke, and no one would employ him any longer. In despair he went to the burial-ground of 
 Yathrub, and there played his harp to God, looking to Him for recompense. Having finished his melody he fell asleep, and dreamed he was in heaven. The same night a divine voice came to 'Omar, directing him to go to the burial-ground, and relieve an old man whom he should find there. 'Omar proceeded to the place, found the harper, and gave him money, promising him more when he should need it. The harper cast away his harp, saying that it had diverted him from God, and expressed great contrition for his past sins. 'Omar then instructed him that his worldly journey was now over, and that he must not give way to contrition for the past, as he was now entered into the state of ecstasy and intoxication of union with God, and in this exalted state regard to past and future should be swept away. The harper acted on his instructions, and sang no more.
 Apology for applying the term "Bride" to God.
 Mustafa became beside himself at that sweet call,
 His prayer failed on "the night of the early morning halt."
 He lifted not head from that blissful sleep," 1
 So that his morning prayer was put off till noon.
 On that, his wedding night, in presence of his bride,
 His pure soul attained to kiss her hands.
 Love and mistress are both veiled and hidden,
 Impute it not as a fault if I call Him "Bride."
 I would have kept silence from fear of my Beloved,
 If He had granted me but a moment's respite.
 But He said, "Speak on, 'tis no fault,
 'Tis naught but the necessary result of the hidden decree,
 'Tis a fault only to him who only sees faults.
 How can the Pure Hidden Spirit notice faults?"
 Faults seem so to ignorant creatures,
 Not in the sight of the Lord of Benignity.
 Blasphemy even may be wisdom in the Creator's si ht,
 Whereas from our point of view it is grievous sin.
 If one fault occur among a hundred beauties
 'Tis as one dry stick in a garden of green herbs.
 Both weigh equally in the scales
 For the two resemble body and soul.
 Wherefore the sages have said not idly,
 " The bodies of the righteous are as pure souls."
 Their words, their actions, their praises,
 Are all as a pure soul without spot or blemish.
 'Omar rebukes the Harper for brooding over 
 and bewailing the past.
 Then 'Omar said to him, "This wailing of thine
 Shows thou art still in a state of ' sobriety."'
 Afterwards he thus urged him to quit that state
 And called him out of his beggary to absorption in God:
 "Sobriety savours of memory of the past;
 Past and future are what veil God from our sight.
 Burn up both of them with fire! How long
 Wilt thou be partitioned by these segments as a reed?
 So long as a reed has partitions 'tis not privy to secrets,
 Nor is it vocal in response to lip and breathing.
 While circumambulating the house thou art a stranger;
 When thou enterest in thou art at home.
 Thou whose knowledge is ignorance of the Giver of knowledge,
 Thy wailing contrition is worse than thy sin.
 The road of the 'annihilated' is another road;
 Sobriety is wrong, and a straying from that other road.
 O thou who seekest to be contrite for the past,
 How wilt thou be contrite for this contrition?
 At one time thou adorest the music of the lute,
 At another embracest wailing and weeping."
 While the "Discerner" reflected these mysteries,
 The heart of the harper was emancipated.
 Like a soul he was freed from weeping and rejoicing,
 His old life died, and he was regenerated.
 Amazement fell upon him at that moment,
 For he was exalted above earth and heaven,
 An uplifting of the heart surpassing all uplifting;
 I cannot describe it ; if you can, say on!
 Ecstasy and words beyond all ecstatic words;
 Immersion in the glory of the Lord of glory!
 Immersion wherefrom was no extrication,
 As it were identification with the Very Ocean!
 Partial Reason is as naught to Universal Reason,
 If one impulse dependent on another impulse be naught;
 But when that impulse moves this impulse,
 The waves of that sea rise to this point; 2
 *NOTES:
 1. The night of his marriage with Safiyya. 
 2. i.e., he is possessed by the Deity as an "Energumen," and the Deity works these ecstatic states in him.

 STORY IX.
 The Arab and his Wife.
 An Arab lived with his wife in the desert in extreme poverty, so that they became a reproach to their neighbours. The wife at last lost patience, and began to abuse her husband, and to urge him to improve their condition. The Arab rebuked her for her covetousness, reminding her that the Prophet had said, "Poverty is my glory," and showing her how poverty was a better preparation for death than riches, and finally threatening to divorce her if she persisted in her querulous ways. The wife, however, by blandishments reduced her husband to obedience, as wives always do, and made him promise to carry out her wishes. She directed him to go and represent their case to the Khalifa at Bagdad, and to make him an offering of a pot of water, that being the only present they could afford to make. Accordingly the Arab travelled to Bagdad, and laid his offering at the feet of the Khalifa, who received it graciously, and in return filled the pot with pieces of gold, and then sent him back to his home in a boat up the river Tigris. The Arab was lost in wonder at the benignity of the Khalifa, who had recompensed him so bountifully for his petty offering of a drop of water. The story contains several digressions, on Pharaoh, on the prophet Salih, and on Adam and the angels, and the poet, apropos of its disconnectedness, compares it to eternity, as it has no beginning and no end.
 Men subdued by women's wiles.
 In this manner she pleaded with gentle coaxing,
 The while her tears fell upon her cheeks.
 How could his firmness and endurance abide
 When even without tears she could charm his heart?
 That rain brought forth a flash of lightning
 Which kindled a spark in the heart of that poor man.
 Since the man was the slave of her fair face,
 How was it when she stooped to slavish entreaties?
 When she whose airs set thy heart a-quaking,
 When she weeps, how feelest thou then?
 When she whose coquetry makes thy heart bleed
 Condescends to entreaties, how is it then?
 She who subdues us with her pride and severity,
 What plea is left us when she begins to plead?
 When she who traded in naught but bloodshed
 Submits at last, ah! what a profit she makes!
 God has adorned them "fair in the sight of men;" 1
 From her whom God has adorned how can man escape?
 Since He created him "to dwell together with her," 2
 How can Adam sever himself from his Eve?
 Though he be Rustum, son of Zal, and braver than Hamza,
 Yet he is submissive to the behests of his dame.
 He by whose preaching the world was entranced
 Was he who spake the two words, "O Humaira!" 3
 Though water prevails over fire in might,
 Yet it boils by fire when in a cauldron.
 When the cauldron intervenes between these two,
 Air (desire) makes as naught the action of the water.
 Apparently thou art the ruler of thy wife, like water;
 In reality thou art ruled by and suppliant to her.
 Such is the peculiarity of man,
 He cannot withstand animal desire; that is his failing.
 The Prophet said that women hold dominion
 Over sages and over men of heart,
 But that fools, again, hold the upper hand over women,
 Because fools are violent and exceedingly froward.
 They have no tenderness or gentleness or amity,
 Because the animal nature sways their temperament.
 Love and tenderness are qualities of humanity,
 Passion and lust are qualities of animality.
 Woman is a ray of God, not a mere mistress,
 The Creator's self, as it were, not a mere creature!
 Moses and Pharaoh, alike doers of God's will, 
 as Light and Darkness. Poison and Antidote.
 Verily, both Moses and Pharaoh walked in the right way,
 Though seemingly the one did so, and the other not.
 By day Moses wept before God,
 At midnight Pharaoh lifted up his cry,
 Saying, "What a yoke is this upon my neck, O God!
 Were it not for this yoke who would boast, 'I am ?'
 Because Thou hast made Moses' face bright as the moon,
 And hast made the moon of my face black in the face.
 Can my star ever shine brighter than the moon?
 If it be eclipsed, what remedy have I?
 Though princes and kings beat drums,
 And men beat cymbals because of my eclipse, 4
 They beat their brass dishes and raise a clamour,
 And make my moon ashamed thereby,
 I, who am Pharaoh, woe is me! The people's clamour
 Confounds my boast, 'I am Lord Supreme!' 5
 Moses and I are Thy nurslings both alike,
 Yet Thy axe cuts down tho branches in Thy woods.
 Some of these branches Thou plantest in the ground,
 Others Thou castest away as useless.
 Can branch strive against axe? Not so.
 Can branch elude the power of the axe? Nay,
 O Lord of the power that dwells in Thy axe,
 In mercy make these crooked things straight!"
 Man and wife types of the spirit and the flesh.
 The dissension of this husband and wife is a parable;
 They are types of thy animal and rational souls.
 This husband and wife are the reason and the flesh,
 A couple joined together for good and for evil.
 And in this earthly house this linked pair
 Day and night are ever at variance and strife.
 The wife is ever seeking dainties for domestic needs,
 Namely, bread and meat and her own dignity and position.
 Like the wife, the animal soul seeks comfort,
 Sometimes carnal, sometimes ambitious;
 Reason has no care for these matters,
 In its mind is naught but regard to Allah.
 Though the secret moral hereof is a bait and snare,
 Hear its outward form to the end.
 If spiritual manifestations had been sufficient,
 The creation of the world had been needless and vain.
 If spiritual thought were equivalent to love of God,
 Outward forms of temples and prayers would not exist.
 Presents which friends make one to another
 Are naught but signs and indications,
 To give outward testimony and witness
 Of the love concealed within the heart.
 Because outward attentions are evidence
 Of secret love, O beloved!
 The witness may be true or false,
 Now drunk with real wine, now with sour whey;
 He who drinks fermented whey displays drunkenness,
 Makes a noise, and reels to and fro.
 That hypocrite in prayers and fasts
 Displays exceeding diligence,
 That men may think him drunk with love of God;
 But if you look into the truth, he is drowned in hypocrisy.
 In fine, outward actions are guides
 To show the way to what is concealed within.
 Sometimes the guide is true, sometimes false,
 Sometimes a help, and at other times a hindrance.
 O Lord, grant, in answer to my prayers, discernment,
 That I may know such false signs from the true!
 Know you how discernment accrues to the sense?
 'Tis when sense "sees by the light of Allah."
 If effects are obscure, still causes testify;
 Kindred, for instance, shows that there is love.
 But he to whom God's light is the guide
 Is no longer a slave to effects and causes.
 When the light of Allah illumes his senses,
 A man is no longer a slave to effects.
 When love of God kindles a flame in the inward man,
 He burns, and is freed from effects.
 He has no need of signs to assure him of love,
 For love casts its own light up to heaven.
 Other details are wanting to complete this subject,
 But take this much, and all hail to you!
 Though reality is exposed to view in this form,
 Form is at once nigh to and far from reality.
 For instance, these two resemble water and a tree;
 When you look to their essence they are far apart;
 Yet see how quickly a seed becomes a high tree
 Out of water, along with earth and sunshine!
 If you turn your eyes to their real essence,
 These two are far, far apart from each other!
 But let us quit this talk of essences and properties,
 And return to the story of those two wealth-seekers.
 How God made Adam superior to the Angels
 in wisdom and honour.
 He said, "By Allah, who knoweth hidden secrets,
 Who created pure Adam out of dust;
 In the form, three cubits high, which he gave him,
 He displayed the contents of all spirits, all decrees!
 Communicated to him the indelible tablet of existence, 6
 That he might know all that is written on those tablets,
 A11 that should be first and last to endless eternity
 He taught him, with the knowledge of his own 'names,' 7
 So that the angels were beside themselves at his instruction,
 And gained more sanctity from his sanctification.
 The expansion of their minds, which Adam brought about,
 Was a thing unequalled by the expansion of the heavens.
 For the wide expanse of that pure mind
 The wide space of the seven heavens was not enough."
 The Prophet said that God has declared,
 "I am not contained in aught above or below,
 I am not contained in earth or sky, or even
 In highest heaven. Know this for a surety. O beloved!
 Yet am I contained in the believer's heart!
 If ye seek me, search in such hearts!"
 He said also, "Enter the hearts of my servants 8
 To gain the paradise of beholding Me, O fearer of God."
 Highest heaven, with all its light and wide expanse,
 When it beheld Adam, was shaken from its place!
 Highest heaven is greatness itself revealed;
 But what is form when reality draws nigh?
 Every angel declared, "In times of yore
 We bore friendship to the plains of earth;
 We were wont to sow the seed of service on the earth,
 Wherefore we bore a wondrous attachment to it.
 What was this attachment to that house of earth
 When our own natures are heavenly?
 What was the friendship of lights like us to darkness?
 How can light dwell together with darkness?
 O Adam! that friendship arose from the scent of thee,
 Because the earth is the warp and weft of thy body.
 Thy earthly body was taken from there,
 Thy pure spirit of light was shed down from here!
 But our souls were enlightened by thy spirit 9
 Long, long before earth had diverted it to itself.
 We used to be on earth, ignorant of tho earth,
 Ignorant of the treasure buried within it.
 When we were commanded to depart from that place,
 We felt sorrow at turning our steps away from it.
 So that we raised many questions, saying,
 ' O Lord! who will come to take our place?
 Wilt Thou barter the glory of our praises and homage
 For the vain babble (of men)?'
 The commands of God then diffused joy upon us; He said,
 'What are ye saying at such length?
 What ye give tongue to so foolishly
 Is as the words of spoiled children to their father.
 I knew of myself what ye thought,
 But I desired that ye should speak it;
 As this boasting of yours is very improper,
 So shall my mercy be shown to prevail over my wrath:
 O angels, in order to show forth that prevailing,
 I inspired that pretension to cavil and doubt;
 If you say your say, and I forbear to punish you,
 The gainsayers of my mercy must hold their peace.
 My mercy equals that of a hundred fathers and mothers;
 Every soul that is born is amazed thereat.
 Their mercy is as the foam of the sea of my mercy;
 It is mere foam of waves, but the sea abides ever!
 What more shall I say? In that earthly shell
 There is naught but foam of foam of foam of foam!'"
 God is that foam; God is also that pure sea,
 For His words are neither a temptation nor a vain boast.
 Plurality and Partial Evil, though seemingly
 opposed to Unity, subserve Good.
 The story is now concluded, with its ups and downs,
 Like lovers' musings, without beginning or ending.
 It has no beginning, even as eternity,
 Nor ending, for 'tis akin to world without end.
 Or like water, each drop whereof is at once
 Beginning and end, and also has no beginning or end.
 But God forbid! This story is not a vain fable,
 'Tis the ready money of your state and mine, be sure!
 Before every Sufi who is enlightened
 Whatever is past is never mentioned.
 When his whole thoughts are absorbed in present ecstasy,
 No thought of consequences enters his mind. l0
 Arab, water-pot, and angels are all ourselves!
 "Whatsoever turneth from God is turned from Him." 11
 Know the husband is reason, the wife lust and greed;
 She is vested with darkness and a gainsayer of reason.
 Learn now whence springs the root of this circumstance,
 From this, that the Whole has parts of divers kinds.
 These parts of the Whole are not parts in relation to it,
 Not in the way that rose's scent is a part of the rose.
 The beauty of the green shoot is part of the rose's beauty,
 But the turtle-dove's cooing is a part of that Bulbuls music.
 But if I engage in doubts and answers,
 How can I give water to thirsty souls?
 Yet, if you are perplexed by Whole and finite parts,
 Have patience, for c( patience is the key of joy."
 Be abstinent, abstinent from vague thoughts,
 Since there are lions in that desert (of thoughts).
 Abstinence is the prince of medicines,
 As scratching only aggravates a scab.
 Abstinence is certainly the root of medicine;
 Practise abstinence, see how it invigorates thy soul!
 Accept this counsel and give ear thereto,
 That it may be to thee as an earring of gold!
 Nay, not a mere earring, but that thou mayest be a mine of gold,
 Or that thou mayest surpass moon and Pleiades.
 First, know creation is in various forms;
 Souls are as various as the letters from Alif to Ya.
 In this variety of letters there seems disorder,
 Though in fact they agree in an integral unity.
 In one aspect they are opposed, in another united;
 In one aspect capricious, in another serious.
 The day of judgment is the day of tho great review;
 Whoso is fair and enlightened longs for that review;
 Whoso, like a Hindoo, is black (with sin),
 The day of review will sound the knell of his disgrace.
 Since he has not a face like a sun,
 He desires only night like to a veil!
 If his thorn puts not forth a single rosebud,
 The spring in disclosing him is his foe.
 But he who is from head to foot a perfect rose or lily,
 To him spring brings rejoicing.
 The useless thorn desires the autumn,
 That autumn may associate itself with the garden;
 And hide the rose's beauty and the thorn's shame,
 That men may not see the bloom of the one and the other's shame,
 That common stone and pure ruby may appear all as one.
 True, the Gardener knows the difference even in autumn,
 But the sight of One is better than the world's sight.
 That One Person is Himself the world, as He is the sun,
 And every star in heaven is a part of the sun.
 That One Person is Himself the world, and the rest
 Are all His dependents and parasites, O man!
 He is the perfect world, yet He is single;
 He holds in hand the writing of the whole of existence.
 Wherefore all forms and colours of beauty cry out,
 " Good news! good news! Lo! the spring is at hand!"
 If the blossoms did not shine as bright helmets,
 How could the fruits display their globes?
 When the blossoms are shed the fruits come to a head,
 When tho body is destroyed the soul lifts up its head.
 The fruit is the substance, the blossom only its form,
 Blossom the good news, and fruit the promised boon.
 When the blossoms fall the fruit appears,
 When the former vanish the fruit is tasted.
 Till bread is broken, how can it serve as food?
 Till the grapes are crushed, how can they yield wine?
 Till citrons be pounded up with drugs,
 How can they afford healing to the sick?
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran iii. 12. 
 2. Koran iii. 189. 
 3. Muhammad said these words to his wife, Ayisha. 
 4. Compare the ancient custom of ringing bells to still thunder. 
 5. Koran lxxix. 24. Pharaoh's boast. 
 6. The tablet on which God writes His eternal decrees. 
 7. Koran ii. 29. 
 8. Koran lxxxix. 29. 
 9. The Logos, the first of created beings, was afterwards embodied in Adam, the "Perfect Man," or Microcosm. 
 10. He is the "son of the time present and instant," as said above. 
 11. Koran li. 9. 

 STORY X.
 The Man who was Tattooed.
 It was the custom of the men of Qazwin to have various devices tattooed upon their bodies. A certain coward went to the artist to have such a device tattooed on his back, and desired that it might be the figure of a lion. But when he felt the pricks of the needles he roared with pain, and said to the artist, "What part of the lion are you now painting?" The artist replied, "I am doing the tail." The patient cried, "Never mind the tail; go on with another part." The artist accordingly began in another part, but the patient again cried out and told him to try somewhere else. Wherever the artist applied his needles, the patient raised similar objections, till at last the artist dashed all his needles and pigments on the ground, and refused to proceed any further.
 The Prophet's counsels to 'Ali to follow the direction of the Pir or Spiritual Guide, and to endure his chastisements patiently.
 The Prophet said to 'Ali, "O 'Ali,
 Thou art the Lion of God, a hero most valiant;
 Yet confide not in thy lion-like valour,
 But seek refuge under the palm-trees of the 'Truth.'
 Whoso takes obedience as his exemplar
 Shares its proximity to the ineffable Presence.
 Do thou seek to draw near to Reason; let not thy heart
 Rely, like others, on thy own virtue and piety.
 Come under the shadow of the Man of Reason, l
 Thou canst not find it in the road of the traditionists.
 That man enjoys close proximity to Allah;
 Turn not away from obedience to him in any wise;
 For he makes the thorn a bed of roses,
 And gives sight to the eyes of the blind.
 His shadow on earth is as that of Mount Qaf,
 His spirit is as a Simurgh soaring on high.
 He lends aid to the slaves of the friends of God,
 And advances to high place them who seek him.
 Were I to tell his praises till the last day,
 My words would not be too many nor admit of curtailment,
 He is the sun of the spirit, not that of the sky,
 For from his light men and angels draw life.
 That sun is hidden in the form of a man,
 Understand me! Allah knows the truth.
 O 'Ali, out of all forms of religious service
 Choose thou the shadow of that dear friend of God!
 Every man takes refuge in some form of service,
 And chooses for himself some asylum;
 Do thou seek refuge in the shadow of the wise man,
 That thou mayest escape thy fierce secret foes.
 Of all forms of service this is fittest for thee;
 Thou shalt surpass all who were before thee.
 Having chosen thy Director, be submissive to him,
 Even as Moses submitted to the commands of Khizr; 2
 Have patience with Khizr's actions, O sincere one!
 Lest he say, 'There is a partition between us.'
 Though he stave in thy boat, yet hold thy peace;
 Though he slay a young man, heave not a sigh.
 God declares his hand to be even as God's hand,
 For He saith, ( The hand of God is over their hands.' 3
 The hand of God impels him and gives him life;
 Nay, not life only, but an eternal soul.
 A friend is needed; travel not the road alone,
 Take not thy own way through this desert!
 Whoso travels this road alone
 Only does so by aid of the might of holy men.
 The hand of the Director is not weaker than theirs;
 His hand is none other than the grasp of Allah!
 If absent saints can confer such protection,
 Doubtless present saints are more powerful than absent.
 If such food be bestowed on the absent,
 What dainties may not the guest who is present expect?
 The courtier who attends in the presence of the king
 Is served better than the stranger outside the gate.
 The difference between them is beyond calculation;
 One sees the light, the other on]y the veil.
 Strive to obtain entrance within,
 If thou wouldst not remain as a ring outside the door.
 Having chosen thy Director, be not weak of heart,
 Nor yet sluggish and lax as water and mud;
 But if thou takest umbrage at every rub,
 How wilt thou become a polished mirror?"
 *NOTES:
 1. i.e., the Pir, or Perfect Shaikh, or Spiritual Director. So St. John of the Cross and St. Theresa enjoin obedience to the Director (Vaughan, xii. 122). 
 2. See Koran xviii. 77 for the story of Moses and Khizr. It is also given in Parnell's 'Hermit.' 
 3. Koran xlviii. 10. 

 STORY XI.
 The Lion who Hunted with the Wolf and the Fox.
 A lion took a wolf and a fox with him on a hunting excursion, and succeeded in catching a wild ox, an ibex, and a hare. He then directed the wolf to divide the prey. The wolf proposed to award the ox to the lion, the ibex to himself, and the hare to the fox. The lion was enraged with the wolf because he had presumed to talk of "I" and "Thou," and "My share" and "Thy share" when it all belonged of right to the lion, and he slew the wolf with one blow of his paw. Then, turning to the fox, he ordered him to make the division. The fox, rendered wary by the fate of the wolf, replied that the whole should be the portion of the lion. The lion, pleased with his self-abnegation, gave it all up to him, saying, "Thou art no longer a fox, but myself."
 Till man destroys "self" he is no true friend of God.
 Once a man came and knocked at the door of his friend.
 His friend said, "who art thou. O faithful one?"
 He said, "'Tis I." He answered, "There is no admittance.
 There is no room for the 'raw' at my well-cooked feast.
 Naught but fire of separation and absence
 Can cook the raw one and free him from hypocrisy!
 Since thy 'self' has not yet left thee,
 Thou must be burned in fiery flames."
 The poor man went away, and for one whole year
 Journeyed burning with grief for his friend's absence.
 His heart burned till it was cooked; then he went again
 And drew near to the house of his friend.
 He knocked at the door in fear and trepidation
 Lest some careless word might fall from his lips.
 His friend shouted, "Who is that at the door?"
 He answered, "'Tis Thou who art at the door. O Beloved!"
 The friend said, "Since 'tis I, let me come in,
 There is not room for two 'I's' in one house."

 STORY XII.
 Joseph a###130######142###d the Mirror.
 An old friend came to pay his respects to Joseph, and, after some remarks upon the bad behaviour of his brethren, Joseph asked him what present he had brought to show his respect. The friend replied that he had long considered what gift would be most suitable to offer, and at last had fixed upon a mirror, which he accordingly produced from his pocket and presented to Joseph, at the same time begging him to admire his own beauteous face in it.
 Defect and Not-being the Mirror wherein 
 Absolute Perfect Being is reflected 1.
 He drew forth a mirror from his side
 A mirror is what Beauty busies itself with.
 Since Not-being is tho mirror of Being,
 If you are wise, choose Not-being (self-abnegation).
 Being may be displayed in that Not-being,
 Wealthy men show their liberality on the poor.
 He who is an hungered is the clear mirror of bread,
 The tinder is the mirror of the flint and steel.
 Not-being and Defect, wherever they occur,
 Are the mirrors of the Beauty of all beings.
 Because Not-being is a clear filtered essence,
 Wherein all these beings are infused.
 When a garment is made by a good tailor,
 'Tis an evidence of the tailor's art.
 Logs of wood would not be duly shaped
 Did not the carpenter plan outline and detail.
 The leech skilled in setting bones goes
 Where lies the patient with a broken leg.
 If there were no sick and infirm,
 How could the excellence of the leech's art be seen?
 If vile base copper were not mingled,
 How could the alchemist show his skill?
 Defects are the mirrors of the attributes of Beauty,
 The base is the mirror of the High and Glorious One,
 Because one contrary shows forth its contrary, 2
 As honey's sweetness is shown by vinegar's sourness.
 Whoso recognizes and confesses his own defects
 Is hastening in the way that leads to perfection!
 But he advances not towards the Almighty
 Who fancies himself to be perfect.
 No sickness worse than fancying thyself perfect
 Can infect thy soul, O arrogant misguided one!
 Shed many tears of blood from eyes and heart,
 That this self-satisfaction may be driven out.
 The fault of Iblis lay in saying, "I am better than he," 3
 And this same weakness lurks in the soul of all creatures.
 *NOTES:
 1. Compare the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, 1. 135, and the notes thereon. 
 2. Cp. "Religio Medici," Sect. 35: "Herein is divinity conformant unto philosophy, and not only generation founded on contrarieties, but also creation. God, being all things, is contrary unto nothing; out of which were made all things, and so nothing became something, and Omneity informed nullity into existence." 
 3. Koran vii. II. 

 STORY XIII.
 The Prophet's Scribe.
 The Prophet had a scribe who used to write down the texts that fell from his lips. At last this scribe became so conceited that he imagined all this heavenly wisdom proceeded from his own wit, and not from the Prophet. Puffed up with self-importance, he fancied himself inspired, and his heart was hardened against his master, and he became a renegade, like the fallen angels Harut and Marut. He took his own foolish surmises to be the truth, whereas they were all wide of the mark, as those of the deaf man who went to condole with a sick neighbour and answered all his remarks at cross purposes.
 How philosophers deceive themselves.
 On the last day, 1 "when Earth shall quake with quaking,"
 This earth shall give witness of her condition.
 For she "shall tell out her tidings openly,"
 Yea, earth and her rocks shall tell them forth!
 The philosopher reasons from base analogies
 (True reason comes not out of a dark corner) ;
 The philosopher (I say) denies this in his pride of intellect.
 Say to him, "Go, dash thy head against a wall!"
 The speech of water, of earth, of mire,
 Is audible by the ears of men of heart!
 Tho philosopher, who denies Divine Providence,
 Is a stranger to the perceptions of saints.
 He says that the flashes of men's morbid imaginations
 Instil many vain fancies into men's minds.
 But, on the contrary, 'tis his perverseness and want of faith
 Which implant in himself this vain fancy of negation.
 The philosopher denies the existence of the Devil;
 At the same time he is the Devil's laughing-stock.
 If thou hast not seen the Devil, look at thyself,
 Without demon's aid how came that blue turban 2 on thy brow?
 Whosoever has a doubt or disquietude in his heart
 Is a secret denier and philosopher.
 Now and then he displays firm belief,
 But that slight dash of philosophy blackens his face.
 Beware, O believers! That lurks in you too;
 You may develop innumerable states of mind.
 All the seventy and two heresies lurk in you;
 Have a care lest one day they prevail over you!
 He in whose breast the leaf of true faith is grown
 Must tremble as a leaf from fear of such a catastrophe.
 Thou makest a mock of Iblis and the Devil,
 Because thou art a fine man in thy own sight;
 But when thy soul shall tell thy wretched faults,
 What lamentation thou wilt cause to the faithful!
 The sellers of base gold sit smiling in their shops,
 Because the touchstone is not as yet in their sight.
 O Veiler of sins! strip not the veil from us;
 Lend us aid on the day of trial!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xcix. 1-4. 
 2. Blue turbans were considered a sign of hypocrisy (Hafiz, Ode 5). 

 STORY XIV.
 The Chinese and the Greek Artists.
 The Chinese and the Greeks disputed before the Sultan which of them were the better painters; and, in order to settle the dispute, the Sultan allotted to each a house to be painted by them. The Chinese procured all kinds of paints, and coloured their house in the most elaborate way. The Greeks, on the other hand, used no colours at all, but contented themselves with cleansing the walls of their house from all filth, and burnishing them till they were as clear and bright as the heavens. When the two houses were offered to tho Sultan's inspection, that painted by tho Chinese was much admired; but the Greek house carried off the palm, as all the colours of the other house were reflected on its walls with an endless variety of shades and hues.
 Knowledge of the heart preferable
 to the knowledge of the schools.
 The knowledge of men of heart bears them up,
 The knowledge of men of the body weighs them down.
 When 'tis knowledge of the heart, it is a friend;
 When knowledge of the body, it is a burden.
 God saith, "As an ass bearing a load of books," 1
 The knowledge which is not of Him is a burden.
 Knowledge which comes not immediately from Him
 Endures no longer than the rouge of the tirewoman.
 Nevertheless, if you bear this burden in a right spirit
 'Twill be removed, and you will obtain joy.
 See you bear not that burden out of vainglory,
 Then you will behold a store of true knowledge within.
 When you mount the steed of this true knowledge,
 Straightway the burden will fall from your back.
 If you drink not His cup, how will you escape lusts?
 You, who seek no more of Him than to name His name?
 What do His name and fame suggest? The idea of Him.
 And the idea of Him guides you to union with Him.
 Know you a guide without something to which it guides?
 Were there no roads there would be no ghouls.
 Know you a name without a thing answering to it?
 Have you ever plucked a rose (Gul) from Gaf and Lam?
 You name His name; go, seek the reality named by it!
 Look for the moon in heaven, not in the water!
 If you desire to rise above mere names and letters,
 Make yourself free from self at one stroke!
 Like a sword be without trace of soft iron;
 Like a steel mirror, scour off all rust with contrition;
 Make yourself pure from all attributes of self,
 That you may see your own pure bright essence!
 Yea, see in your heart the knowledge of the Prophet,
 Without book, without tutor, without preceptor.
 The Prophet saith, "He is one of my people,
 Whoso is of like temper and spirit with me.
 His soul beholds me by the selfsame light
 Whereby I myself behold him,
 Without traditions and scriptures and histories,
 In the fount of the water of life."
 Learn the mystery, "I was last night a Kurd,
 And this morning am become an Arab." 2
 This mystery of "last night" and "this morning"
 Leads you into the road that brings you to God.
 But if you want an instance of this secret knowledge,
 Hear the story of the Greeks and the Chinese.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxii. 5. 
 2. Syad Abu'l Wafa, an unlettered Kurd, found a paper with the words Bismillah upon it, and, after spending the night in prayer, found himself able to understand Arabic (Luck-now Commentator). 

 STORY XV.
 Counsels of Reserve given by the Prophet to his Freedman Zaid.
 At dawn the Prophet said to Zaid,
 "How is it with thee this morning, O pure disciple?"
 He replied, "Thy faithful slave am I." Again he said,
 "If the garden of faith has bloomed, show a token of it."
 He answered, "I was athirst many days,
 By night I slept not for the burning pangs of love;
 So that I passed by days and nights,
 As the point of a spear glances off a shield.
 For in that state all faith is one,
 A hundred thousand years and a moment are all one;
 World without beginning and world without end are one;
 Reason finds no entrance when mind is thus lost."
 The Prophet again urged Zaid to deliver to him a present from that celestial region, as a token that he had really been there in the spirit. Zaid answered that he had seen the eight heavens and the seven hells, and the destinies of all men, whether bound to heaven or hell. The body, he said, is as a mother, and the soul as her infant, and death is the time of parturition, when it becomes manifest to what class the infant soul belongs. As, on the day of judgment it will be manifest to all men whether a soul belongs to the saved or to the lost, so now it was plain and manifest to him. He went on to ask the Prophet if he should publish this secret knowledge of his to all men, or hold his peace. The Prophet told him to hold his peace. Zaid, however, proceeded to detail the vision of the last judgment, which he had seen when in the spirit; and the Prophet again commanded him to pause, adding that" God is never ashamed to say the truth," l and allows His Prophet to speak forth the truth, but that for Zaid to blab forth the secrets seen in ecstatic vision would be wrong. Zaid replied that it was impossible for one who had once beheld the Sun of "The Truth" to keep his vision a secret. But the Prophet in reply instructed him that all men are masters of their own wills, and that he must not reveal what God has determined to keep secret till the last day, in order to leave men till then under the stimulus of hope and fear, and to give them the credit of "believing what is not seen." 2 More honour is given to the warder of a castle who faithfully executes his trust at a distance from the court than to those courtiers who serve constantly under the king's own eye. Zaid submitted to tho Prophet's injunctions, and remained self-contained in his ecstatic visions. Anecdotes of the sage Luqman, of King Solomon, and of a conflagration in the days of the Khalifa 'Omar complete the section.
 The Prophet's final counsels of "Reserve".
 The Prophet said, "My companions are as the stars,
 Lights to them that walk aright, missiles against Satan.
 If every man had strength of eyesight
 To look straight at the light of the sun in heaven,
 What need were there of stars, O humble one,
 To one who was guided by the light of the sun?
 Neither moon nor planets would be needed
 By one who saw directly the Sun of 'The Truth.'
 The Moon 3 declares, as also the clouds and shadows,
 ' I am a man, yet it hath been revealed to me.' 4
 Like you, I was naturally dark,
 'Twas the Sun's revelation that gave me such light.
 I still am dark compared to the Sun,
 Though I am light compared to the dark souls of men.
 Therefore is my light weak, that you may bear it,
 For you are not strong enough to bear the dazzling Sun.
 I have, as it were, mixed honey with vinegar,
 To succour the sickness of your hearts.
 When you are cured of your sickness, O invalid,
 Then leave out the vinegar and eat pure honey.
 When the heart is garnished and swept clear of lust,
 Therein 'The God of Mercy sitteth on His throne.' 5
 Then God rules the heart immediately,
 When it has gained this immediate connection with Him.
 This subject is endless; but where is Zaid,
 That I may tell him again not to seek notoriety?
 'Tis not wise to publish these mysteries,
 Since the last day is approaching to reveal all things."
 Now you will not find Zaid, for he is fled,
 He sprang from the place where the shoes were left, 6
 Scattering the shoes in his hurry.
 If you had been Zaid, you too would have been lost,
 As a star is lost when tho sun shines on it;
 For then you see no trace or sign of it,
 No place or track of it in tho milky way.
 Our senses and our endless discourses
 Are annihilated in the light of the knowledge of our King.
 Our senses and our reason within us
 Are as waves on waves "assembled before us." 7
 When night returns and 'tis the time of the sky's levee,
 The stars that were hidden come forth to their work.
 The people of the world lie unconscious,
 With veils drawn over their faces, and asleep;
 But when the morn shall burst forth and the sun arise
 Every creature will raise its head from its couch;
 To the unconscious God will restore consciousness;
 They will stand in rings as slaves with rings in ears;
 Dancing and clapping hands with songs of praise,
 Singing with joy, "Our Lord hath restored us to life!"
 Shedding their old skins and bones,
 As horsemen stirring up a cloud of dust.
 All pressing on from Not-being to Being,
 On the last day, as well the thankful as the unthankful.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xxxiii. 53. 
 2. Koran ii. 2. 
 3. i.e., the Prophet. 
 4. Koran xviii. 110. 
 5. Koran xx. 4. 
 6. i.e., the vestibule of the house. 
 7. Koran xxxvi. 53. 

 STORY XVI.
 'Ali's Forbearance.
 'Ali, the "Lion of God," was once engaged in conflict with a Magian chief, and in the midst of the struggle the Magian spat in his face. 'Ali, instead of taking vengeance on him, at once dropped his sword, to the Magian's great astonishment. On his inquiring the reason of such forbearance, 'Ali informed him that the "Lion of God" did not destroy life for the satisfaction of his own vengeance, but simply to carry out God's will, and that whenever he saw just cause, he held his hand even in the midst of the strife, and spared the foe. The Prophet, 'Ali continued, had long since informed him that he would die by the hand of his own stirrup-bearer (Ibn Maljun), and the stirrup-bearer had frequently implored 'Ali to kill him, and thus save him from the commission of that great crime; but 'Ali said he always refused to do so, as to him death was as sweet as life, and he felt no anger against his destined assassin, who was only the instrument of God's eternal purpose. The Magian chief, on hearing 'Ali's discourse, was so much affected that he embraced Islam, together with all his family, to the number of fifty souls.
 How the Prophet whispered to 'Ali's stirrup-bearer 
 that he would one day assassinate his master.
 "The Prophet whispered in the ear of my servant
 That one day he would sever my head from my neck.
 The Prophet also warned by inspiration me, his friend,
 That the hand of my servant would destroy me.
 My servant cried, "O kill me first,
 That I may not become guilty of so grievous a sin!"
 I replied, "Since my death is to come from thee,
 How can I balk the fateful decree?"
 He fell at my feet and cried, "O gracious lord,
 For God's sake cleave now my body in twain,
 That such an evil deed may not be wrought by me,
 And my soul burn with anguish for its beloved."
 I replied, "What God's pen has written, it has written;
 In presence of its writings knowledge is confounded;
 There is no anger in my soul against thee,
 Because I attribute not this deed to thee;
 Thou art God's instrument. God's hand is the agent.
 How can I chide or fret at God's instrument?"
 He said, "If this be so, why is there retaliation?" 1
 I answered, "'Tis from God, and 'tis God's secret;
 If He shows displeasure at His own acts,
 From His displeasure He evolves a Paradise;
 He feels displeasure at His own acts,
 Because He is a God of vengeance as of mercy.
 In this city of events He is the Lord,
 In this realm He is the King who plans all events.
 If He crushes His own instruments,
 He makes those crushed ones fair in His sight.
 Know the great mystery of 'whatever verses we cancel,
 Or cause you to forget, we substitute better for them.' 2
 Whatever law God cancels, He makes as a weed,
 And in its stead He brings forth a rose.
 So night cancels the business of the daytime,
 When the reason that lights our minds becomes inanimate.
 Again, night is cancelled by the light of day,
 And inanimate reason is rekindled to life by its rays.
 Though darkness produces this sleep and quiet,
 Is not the 'water of life' in the darkness? 3
 Are not spirits refreshed in that very darkness?
 Is not that silence the season of heavenly voices?
 For from contraries contraries are brought forth,
 Out of darkness was created light.
 The Prophet's wars brought about the present peace,
 The peace of these latter days resulted from those wars.
 That conqueror of hearts cut off a thousand heads,
 That the heads of his people might rest in peace."
 God's rebuke to Adam for scorning Iblis.
 To whomsoever God's order comes,
 He must smite with his sword even his own child.
 Fear then, and revile not the wicked,
 For the wicked are impotent under God's commands.
 In presence of God's commands bow down the neck of pride.
 Scoff not nor chide even them that go astray!
 One day Adam cast a look of contempt and scorn
 Upon Iblis, thinking what a wretch he was.
 He felt self-important and proud of himself,
 And he smiled at the actions of cursed Iblis.
 God Almighty cried out to him, "O pure one,
 Thou art wholly ignorant of hidden mysteries.
 If I were to blab the faults of the unfortunate,
 I should root up the mountains from their bases,
 And lay bare the secrets of a hundred Adams,
 And convert a hundred fresh Iblises into Mosalmans."
 Adam answered, "I repent me of my scornful looks;
 Such arrogant thoughts shall not be mine again.
 O Lord, pardon this rashness in Thy slave;
 I repent; chastise me not for these words!"
 O Aider of aid-seekers, guide us,
 For there is no security in knowledge or wealth;
 "Lead not our hearts astray after Thou hast guided us," 4
 And avert the evil that the "Pen" has written.
 Turn aside from our souls the evil written in our fates,
 Repel us not from the tables of purity!
 O God, Thy grace is the proper object of our desire;
 To couple others with Thee is not proper.
 Nothing is bitterer than severance from Thee,
 Without Thy shelter there is naught but perplexity.
 Our worldly goods rob us of our heavenly goods,
 Our body rends the garment of our soul.
 Our hands, as it were, prey on our feet;
 Without reliance on Thee how can we live?
 And if the soul escapes these great perils,
 It is made captive as a victim of misfortunes and fears,
 Inasmuch as when the soul lacks union with the Beloved,
 It abides forever blind and darkened by itself.
 If Thou showest not the way, our life is lost;
 A life living without Thee esteem as dead!
 If Thou findest fault with Thy slaves,
 Verily it is right in Thee, O Blessed One!
 If Thou shouldst call sun and moon obscure,
 If Thou shouldst call the straight cypress crooked,
 If Thou shouldst declare the highest heaven base,
 Or rich mines and oceans paupers,
 All this is the truth in relation to Thy perfection!
 Thine is the dominion and the glory and the wealth!
 For Thou art exempt from defect and not-being,
 Thou givest existence to things non-existent, and again
 Thou makest them non-existent.
 *NOTES:
 1. i,e., why is the rule "an eye for an eye" enjoined in the Koran, ii. 173? 
 2. Koran ii, 100. 
 3. Alluding to the "water of life" in the land of darkness discovered by Khizr. 
 4. Koran iii. 6.

 Epilogue to Book I.
 Alas! the forbidden fruits were eaten,
 And thereby the warm life of reason was congealed.
 A grain of wheat eclipsed the sun Of Adam, l
 Like as the Dragon's tail 2 dulls the brightness of the moon.
 Behold how delicate is the heart, that a morsel of dust
 Clouded its moon with foul obscurity!
 When bread is "substance," to eat it nourishes us;
 When 'tis empty "form," it profits nothing.
 Like as the green thorn which is cropped by the camel,
 And then yields him pleasure and nutriment;
 When its greenness has gone and it becomes dry,
 If the camel crops that same thorn in the desert,
 It wounds his palate and mouth without pity,
 As if conserve of roses should turn to sharp swords.
 When bread is "substance," it is as a green thorn;
 When 'tis "form," 'tis as the dry and coarse thorn.
 And thou eatest it in the same way as of yore
 Thou wert wont to eat it, O helpless being,
 Eatest this dry thing in the same manner,
 After the real "substance" is mingled with dust;
 It has become mingled with dust, dry in pith and rind.
 O camel, now beware of that herb!
 The Word is become foul with mingled earth;
 The water is become muddy; close the mouth of the well,
 Till God makes it again pure and sweet;
 Yea, till He purifies what He has made foul.
 Patience will accomplish thy desire, not haste.
 Be patient, God knows what is best.
 *NOTES:
 1. Muhammadans think the forbidden fruit to have been wheat. 
 2. The descending node of the moon (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 233). 

     
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book II.
 PROLOGUE.

 THE Composition of this Masnavi has been delayed for a season; 1
 Time is needed for blood to become milk.
 Till thy fortune comes forth as a new-born babe,
 Blood becomes not milk, sweet and pleasant to the mind.
 When that light of God, Husamu-'d-Din
 Turned his course down from the summit of heaven,
 While he had ascended to sublimest verities,
 In the absence of his spring the buds blossomed not,
 But when out of that sea he came to shore,
 The lute of the poesy of the Masnavi sounded again.
 This Masnavi, which is the polisher of spirits,
 Its recommencement occurred on the day of "Opening."
 The commencement date of this precious work
 Was the year six hundred and sixty-two of the Flight.
 The Bulbul started on this date and became a hawk;
 Yea, a hawk to hunt out these mysteries.
 May the wrist of the King be the resting-place of this hawk,
 And may this door be open to the people for ever!
 *NOTES:
 1. The delay was caused by the grief of Husam for the death of his wife. 

 STORY I.
 The Sufi's Beast
 After anecdotes of the man, in the time of 'Omar, who mistook his eyelash for the new moon, of one who stole a snake and got bitten by it, and of 'Isa's foolish disciple who besought the Lord to teach him the spell whereby he raised the dead, comes the following story.
 A certain Sufi, after a long day's journey, arrived at a monastery, where he put up for the night, and strictly enjoined his servant to groom his ass carefully and give him plenty of litter and fodder. The servant assured him that his minute directions were superfluous, and promised to attend to the ass most carefully; but when his master's back was turned he neglected the ass, and the poor animal remained all night without water or food. Consequently he was weak and unfit to travel next morning, and in spite of the blows and kicks that were showered on him, could not carry his master, but had to be led. The other Sufis who were traveling with his owner thought that the ass was useless, and when they arrived at the place where they halted for the night, they sold the ass to a traveler, and with the proceeds of the sale bought delicate viands and torches, and made a feast. The owner of the ass, who was ignorant of this transaction, shared the feast, and joined in the chorus sung by the others, "The ass is gone, the ass is gone," without attaching any sense to the words, and blindly following their example. Next morning he asked his servant what had become of the ass, and the servant told him it had been sold, adding that he thought he had known it overnight, because he had heard him singing "The ass is gone" along with the other Sufis. In the course of this story there occur anecdotes of God consulting with the angels as to the creation of man, of a king who lost his hawk and found it again in the house of a poor old man, and of Shaikh Ahmad Khizrawiya buying sweetmeats for his creditors.
 Why the poet veils his doctrines in fables.
 What is it hinders me from expounding my doctrines
 But this, that my hearers' hearts incline elsewhere.
 Their thoughts are intent on that Sufi guest;
 They are immersed in his affairs neck deep.
 So I am compelled to turn from my discourse
 To that story, and to set forth his condition.
 But, O friend, think not this Sufi a mere outward form,
 As children see in a vine nothing but raisins.
 O son, our bodies are as dried grapes and raisins;
 If you are a man, cast away these things.
 If you pass on to the pure mysteries of God,
 You will be exalted above the nine heavenly spheres.
 Now hear the outward form of my story,
 But yet separate the grain from the chaff.
 Why the prophets were sent.
 God sent the prophets for this purpose,
 Namely, to sever infidelity from faith.
 God sent the prophets to mankind
 That they might gather the pure grain on their tray.
 Infidel and faithful, Mosalman and Jew,
 Before the prophets came, seemed all as one.
 Before they came we were all alike,
 No one knew whether he was right or wrong.
 Genuine coin and base coin were current alike;
 The world was a night, and we travelers in the dark,
 Till the sun of the prophets arose, and cried,
 "Begone. O slumber; welcome, O pure light!"
 Now the eye sees how to distinguish colors,
 It sees the difference between rubies and pebbles.
 The eye distinguishes jewels from dust,
 Hence it is dust makes the eyes smart.
 Makers of base coin hate the daylight,
 Coins of pure gold love the daylight,
 Because daylight is the mirror that reflects them,
 So that they see their own perfect beauty.
 Mystical Meaning of "Daylight"

 God has named the resurrection "that day;"
 Day shows off the beauty of red and yellow.
 Wherefore "Day" in 'truth is the mystery of the saints;
 One day of their moons is as whole years.
 Know, "Day " is the reflection of the mystery of the saints,
 Eye-closing night that of their hidden secrets.
 Therefore hath God revealed the chapter "Daylight," 1
 Which daylight is the light of the heart of Mustafa.
 On the other view, that daylight means "The Friend,"
 It is also a reflection of the same prophet.
 For, as it is wrong to swear by a transitory being,
 How can we suppose a transitory being spoken of by God?
 The Friend of God said, "I love not them that set?" 2
 How, then, could Allah have meant a transitory being?
 Again, the words "by the night" mean Muhammad's veiling,
 Namely, the fair earthly body that he bore;
 When his sun proceeded from heaven on high
 Into that body's night, it said, "He hath not forsaken thee;"
 Union with God arose out of the depth of that disgrace;
 That boon was the word, "He hath not been displeased."
 Expressions of religious or other feeling derive their only value from the state of mind from which they proceed.
 Every expression is the sign of a state of mind;
 That state is a hand, the expression an instrument.
 A goldsmith's instruments in the hand of a cobbler
 Are as grains of wheat sown on sand.
 The tools of a cobbler in the hand of a cultivator
 Are as grass before a dog or bones before an ass.
 The words, "I am the Truth" were light in Mansur's 3 mouth,
 In the mouth of Pharaoh "I am Lord Supreme" was blasphemy.
 The staff in the hand of Moses was a witness,
 In the hands of the magicians it was naught.
 For this cause 'Isa taught not to that foolish man
 The words of power whereby he raised the dead.
 For he who is ignorant misuses the instrument ;
 If you strike flint on mud you will get no fire.
 Hand and instrument resemble flint and steel;
 You must have a pair; a pair is needed to generate.
 He who has no peer or member is the "One,"
 An uneven number, One without dispute!
 Whoso says "one" and "two," and so on,
 Confesses thereby the existence of the "One."
 When the illusion of seeing double is swept away,
 They who say "one" and "two" are even as they who say "One."
 If you take "One" as your ball in his tennis-field,
 It is made to revolve by the strokes of his bat. 4
 Yea, the ball that is even and without fault
 Is made to revolve by the strokes of the King's hand.
 O man of double vision, 5 hearken with attention,
 Seek a cure for your defective sight by listening.
 Many are the holy words that find no entrance
 Into blind hearts, but they enter hearts full of light.
 But the deceits of Satan enter crooked hearts,
 Even as crooked shoes fit crooked feet.
 Though you repeat pious expressions again and again,
 If you are a fool, they affect you not at all;
 Nay, not though you set them down in writing,
 And though you proclaim them vauntingly;
 Wisdom averts its face from you, O man of sin,
 Wisdom breaks away from you and takes to flight!
 0n Taqlid, blind imitation or cant.
 "O wretch, why did you not come and say to me,
 'Such and such a disastrous affair has occurred?'"
 The servant replied, "By Allah, I came again and again,
 That I might acquaint you with the matter.
 You were always saying, 'The ass is gone, my lad!'
 Along with the others in high excitement;
 So I went away, thinking you knew all about it,
 And were pleased at the transaction, being a wise man."
 The Sufi said, "They were all singing the same words,
 So I felt impelled to sing them as well.
 Blind imitation of them has undone me.
 Cursed be that blind imitation!"
 The effect of blindly imitating unprofitable conduct
 Is that men cast away honor for a morsel of bread.
 The ecstasy of that company cast a reflection,
 Whereby that Sufi's heart became ecstatic like them.
 You need many reflections from your associates
 In order to draw water from the peerless Ocean.
 The first reflection cast is mere blind imitation;
 After it has been often repeated you may test its truth.
 Till it is thus verified, take it not from your friends;
 The drop, not yet become pearl, sever not from its shell.
 Evil influence of covetousness.

 Would you have eyes and ears of reason clear,
 Tear off the obstructing veil of greed!
 The blind imitation of that Sufi proceeded from greed;
 Greed closed his mind to the pure light.
 Yea, 'twas greed that led astray that Sufi,
 And brought him to loss of property and ruin.
 Greed of victuals, greed of that ecstatic singing
 Hindered his wits from grasping the truth.
 If greed stained the face of a mirror,
 That mirror would be as deceitful as we men are. 6
 If a pair of scales were greedy of riches,
 Would they tell truly the weight of anything?
 The Prophet saith, "O people, through singleness of mind,
 I ask of you no recompense for my prophesying; 7
 I am a guide; God buyeth my guidance for you,
 God giveth you my guidance in both worlds.
 True, a guide deserves his wages;
 Wages are due to him for directing you aright.
 But what are my wages? The vision of The Friend.
 Abu Bakr indeed offered me forty thousand pieces of gold,
 But his forty thousand pieces were no wages for me. 8
 How could I take brass beads for pearls of Aden?"
 I will tell you a tale; hearken attentively,
 That you may know how greed closes up the ears.
 Every man subject to greed is a miser.
 Can eyes of hearts clouded with greed see clearly?
 The illusion of rank and riches blinds his sight,
 Like hair dropping down before his eyes.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xciii: "By the daylight and by the night thy, Lord hath not forsaken thee nor been displeased." 
 2. Koran vi. 76: "And when the night overshadowed Abraham, he beheld a star, and he said, 'This is my Lord;' but when it set he said, 'I love not Gods which set.'" 
 3. Mansur Hallaj, a celebrated Sufi who was put to death at Bagdad in 309 A.H. for using these words. 
 4. i.e., unity is made to appear as plurality (see Gulshan i Raz, I. 710). 
 5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 104. 
 6. The Turkish commentator translates thus. The Lucknow copy reads Ba sati for Ma sti. 
 7. Koran xi 53. 
 8. Abu Bakr made over all his goods to the Prophet in aid of the expedition to Syria. 

 STORY II.
 The Pauper and the Prisoners.
 A certain pauper obtained admittance to a prison, and annoyed the prisoners by eating up all their victuals and leaving them none. At last they made a formal complaint to the Qazi, and prayed him to banish the greedy pauper from the prison. The Qazi summoned the pauper before him, and asked him why he did not go to his own house instead of living on the prisoners. The pauper replied that he had no house or means of livelihood except that supplied by the prison; whereupon the Qazi ordered him to be carried through the city, and proclamation to be made that he was a pauper, that no one might be induced to lend him money or trade with him. Accordingly the attendants sought for a camel whereon to carry him through the city, and at last induced a Kurd who sold firewood to lend his camel for the purpose. The Kurd consented from greed of reward, and the pauper, being seated on the camel, was carried through the city from morning till evening, proclamation being made in Persian, Arabic, and Kurdish that he was a pauper. When evening came the Kurd demanded payment, but the pauper refused to give him anything, observing that if he had kept his ears open he must have heard the proclamation. Thus the Kurd was led by greed to spend the day in useless labor.
 Satan's office in the world.
 The pauper said, "Your beneficence is my sustenance;
 To me, as to aliens, your prison is a paradise.
 If you banish me from your prison in reprobation,
 I must needs die of poverty and affliction."
 Just so Iblis said to Allah, "O have compassion;
 Lord! respite me till the day of resurrection;
 For in this prison of the world I am at oase,
 That I may slay the children of my enemies.
 From every one who has true faith for food,
 And as bread for his provisions by the way,
 I take it away by fraud or deceit,
 So that they raise bitter cries of regret.
 Sometimes I menace them with poverty, 2
 Sometimes I blind their eyes with tresses and moles."
 In this prison the food of true faith is scarce,
 And by the tricks of this dog what there is is lost.
 In spite of prayers and fasts and endless pains,
 Our food is altogether devoured by him.
 Let us seek refuge with Allah from Satan.
 Alas ! we are perishing by his insolence.
 The dog is one, yet he enters a thousand forms; 3
 Whatever he enters straight becomes himself.
 Whatever makes you shiver, know he is in it,
 The Devil is hidden beneath its outward form.
 When he finds no form at hand, he enters your thoughts,
 To cause them to draw you into sin.
 From your thoughts proceeds destruction,
 When from time to time evil thoughts occur to you.
 Sometimes thoughts of pleasure, sometimes of business,
 Sometimes thoughts of science, sometimes of house and home.
 Sometimes thoughts of gain and traffic,
 Sometimes thoughts of merchandise and wealth.
 Sometimes thoughts of money and wives and children,
 Sometimes thoughts of wisdom or of sadness.
 Sometimes thoughts of household goods and fine linen,
 Sometimes thoughts of carpets, sometimes of sweepers.
 Sometimes thoughts of mills, gardens, and villas,
 Sometimes of clouds and mists and jokes and jests.
 Sometimes thoughts of peace and war,
 Sometimes thoughts of honor and disgrace.
 Ah! cast out of your head these vain imaginations,
 Ah! sweep out of your heart these evil suggestions.
 Cry, "There is no power nor strength but in God!"
 To avert the Evil One from the world and your own soul.
 It is the true Beloved who causes all 
 outward earthly beauty to exist.
 Whatsoever is perceived by sense He annuls,
 But He establishes that which is hidden from the senses.
 The lover's love is visible, his Beloved hidden.
 The Friend is absent, the distraction he causes present.
 Renounce these affections for outward forms,
 Love depends not on outward form or face.
 Whatever is beloved is not a mere empty form,
 Whether your beloved be of the earth or of heaven.
 Whatever be the form you have fallen in love with,
 Why do you forsake it the moment life leaves it?
 The form is still there; whence, then, this disgust at it?
 Ah! lover, consider well what is really your beloved.
 If a thing perceived by outward senses is the beloved,
 Then all who retain their senses must still love it;
 And since love increases constancy,
 How can constancy fail while form abides? 4
 But the truth is, the sun's beams strike the wall,
 And the wall only reflects that borrowed light.
 Why give your heart to mere stones, O simpleton?
 Go! seek the source of light which shineth always!
 Distinguish well true dawn from false dawn,
 Distinguish the color of the wine from that of the cup;
 So that, instead of many eyes of caprice,
 One eye may be opened through patience and constancy.
 Then you will behold true colors instead of false,
 And precious jewels in lieu of stones.
 But what is a jewel? Nay, you will be an ocean of pearls;
 Yea, a sun that measures the heavens!
 The real Workman is hidden in His workshop,
 Go you into that workshop and see Him face to face.
 Inasmuch as over that Workman His work spreads a curtain,
 You cannot see Him outside His work.
 Since His workshop is the abode of the Wise One,
 Whoso seeks Him without is ignorant of Him.
 Come, then, into His workshop, which is Not-being, 5
 That you may see the Creator and creation at once.
 Whoso has seen how bright is the workshop
 Sees how obscure is the outside of that shop.
 Rebellious Pharaoh set his face towards Being (egoism),
 And was perforce blind to that workshop.
 Perforce he looked for the Divine decree to change,
 And hoped to turn his destiny from his door.
 While destiny at the impotence of that crafty one
 All the while was secretly mocking.
 He slew a hundred thousand guiltless babes
 That the ordinance and decree of Allah might be thwarted.
 That the prophet Moses might not be born alive,
 He committed a thousand murders in the land.
 He did all this, yet Moses was born,
 And was protected against his wrath.
 Had he but seen the Eternal workshop,
 He had refrained hand and foot from these vain devices.
 Within his house was Moses safe and sound,
 While he was killing the babes outside to no purpose.
 Just so the slave of lusts who pampers his body
 Fancies that some other man bears him ill-will;
 Saying this one is my enemy, and this one my foe,
 While it is his own body which is his enemy and foe,
 He is like Pharaoh, and his body is like Moses,
 He runs abroad crying, "where is my foe?"
 While lust is in his house, which is his body,
 He bites his finger in spite against strangers.
 Then follows an anecdote of a man who slew his mother because she was always misconducting herself with strangers, and who excused himself by pleading that if he had not done so he would have been obliged to slay strangers every day, and thus incur blood-guiltiness. Lust is likened to this abandoned mother; when it is once slain, you are at peace with all men. In answer to an objection that if this were so the prophets and saints, who have subdued lust, would not have been hated and oppressed as they were, it is pointed out that they who hated the prophets in reality hated themselves, just as sick men quarrel with the physician or boys with the teacher. Prophets and saints are created to test the dispositions of men, that the good may be severed from the bad. The numerous grades of prophets, of saints, and of holy men are ordained, as so many curtains of the light of God, to tone down its brilliance, and make it visible to all grades of human sight.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran vii. 13. 
 2. Koran ii. 279. 
 3. cf. Gulshan i Raz, p. 86. 
 4. This couplet exercises both the Turkish and the Lucknow commentators. 
 5. i.e., annihilation of self and of all phenomenal being, regarding self as naught in the presence of the Deity. 

 STORY III.
 The King and his Two Slaves.
 A king purchased two slaves, one extremely handsome, and the other very ugly. He sent the first away to the bath, and in his absence questioned the other. He told him that the first slave had given a very bad account of him, saying that he was a thief and a bad character, and asked if it was true. The second slave replied that the first was everything that was good, his inward qualities corresponding to the beauty of his outward appearance, and that whatever he had told the king was worthy of credit. The king replied that beauty was only an accident, and that, according to the tradition, accidents "endure only two moments;" that at death the animal soul is destroyed, that the text, "Whoso shall present himself with beauty shall receive tenfold reward," I does not refer to outward accidents, but to the "substance," the eternal soul. The slave in reply urged that the accidents of good works and thoughts will in some way bear fruit in the next world, pointing out that thought is always the precursor of the completed work, as the plan of the architect precedes the building, and the gardener's design the perfect fruit resulting from his labors. He added that the world is only the realized thought of "Universal Reason" 2 The king then sent away the slave with whom he had held this discourse, and summoned the other, and told him that his fellow slave had given a bad account of him, and asked what he had to say. He replied that his fellow slave was a liar and a rascal, and the king then dismissed him, observing that, in accordance with the tradition, "Every man is hidden under his own tongue," his tongue had betrayed his inner vileness. "The safety of a man lies in holding his tongue."
 The apostolical succession of the prophets and the saints.

 With that "brightness of lightning" 3 He kindled their souls
 So that Adam acquired knowledge from that light.
 That, which shone from Adam was gathered by Seth,
 Wherefore Adam made him his viceroy when he saw it.
 When Noah received the gift of that lustre,
 He became a soul bearing pearls in the tempest of the flood.
 By that light the soul of Abraham was led,
 Without fear he entered Nimrod's fiery furnace.
 When Ishmael sought out that light,
 He meekly laid his head beneath his father's bright knife.
 The soul of David was warmed by its heat,
 Iron became pliable by the force of his weaving. 4
 When Solomon was nurtured by its fruition,
 The devils became the submissive slaves of his will.
 When Jacob bowed his head to the Divine decree,
 He recovered his sight at the scent of his son. 5
 When moonlike Joseph saw that brilliant sun,
 He became so expert as he was in interpreting dreams.
 When the staff drew might from the hand of Moses,
 It devoured the realm of Pharaoh at a mouthful.
 When the soul of Jirjis 6 became privy to its light,
 He sacrificed his life seven times, and regained it.
 When Zakhariah 7 boasted of his love for it,
 He ransomed his life in the hollow of the tree.
 When Jonah swallowed a draught from that cup,
 He found repose in the belly of the fish.
 When John the Baptist became filled with its unction,
 He laid his head in the golden charger in ardour for it.
 When Jethro became aware of this exaltation,
 He risked his life to find it.
 Patient Job gave thanks for seven years,
 For in his calamities he saw signs of its approach.
 When Khizr and Elias boasted of gaining it,
 They found the water of life and were no more seen.
 When Jesus. Son of Mary, found that ladder of ascent,
 He ascended to the height of the fourth heaven.
 When Muhammad gained that blessed possession,
 In a moment he cleft asunder the disk of the moon. 8
 When Abu Bakr became the exemplar of that grace,
 He was companion of that Lord, and a 'c faithful witness."
 When 'Omar was enraptured with that beauty,
 Like a mind he discerned true and false. 9
 When Osman viewed those brilliant sights,
 He diffused light and became "Lord of the two lights." 10
 When Martaza ('Ali) shined with its reflection,
 He became the "Lion of God" in the soul's domain.
 When his two sons were illumined by this light,
 They became the "pearly earrings of highest heaven;" 11
 One of them losing his life by poison,
 The other losing his head as he went about his march.
 When Junaid was succoured by the forces of that light,
 His ecstatic states exceeded counting.
 Bayazid saw his way to increased fruition thereof,
 And gained from God the name "Polestar of Gnostics."
 What time King Mansur became victorious, 12
 He left his throne and hastened to the stake.
 When Karkhi of Karkh became its keeper,
 He became lord of love and of the breath of Jesus.
 Ibrahim son of Adham rode his horse to that point,
 And became king of kings of equity.
 And that Shakik starting from that junction
 Became a sun of wit and acute of genius.
 Fazil from a highway robber became a sage of the way, 13
 When he was regarded with esteem by the King.
 To Bishr Hafi the doctrine, was announced,
 And he set his face towards the desert of inquiry.
 When Zu-1-Ntin became distraught with care for it,
 Egypt (Milk) as sugar became the house of his soul.
 When Sari 14 lost his head in seeking the way thereto,
 His rank was exalted above the seats of the mighty.
 A hundred thousand great (spiritual) kings
 Exalted by this divine light approach the world.
 Their names remain hidden through God's jealousy;
 Every beggar tells not their names. 15
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran vi. 161. 
 2. i.e., the Logos as Demiurge. 
 3. Koran xxiv. 43. The prophetic inspiration is likened to a light handed on from one to another. 
 4. Koran xxi. 80. 
 5. Koran lxxvii. 96. 
 6. Jirjis or St. George is supposed by Muhammadans to be the same person as Khizr or Elias. 
 7. Zakhariah the prophet is said to have taken refuge from his persecutors in the hollow of a tree. 
 8. Koran liv. 1. 
 9. Omar was called "The Discerner." 
 10. He bore this name because he had two daughters of Muhammad as his wives. 
 11. A tradition gives this title to Hasan and Hussain. 
 12. Mansur Hallaj, the celebrated Sufi impaled at Bagdad. Shah or King was a title often assumed by darveshes. 
 13. The "way" means the Sufi doctrines. 
 14. All these saints lived in the second and third centuries of the Flight. 
 15. In the introduction to the Nafahatu-'l Uns, Jami says there are always 4000 saints on the earth who are not even known to one another. 

 STORY IV.
 The Falcon and the Owls.
 A certain falcon lost his way, and found himself in the waste places inhabited by owls. The owls suspected that he had come to seize their nests, and all surrounded him to make an end of him. The falcon assured them that he had no such design as they imputed to him, that his abode was on the wrist of the king, and that he did not envy their foul habitation. The owls replied that he was trying to deceive them, inasmuch as such a strange bird as he could not be a favorite of the king. The falcon repeated that he was indeed a favorite of the king, and that the king would assuredly destroy their houses if they injured him, and proceeded to give them some good advice on the folly of trusting to outward appearances. He said, "It is true I am not homogeneous with the king, but yet the king's light is reflected in me, as water becomes homogeneous with earth in plants. I am, as it were, the dust beneath the king's feet; and if you become like me in this respect, you will be exalted as I am. Copy the outward form you behold in me, and perchance you will reach the real substance of the king."
 The right use of forms.
 That my outward form may not mislead you,
 Digest my sweet advice before copying me.
 Many are they who have been captured by form,
 Who aimed at form, and found Allah.
 After all, soul is linked to body,
 Though it in nowise resembles the body.
 The power of the light of the eye is mated with fat,
 The light of the heart is hidden in a drop of blood.
 Joy harbors in the kidneys and pain in the liver,
 The lamp of reason in the brains of the head;
 Smell in the nostrils and speech in the tongue,
 Concupiscence in the flesh and courage in the heart.
 These connections are not without a why and a how,
 But reason is at a loss to understand the how.
 Universal Soul had connection with Partial Soul, 1
 Which thence conceived a pearl and retained it in its bosom.
 From that connection, like Mary,
 Soul became pregnant of a fair Messiah;
 Not that Messiah who walked upon earth and water,
 But that Messiah who is higher than space. 2
 Next, as Soul became pregnant by the Soul of souls,
 So by the former Soul did the world become pregnant;
 Then the World brought forth another world,
 And of this last are brought forth other worlds.
 Should I reckon them in my speech till the last day
 I should fail to tell the total of these resurrections. 3
 *NOTES:
 1. This is a figurative account of the emanations of Absolute Being, whereby the world of phenomena is constituted (see Gulshan i Raz, p. 21, note, and p. 66). 
 2. i.e., the spirit of the Prophet Muhammad, whom the Sufis identify with the Primal Soul. 
 3. Continually is creation born again in a new creation" (Gulshan i Raz, p. 66). By constant effluxes from Absolute Being the world of phenomena is every moment renewed. 

 STORY V.
 The Thirsty Man who threw Bricks into the Water.
 A thirsty man discovered a tank of water, but could not drink of it because it was surrounded by a high wall. He took some of the bricks off the top of the wall and cast them over it into the water. The water cried out, "What advantage do you gain by doing this?" He made answer, "The first advantage is this, that I hear your voice; and the second, that the more bricks I pull off the wall, the nearer I approach to you." The moral is, that so long as the wall of the body intervenes, we cannot reach the water of life. The abasement of the body brings men nearer to union with the Deity. Destroy, therefore, the fleshly lusts which war against the soul. Then follows another parable to illustrate the folly of procrastination in this important matter.
 "It was not ye who shot, but God shot; and 
 those arrows were God's not yours". 1
 'Tis God's light that illumines the senses' light,
 That is the meaning of "Light upon light." 2
 The senses' light draws us earthwards,
 God's light carries us heavenwards.
 As objects of sense are of base condition,
 God's light is an ocean, and the senses' light a dewdrop.
 But that light which is "upon this light" is not seen,
 Save through signs and holy discourses.
 Since the senses' light is gross and dense,
 It lies hidden in the black pupil of the eye.
 When you cannot see the senses' light with the eye,
 How can you see with the eye the Light of the mind?
 As the senses' light is hidden in these gross veils,
 Must not that Light which is pure be also hidden?
 Like the senses, this world is ruled by a hidden Power.
 It confesses its impotence before that hidden Power,
 Which sometimes exalts it and sometimes lays it low,
 Sometimes makes it dry and sometimes moist.
 The hand is hidden, yet we see the pen writing;
 The horse is galloping, yet the rider is hid from view.
 The arrow speeds forth, yet the bow is not seen;
 Souls are seen, the Soul of souls (God) is hidden.
 Break not the arrow, for it is the arrow of the King
 Yea, it is an arrow from the bow of Wisdom.
 "Ye shot not when ye shot," was said by God;
 God's action has predominance over all actions.
 Break your own passion, break not that arrow,
 The eye of passion takes milk to be blood.
 Kiss that arrow and bear it to the King,
 Yea, though it be stained with your own blood.
 Whatsoever is seen is weak and base and impotent;
 What is hidden is equally fierce and headstrong.
 We are the captured game; who is the snare?
 We are the balls; where is the bat?
 He tears and mends; who is this tailor?
 He fans and kindles the flame; who is this kindler?
 At one time He makes the faithful one an infidel,
 At another He makes the atheist a devotee!
 Next comes an anecdote of a dirty man who refused to bathe because he was ashamed to go into the water, with the moral that "Shame hinders religion;" 3 and then another of Zu'l Nun, a celebrated Egyptian Sufi of the third century A.H. Zu'l Nun appeared to his ignorant friends to be mad, and they accordingly confined him in a madhouse. After a time they thought that he was not really mad, but had feigned madness for some deep purpose, and they went to the madhouse to inquire into the state of his health. When they arrived there, Zu'l Nun asked them who they were, and they answered that they were his devoted friends, who were now convinced that the story of his being mad was a calumny. Zu'l Nun jumped up and drove them away with sticks and stones, saying that true friendship would have been manifested in sharing his troubles, even as pure gold is tried by fire.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran viii. 17, meaning, "God is the Fa'il i Hakiki, or Only Real Agent." 
 2. Koran xxiv. 35. 
 3. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. pp. 379 and 418, gives two proverbs - one, "Shame is a part of religion;" and the other, "Shame hinders getting a livelihood." 

 STORY VI.
 Luqman's Master examines him and discovers his Acuteness.
 Luqman the Sage, 1 who is sometimes identified with Esop, and sometimes with the nephew of the prophet. Job, though "gifted with wisdom by God," was a slave. His master, however, discovered his worth, and became extremely attached to him, so that he never received any delicacy without giving Luqman a share of it. One day, having received a watermelon, he gave Luqman the best part of it, and Luqman devoured it with such apparent relish that his master was tempted to taste it. To his surprise he found it very bitter, and asked Luqman why he had not told him of this. Luqman replied that it was not for him, who lived on his master's bounty, to complain if he now and then received disagreeable things at his hands. Thus, though to outward appearance a slave, Luqman showed himself to be a lord.
 Love endures hardships at the hands of the Beloved.
 Through love bitter things seem sweet,
 Through love bits of copper are made gold.
 Through love dregs taste like pure wine,
 Through love pains are as healing balms.
 Through love thorns become roses,
 And through love vinegar becomes sweet wine.
 Through love the stake becomes a throne,
 Through love reverse of fortune seems good fortune.
 Through love a prison seems a rose bower,
 Without love a grate full of ashes seems a garden.
 Through love burning fire is pleasing light,
 Through love the Devil becomes a Houri.
 Through love hard stones become soft as butter,
 Without love soft wax becomes hard iron.
 Through love grief is as joy,
 Through love Ghouls turn into angels.
 Through love stings are as honey,
 Through love lions are harmless as mice.
 Through love sickness is health,
 Through love wrath is as mercy.
 Through love the dead rise to life,
 Through love the king becomes a slave.
 Even when an evil befalls you, have due regard;
 Regard well him who does you this ill turn.
 The sight which regards the ebb and flow of good and ill
 Opens a passage for you from misfortune to happiness.
 Thence you see the one state moves you into the other, 2
 One opposite state generating its opposite in exchange.
 So long as you experience not fears after joys,
 How can you look for pleasures after disgusts?
 While ye fear the doom of the angel on the left hand,
 Men hope for the bliss of the angel on the right. 3
 May you gain two wings! 4 A fowl with only one wing
 Is impotent to fly, O well-intentioned one!
 Now either permit me to hold my peace altogether,
 Or give me leave to explain the whole matter.
 And if you dislike this and forbid that,
 Who can tell what your desire is?
 You must have the soul of Abraham in order with light
 To see the mansions of Paradise in the fire.
 Step by step he ascended above sun and moon,
 And so lagged not below, as a ring that fastens a door.
 Since the "Friend of God" ascended above the heavens,
 And said, "I love not Gods that set;" 5
 So this world of the body is a breeder of misconceptions
 In all who have not fled from lust.
 *NOTES:
 1. See Koran xxxi. Another anecdote of his wit occurs in Book I. 
 2. The doctrine of Heraclitus, that opposite states generate one another, is discussed by Jelaludin in a passage quoted in Lumsden's Grammar, ii. 323, and is mentioned in the Phado and the Nicomachean Ethics. 
 3. An anacoluthon (see Koran i. 16). 
 4. The two wings are hope and fear, both of which are needed to guide men's religious flight (see Book III. on "Probability the guide of life"). 
 5. Koran vi. 77. 

 STORY VII.
 Moses and the Shepherd.
 Next follows an anecdote of Bilkis, Queen of Sheba, whose reason was enlightened by the counsels of the Hoopoo sent to her by King Solomon. Outward sense is as opposed to true reason as Abu Jahl was to Muhammad; and when the outward senses are replaced by the true inner reason, man sees that the body is only foam, and the heart the limitless ocean. Afterwards comes an anecdote of a philosopher who was struck blind for cavilling at the verse, "What think ye? If at early morn your waters shall have sunk away, who will then give you clear running water?" 1 This is succeeded by the story of Moses and the shepherd. Moses once heard a shepherd praying as follows: "O God, show me where thou art, that I may become. Thy servant. I will clean Thy shoes and comb Thy hair, and sew Thy clothes, and fetch Thee milk." When Moses heard him praying in this senseless manner, he rebuked him, saying, "O foolish one, though your father was a Mosalman, you have become an infidel. God is a Spirit, and needs not such gross ministrations as, in your ignorance, you suppose." The shepherd was abashed at his rebuke, and tore his clothes and fled away into the desert. Then a voice from heaven was heard, saying, "O Moses, wherefore have you driven away my servant? Your office is to reconcile my people with me, not to drive them away from me. I have given to each race different usages and forms of praising and adoring me. I have no need of their praises, being exalted above all such needs. I regard not the words that are spoken, but the heart that offers them. I do not require fine words, but a burning heart. Men's ways of showing devotion to me are various, but so long as the devotions are genuine, they are accepted."
 Religious forms indifferent.
 A voice came from God to Moses,
 "Why hast thou sent my servant away?
 Thou hast come to draw men to union with me,
 Not to drive them far away from me.
 So far as possible, engage not in dissevering;
 'The thing most repugnant to me is divorce.' 2
 To each person have I allotted peculiar forms,
 To each have I given particular usages.
 What is praiseworthy in thee is blameable in him,
 What is poison for thee is honey for him.
 What is good in him is bad in thee,
 What is fair in him is repulsive in thee.
 I am exempt from all purity and impurity,
 I need not the laziness or alacrity of my people.
 I created not men to gain a profit from them,
 But to shower my beneficence upon them.
 In the men of Hind the usages of Hind are praiseworthy,
 In the men of Sind those of Sind.
 I am not purified by their praises,
 'Tis they who become pure and shining thereby.
 I regard not the outside and the words,
 I regard the inside and the state of heart.
 I look at the heart if it be humble,
 Though the words may be the reverse of humble.
 Because the heart is substance, and words accidents,
 Accidents are only a means, substance is the final cause.
 How long wilt thou dwell on words and superficialities?
 A burning heart is what I want; consort with burning!
 Kindle in thy heart the flame of love,
 And burn up utterly thoughts and fine expressions.
 O Moses! the lovers of fair rites are one class,
 They whose hearts and souls burn with love are another.
 Lovers must burn every moment,
 As tax and tithe are levied on a ruined village.
 If they speak amiss, call them not sinners;
 If a martyr be stained with blood, wash it not away.
 Blood is better than water for martyrs,
 This fault is better than a thousand correct forms.
 No need to turn to the Ka'ba when one is in it,
 And divers have no need of shoes.
 One does not take a drunken man as a guide on the way,
 Nor speak of darns to torn garments.
 The sect of lovers is distinct from all others,
 Lovers have a religion and a faith of their own.
 Though the ruby has no stamp, what matters it?
 Love is fearless in the midst of the sea of fear.
 Beware, if thou offerest praises or thanksgivings,
 And know them to be even as the babble of that shepherd;
 Though thy praises be better compared with his,
 Yet in regard to God they are full of defects.
 How long wilt thou say, 'They obscure the truth,
 For it is not such as they fancy'?
 Thy own prayers are accepted only through mercy,
 They are suffered as the prayers of an impure woman.
 If her prayers are made impure by the flow of blood,
 Thine are stained with metaphors and similitudes.
 Blood is impure, yet its stain is removed by water;
 But that impurity of ignorance is more lasting,
 Seeing that without the blessed water of God
 It is not banished from the man who is subject to it.
 O that thou wouldst turn thy face to thy own prayers,
 And become cognizant of the meaning of thy ejaculations,
 And say, 'Ah! my prayers are as defective as my being;
 O requite me good for evil!'"
 Moses questions God as to the reason of 
 the flourishing state of the wicked.
 Moses said, "O beneficent Creator,
 With whom a moment's remembrance is as long ages,
 I see Thy plan distorted in this world of earth and water;
 My heart, like the angel's, feels a difficulty thereat.
 With what object hast thou framed this plan,
 And sowed therein the seeds of evil?
 Why hast Thou kindled the fire of violence and wrong?
 Why burnt up mosques and them who worship therein?
 Paradise is attached to requirements unpleasant to us,
 Hell is attached to things flattering our lusts.
 The branch full of sap is the main fuel of thy fire.
 'They that are burnt with fire are near to Kausar.' 3
 Whoso is in prison and acquainted with troubles,
 That is in requital for his gluttony and lusts.
 Whoso is in a palace and enjoying wealth,
 That is in reward for toils and troubles.
 Whoso is seen enjoying uncounted gold and silver,
 Know that he strove patiently to acquire it.
 He, whose soul is exempt from natural conditions,
 And who possesses the power of overriding causes,
 Can see without causes, like eyes that pierce night;
 But thou, who art dependent on sense attend to causes.
 Having left Jesus, thou cherishest an ass (lust),
 And art perforce excluded, like an ass;
 The portion of Jesus is knowledge and wisdom,
 Not so the portion of an ass, O asinine one!
 Thou pitiest thine ass when it complains;
 So art thou ignorant, thy ass makes thee asinine.
 Keep thy pity for Jesus, not for the ass,
 Make not thy lust to vanquish thy reason.
 Leave thy natural lusts to whine and howl,
 Tear thee from them, escape that snare of the soul!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxvii. 30. 
 2. A tradition. 
 3. A saying of the Prophet. 

 STORY VIII.
 The Man who made a Pet of a Bear. 1
 A kind man, seeing a serpent overcoming a bear, went to the bear's assistance, and delivered him from the serpent. The bear was so sensible of the kindness the man had done him that he followed him about wherever he went, and became his faithful slave, guarding him from everything that might annoy him. One day the man was lying asleep, and the bear, according to his custom, was sitting by him and driving off the flies. The flies became so persistent in their annoyances that the bear lost patience, and seizing the largest stone he could find, dashed it at them in order to crush them utterly; but unfortunately the flies escaped, and the stone lighted upon the sleeper's face and crushed it. The moral is, "Do not make friends with fools." In the course of this story occur anecdotes of a blind man, of Moses rebuking the worshippers of the calf, and of the Greek physician Galen and a madman.
 He who needs mercy finds it.
 Doing kindness is the game and quarry of good men,
 A good man seeks in the world only pains to cure.
 Wherever there is a pain there goes the remedy,
 Wherever there is poverty there goes relief.
 Seek not water, only show you are thirsty,
 That water may spring up all around you.
 That you may hear the words, "The Lord gives them to drink," 2
 Be athirst! Allah knows what is best for you.
 Seek you the water of mercy? Be downcast,
 And straightway drink the wine of mercy to intoxication.
 Mercy is called down by mercy to the last.
 Withhold not, then, mercy from any one, O son!
 If of yourself you cannot journey to the Ka'ba,
 Represent your helplessness to the Reliever.
 Cries and groans are a powerful means,
 And the All-Merciful is a mighty nurse.
 The nurse and the mother keep excusing themselves,
 Till their child begins to cry.
 In you too has God created infant needs;
 When they cry out, their milk is brought to them;
 God said, "Call on God;" continue crying,
 So that the milk of His love may boil up. 3
 Moses and the worshipper of the calf.
 Moses said to one of those full of vain imaginations,
 "O malevolent one, through error and heresy
 You entertain a hundred doubts as to my prophethood,
 Notwithstanding these proofs, and my holy character.
 You have seen thousands of miracles done by me,
 Yet they only multiply your doubts and cavils.
 Through doubts and evil thoughts you are in a strait,
 You speak despitefully of my prophethood.
 I brought the host out of the Red Sea before all men,
 That ye might escape the oppression of the Egyptians.
 For forty years meat and drink came from heaven,
 And water sprang from the rock at my prayer.
 My staff became a mighty serpent in my hand,
 Water became blood for my ill-conditioned enemy.
 The staff became a snake, and my hand bright as the sun;
 From the reflection of that light the sun became a star.
 Have not these incidents, and hundreds more like them,
 Banished these doubts from you, O cold-hearted one?
 The calf lowed through magic,
 And you bowed down to it, saying, 'Thou art my God.' 4
 The golden calf lowed; but what did it say,
 That the fools should feel all this devotion to it?
 You have seen many more wondrous works done by me,
 But where is the base man who accepts the truth?
 What is it that charms vain men but vanity?
 What else pleases the foolish but folly?
 Because each kind is charmed by its own kind,
 Does a cow ever seek the lion?
 Did the wolf show love to Joseph, 5
 Or only fraud upon fraud with a view to devour him?
 True, if it lose his wolf-like nature it becomes a friend;
 Even as the dog of the cave became a son of man. 6
 When good Abu Bakr saw Muhammad,
 He recognized his truth, saying, 'This one is true;'
 When Abu Bakr caught the perfume of Muhammad,
 He said, 'This is no false one.'
 But Abu Jahl, who was not one of the sympathizers,
 Saw the moon split asunder, yet believed not.
 If from a sympathizer, to whom it is well known,
 I withhold the truth, still 'tis not hidden from him;
 But he who is ignorant and without sympathy,
 However much I show him the truth, he sees it not.
 The mirror of the heart must needs be polished
 Before you can distinguish fair and foul therein."
 *NOTES:
 1. Anwari Suhaili, i. 27. 
 2. Koran lxxvi. 21. 
 3. Koran xvii. 110. 
 4. See Koran xx. 90. 
 5. Koran xii. 17. 
 6. Koran xviii. 17. 

 STORY IX.
 The Gardener and the Three Friends.
 A voice came from heaven to Moses, saying, "O Moses why didst thou not visit me when I was sick?" Moses inquired the meaning of this dark saying, and the answer was, "When one of God's saints is sick, God regards his sickness as His own; and, therefore, he who desires to hold companionship with God must not forsake the saints." 1 This is illustrated by a story of a gardener who saw three friends walking in his garden, and making free with his fruit. Knowing he could not prevail against them while they remained united, he contrived by tricks to separate them, and then proceeded to chastise them one by one. And this caused one of them to make the reflection that he had acted very foolishly in deserting his friends.
 *NOTES:
 1. Cp. Matthew xxv. 40. 

 STORY X.
 Bayazid and the Saint.
 The celebrated Sufi, Abu Yazid or Bayazid of Bastam, in Khorasan, who lived in the third century of the Flight, was once making a pilgrimage to Mecca, and visiting all the "Pillars of insight" who lived m the various towns that lay on his route. At last he discovered the "Khizr of the age" in the person of a venerable Darvesh, with whom he held the following conversation:
 The Sage said, "Whither are you going, O Bayazid?
 Where will you bring your caravan to a halt?"
 Bayazid replied, "At dawn I start for the Ka'ba."
 Quoth the Sage, "What provision for the way have you?"
 He answered, "I have two hundred silver dirhams;
 See them tied up tightly in the corner of my cloak."
 The Sage said, "Circumambulate me seven times;
 Count this better than circumambulating the Ka'ba;
 And as for the dirhams, give them to me, O liberal one,
 And know you have finished your course and obtained your wish,
 You have made the pilgrimage and gained the life to come,
 You have become pure, and that in a moment of time.
 Of a truth that is God which your soul sees in me,
 For God has chosen me to be His house.
 Though the Ka'ba is the house of His grace and favors,
 Yet my body too is the house of His secret.
 Since He made that house He has never entered it,
 But none but That Living One enters this house;
 When you have seen me you have seen God,
 And have circumambulated the veritable Ka'ba.
 To serve me is to worship and praise God;
 Think not that God is distinct from me.
 Open clear eyes and look upon me,
 That you may behold the light of God in a mortal.
 Tho Beloved once called the Ka'ba 'My house,'
 But has said to me 'O my servant' seventy times;
 O Bayazid, you have found the Ka'ba,
 You have found a hundred precious blessings."
 Bayazid gave heed to these deep sayings,
 And placed them as golden earrings in his ears.
 Then follow anecdotes of the Prophet paying a visit to one of his disciples who lay sick, of Shaikh Bahlol, nicknamed "The Madman," who was a favorite at the court of Harunu-'r-Rashid, and of the people of Moses.
 The sweet uses of adversity.

 The sick man said, "Sickness has brought me this boon.
 That this Prince (Muhammad) has come to me this morn,
 So that health and strength may return to me
 From the visit of this unparalleled King.
 O blessed pain and sickness and fever!
 O welcome weariness and sleeplessness by night!
 Lo! God of His bounty and favor
 Has sent me this pain and sickness in my old age;
 He has given me pain in the back, that I may not fail
 To spring up out of my sleep at midnight;
 That I may not sleep all night like the cattle,
 God in His mercy has sent me these pains.
 At my broken state the pity of kings has boiled up,
 And hell is put to silence by their threats!"
 Pain is a treasure, for it contains mercies;
 The kernel is soft when the rind is scraped off.
 O brother, the place of darkness and cold
 Is the fountain of life and the cup of ecstasy.
 So also is endurance of pain and sickness and disease.
 For from abasement proceeds exaltation.
 The spring seasons are hidden in the autumns,
 And autumns are charged with springs; flee them not.
 Consort with grief and put up with sadness,
 Seek long life in your own death!
 Since 'tis bad, whatever lust says on this matter
 Heed it not, its business is opposition.
 But act contrary thereto, for the prophets
 Have laid this injunction upon the world. 2
 Though it is right to take counsel in affairs,
 That you may have less to regret in the upshot;
 The prophets have labored much
 To make the world revolve on this pivot stone; 3
 But, in order to destroy the people, lust desires
 To make them go astray and lose their heads;
 The people say, 'With whom shall we take counsel?'
 The prophets answer, 'With the reason of your chief.'
 Again they say, 'Suppose a child or a woman enter,
 Who lacks reason and clear judgment; '
 They reply, 'Take counsel with them,
 And act contrary to what they advise.'
 Know your lust to be woman, and worse than woman;
 Woman is partial evil, lust universal evil.
 If you take counsel with your lust,
 See you act contrary to what that base one advises.
 Even though it enjoin prayers and fasting,
 It is treacherously laying a snare for you.'
 You must abandon and ignore your own knowledge,
 And dip your hand in the dish of abnegation of knowledge.
 Whatever seems profitable, flee from it,
 Drink poison and spill the water of life.
 Contemn whatever praises you,
 Lend to paupers your wealth and profits!
 Quit your sect and be a subject of aversion,
 Cast away name and fame and seek disgrace!"
 God the Author of good and evil.
 If you seek the explanation of God's love and favor,
 In connection therewith read the chapter "Brightness." 4
 And if you say evil also proceeds from Him,
 Yet what damage is that to His perfection?
 To send that evil is one of His perfections. 
 I will give you an illustration, O arrogant one; 
 The heavenly Artist paints His pictures of two sorts, 
 Fair pictures and pictures the reverse of fair. 
 Joseph he painted fair and made him beautiful; 
 He also painted ugly pictures of demons and 'afrits. 
 Both sorts of pictures are of His workmanship, 
 They proceed not from His imperfection, but His skill, 
 That the perfection of His wisdom may be shown, 
 And the gainsayers of His art be put to shame. 
 Could He not paint ugly things He would lack art, 
 And therefore He creates Guebers as well as Moslems. 
 Thus, both infidelity and faith bear witness to Him, 
 Both alike bow down before His almighty sway. 
 But know, the faithful worship Him willingly, 
 For they seek and aim at pleasing Him; 
 While Guebers worship Him unwillingly, 
 Their real aim and purpose being quite otherwise.
 Evil itself is turned into good for the good.
 The Prophet said to that sick man,
 "Pray in this wise and allay your difficulties;
 'Give us good in the house of our present world,
 And give us good in the house of our next world. 5
 Make our path pleasant as a garden,
 And be Thou, O Holy One, our goal!'"
 The faithful will say on the last day, "O King!
 Was not Hell on the route all of us traveled?
 Did not faithful as well as infidels pass through it?
 Yet on our way we perceived not the smoke of the fire;
 Nay, it seemed Paradise and the mansion of the blessed."
 Then the King will answer, "That green garden,
 As it appeared to you on your passage through it,
 Was indeed Hell and the place of dread torment;
 Yet for you it became a garden green with trees. 
 Since you have labored to make hellish lusts, 
 And the 'fire of pride that courts destruction, 
 To make these, I say, pure and clean, 
 And, to please God, have quenched those fires, 
 So that the fire of lust, that erst breathed flame, 
 Has become a holy garden and a guiding light, 
 Since you have turned the fire of wrath to meekness, 
 And the darkness of ignorance to shining knowledge, 
 Since you have turned the fire of greed into bounty, 
 And the vile thorns of malice into a rose-garden; 
 Since you have quenched all these fires of your own 
 For my sake, so that those poisons are now pure sweets; 
 Since you have made fiery lust as a verdant garden, 
 And have sowed therein the seed of fidelity, 
 So that nightingales of prayer and praise 
 Ever warble sweetly around this garden; 
 Since you have responded to the call of God, 
 And have drawn water out of the hell of lust, 
 For this cause my hell also, for your behoof, 
 Becomes a verdant garden and yields leaves and fruit."
 What is the recompense of well-doing, O son? 
 It is kindness and good treatment and rich requital. 
 Have ye not said, "We are victims, 
 Mere nothings before eternal Being? 
 If we are drunkards or madmen, 
 'Tis that Cup-bearer and that Cup which make us so. 
 We bow down our heads before His edict and ordinance, 
 We stake precious life to gain His favor. 
 While the thought of the Beloved fills our hearts, 
 All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him. 
 Wherever He kindles His destructive torch, 
 Myriads of lovers' souls are burnt therewith. 
 The lovers who dwell within the sanctuary 
 Are moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved's face."
 O heart haste thither, 6 for God will shine upon you, 
 And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror. 
 He will infuse into your soul a new soul, 
 So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine. 
 Take up your abode in His soul! 
 Take up your abode in heaven, O bright full moon! 
 Like the heavenly Scribe,7 He will open your heart's book 
 That He may reveal mysteries unto you. 
 Abide with your Friend, since you have gone astray, 
 Strive to be a full moon; you are now a fragment thereof. 
 Wherefore this shrinking of the part from its whole? 
 Why this association with its foes? 
 Behold Genus become Species in due course, 
 Behold secrets become manifest through his light! 
 So long as woman-like you swallow blandishments, 
 How, O wise man, can you get relief from false flatteries? 
 These flatteries and fair words and deceits (of lust) 
 You take, and swallow, just like women. 
 But the reproaches and the blows of Darveshes 
 Are really better for you than the praises of sinners. 
 Take the light blows of Darveshes, not the honey of sinners, 
 And become, by the fortune of good, good yourself. 
 Because from them the robe of good fortune is gained, 
 In the asylum of the spirit blood becomes life.
 *NOTES:
 1. Alluding to the Hadis: "Heaven and earth contain me not, but the heart of my faithful servant contains me." 
 2. Freytag quotes a saying of 'Omar, "A fool may indicate the right course" (Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 566). 
 3. The law defining the right course. 
 4. Koran xciii. : "By the noonday brightness, and by the night when it darkeneth, thy Lord hath not forsaken thee nor been displeased." 
 5. "O Lord, give us good in this world and good in the next, and save us from the torment of the fire." (Koran ii. 197). 
 6. i.e., to annihilation of self in God, as a moth in the flame. 
 7. Atarid or Mercury. 

 STORY XI.
 Mo'avia and Iblis.
 Mo'avia, the first of the Ommiad Khalifas, was one day lying asleep in his palace, when he was awakened by a strange man. Mo'avia asked him who he was, and he replied that he was Iblis. Mo'avia then asked him why he had awakened him, and lblis replied that the hour of prayer was come, and he feared Mo'avia would be late. Mo'avia answered, "Nay! it could never have been your intention to direct me in the right way. How can I trust a thief like you to guard my interests?" Iblis answered, "Remember that I was bred up as an angel of light, and that I cannot quite abandon my original occupation. You may travel to Rome or Cathay, but still you retain the love of your fatherland. I still retain my love of God, who fed me when I was young; nay, even though I revolted from Him, that was only from jealousy (of Adam), and jealousy proceeds from love, not from denial of God. I played a game of chess with God at His own desire, and though I was utterly checkmated and ruined, in my ruin I still experience God's blessings." 
 Mo'avia answered, "What you say is not credible. Your words are like the decoy calls of a fowler, which resemble the voices of the birds, and so lure them to destruction. You have caused the destruction of hundreds of mortals, such as the people of Noah, the tribe of 'Ad, 1 the family of Lot, Nimrod, Pharaoh, Abu Jahl, and so on."
 Iblis retorted, "You are mistaken if you suppose me to be the cause of all the evil you mention. I am not God, that I should be able to make good evil, or fair foul. Mercy and vengeance are twin divine attributes, and they generate the good and evil seen in all earthly things. I am, therefore, not to blame for the existence of evil, as I am only a mirror, which reflects the good and evil existing in the objects presented to it."
 Mo'avia then prayed to God to guard him against the sophistries of lblis, and again adjured lblis to cease his arguments and tell plainly the reason why he had awakened him. Iblis, instead of answering, continued to justify himself, saying how hard it was that men and women should blame him when they did anything wrong, instead of blaming their own evil lusts. Mo'avia, in reply, reproached him with concealing the truth, and ultimately brought him to confess that the true reason why he had awakened him was this, that if he had overslept himself, and so missed the hour of prayer, he would have felt deep sorrow and have heaved many sighs, and each of these sighs would, in the sight of God, have counted for as many as two hundred ordinary prayers.
 The value of sighs.
 A certain man was going into the mosque,
 Just as another was coming out.
 He inquired of him what had occurred to the meeting,
 That the people were coming out of the mosque so soon.
 The other told him that the Prophet
 Had concluded the public prayers and mysteries.
 "Whither go you," said he, "O foolish one,
 Seeing the Prophet has already given the blessing?"
 The first heaved a sigh, and its smoke ascended;
 That sigh yielded a perfume of his heart's blood.
 The other, who came from the mosque, said to him,
 "Give me that sigh, and take my prayers instead."
 The first said, "I give it, and take your prayers."
 The other took that sigh with a hundred thanks.
 He went his way with deep humility and contrition,
 As a hawk who had ascended in the track of the falcon.
 That night, as ho lay asleep, he heard a voice from heaven,
 "Thou hast bought the water of life and healing;
 The worth of what thou hast chosen and possessed
 Equals that of all the people's accepted prayers."
 To illustrate the treachery of wolves in sheep's clothing, - of Satans rebuking sin and preaching religion - an anecdote is told of a master of a house who caught a thief, but was induced to let him escape by the stratagem of the thief's confederate, who cried that he had got the real thief elsewhere. Apropos of the same theme, the poet next relates the story of "those who built a mosque for mischief," as recorded in the Koran. 2 The tribe of Bani Ganim built a mosque, and invited the Prophet to dedicate it. The Prophet, however, discovered that their real motive was jealousy of the tribe of Bani Amru lbn Auf, and of the mosque at Kuba, near Medina, and a treacherous understanding with the Syrian monk Abu Amir, and therefore he refused their request, and ordered the mosque to be razed to the ground.
 Wisdom the believer's lost camel.
 My people adopt my law without obeying it,
 They take that coin without assaying it.
 The Koran's wisdom is like the "believer's lost camel,' 3
 Every one is certain his camel is lost.
 You have lost your camel and seek it diligently;
 Yet how will you find it if you know not your own?
 What was lost? Was it a female camel that you lost?
 It escaped from your hand, and you are in a maze.
 The caravan is come to be loaded,
 Your camel is vanished from the midst of it.
 You run here and there, your mouth parched with heat;
 The caravan moves on, and night approaches.
 Your goods lie on the ground in a dangerous road,
 You hurry after your camel in all directions.
 You cry "O Moslems, who has seen a camel,
 Which escaped from its stable this morning?
 To him who shall give me news of my camel
 I will give a reward of so many dirhems."
 You go on seeking news of your camel from every one,
 And every lewd fellow flatters you with a fresh rumor,
 Saying, "I saw a camel; it went this way;
 'Twas red, and it went towards this pasture."
 Another says, "Its ear was cropped."
 Another says, "Its cloth was embroidered."
 Another that it had only one eye,
 Another that it had lost its hair from mange.
 To gain the reward every base fellow
 Mentions a hundred marks without any foundation.
 All false doctrines contain an element of truth.
 Just so every one in matters of doctrine
 Gives a different description of the hidden subject.
 A philosopher expounds it in one way,
 And a critic at once refutes his propositions.
 A third censures both of them;
 A fourth spends his life in traducing the others.
 Every one mentions indications of this road,
 In order to create an impression that he has gone it.
 This truth and that truth cannot be all true,
 And yet all of them are not entirely astray in error.
 Because error occurs not without some truth,
 Fools buy base coins from their likeness to real coins.
 If there were no genuine coins current in the world,
 How could coiners succeed in passing false coins?
 If there were no truth, how could falsehood exist?
 Falsehood derives its plausibility from truth.
 'Tis the desire of right that makes men buy wrong;
 Let poison be mixed with sugar, and they eat it at once.
 If wheat were not valued as sweet and good for food,
 The cheat who shows wheat and sells barley would make no profit!
 Say not, then, that all these creeds are false,
 The false ones ensnare hearts by the scent of truth.
 Say not that they are all erroneous fancies,
 There is no fancy in the universe without some truth.
 Truth is the "night of power " 4 hidden amongst other nights,
 In order to try the spirit of every night.
 Not every night is that of power, O youth,
 Nor yet is every night quite void of power.
 In the crowd of rag-wearers there is but one Faqir; 5
 Search well and find out that true one.
 Tell the wary and discerning believer
 To distinguish the king from the beggar.
 If there were no bad goods in the world,
 Every fool might be a skilful merchant;
 For then the hard art of judging goods would be easy.
 If there were no faults, one man could judge as well as another.
 Again, if all were faulty, skill would be profitless.
 If all wood were common, there would be no aloes.
 He who accepts everything as true is a fool,
 But he who says all is false is a knave.
 *NOTES:
 1. See Koran xi. 63. 
 2. Koran ix. 108. 
 3. This is a proverb ascribed to Ali. It means, people are always losing wisdom and seeking it like a lost camel (Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 385). 
 4. The night on which the Koran was revealed. 
 5. So in the Phaedo, "Many are the wandbearers, but few the Mystics." 

 STORY XII.
 The Four Hindustanis who censured one another.
 Four Hindustanis went to the mosque to say their prayers. Each one duly pronounced the Takbir, and was saying his prayers with great devotion, when the Mu'azzin happened to come in. One of them immediately called out, "O Mu'azzin, have you yet called to prayer? It is time to do so." Then the second said to the speaker, "Ah! you have spoken words unconnected with worship, and therefore, according to the Hadis, you have spoiled your prayers." 1 Thereupon the third scolded the last speaker, saying, "O simpleton, why do you rebuke him? Rather rebuke yourself." Last of all, the fourth said, "God be praised that I have not fallen into the same ditch as my three companions." The moral is, not to find fault with others, but rather, according to the proverb, 2 to be admonished by their bad example. Apropos of this proverb, a story is told of two prisoners captured by the tribe of Ghuz. The Ghuzians were about to put one of them to death, to frighten the other, and make him confess where the treasure was concealed, when the doomed man discovered their object, and said, "O noble sirs, kill my companion, and frighten me instead."
 *NOTES:
 1. Mishkat ul Masabih, by Matthews, i. 205. 
 2. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 628. 

 STORY XIII.
 The Old Man and the Physician.

 An old man complained to his physician that he suffered from headache. The physician replied, "That is caused by old age." The old man next complained of a defect in his sight, and the physician again told him that his malady was due to old age. The old man went on to say that he suffered from pain in the back, from dyspepsia, from shortness of breath, from nervous debility, from inability to walk, and so on; and the physician replied that each of these ailments was likewise caused by old age. The old man, losing patience, said, "O fool, know you not that God has ordained a remedy for every malady?" The physician answered, "This passion and choler are also symptoms of old age. Since all your members are weak, you have lost the power of self-control, and fly into a passion at every word."
 Bad principles always produce bad acts.
 Fools laud and magnify the mosque,
 While they strive to oppress holy men of heart.
 But the former is mere form, the latter spirit and truth.
 The only true mosque is that in the hearts of saints.
 The mosque that is built in the hearts of the saints
 Is the place of worship of all, for God dwells there.
 So long as the hearts of the saints are not afflicted,
 God never destroys the nation.
 Our forefathers lifted their hands against the prophets;
 Seeing their bodies, they took them for ordinary men.
 In you also abide the morals of those men of old;
 How can you avoid fearing that you will act like them?
 The morals of those unthankful ones dwell in you,
 Your urn will not always return unbroken from the well.
 Seeing that all these bad symptoms are seen in you,
 And that you are one with those men, how can you escape?

 STORY XIV.
 The Arab Carrier and the Scholar.
 An Arab loaded his camel with two sacks, filling one with wheat and the second with sand, in order to balance the first. As he was proceeding on his way he met a certain tradition-monger, who questioned him about the contents of his sacks. On learning that one contained nothing but sand, he pointed out that the object might be attained much better by putting half the wheat in one sack and half in the other. On hearing this, the Arab was so struck by his sagacity that he conceived a great respect for him, and mounted him on his camel. Then he said, "As you possess such great wisdom. I presume that you are a king or a Vazir, or at least a very rich and powerful noble." The theologian, replied, "On the contrary. I am a very poor man; all the riches my learning has brought me are weariness and headaches, and I know not where to look for a loaf of bread." The Arab said, "In that case get, off my camel and go your way, and suffer me to go mine, for I see your learning brings ill luck." The moral of the story is the worthlessness of mere human knowledge, and its inferiority to the divine knowledge proceeding from inspiration. This thesis is further illustrated by an account of the mighty works which were done by the saint Ibrahim bin Adham, through the divine knowledge that God had given him. Ibrahim was originally prince of Balkh, but renounced his kingdom and became a saint. One day he was sitting by the shore mending his cloak, when one of his former subjects passed by and marvelled to see him engaged in such a, mean occupation. The saint at once, by inspired knowledge, read his thoughts, and thus corrected his false impressions. He took the needle with which he was mending, his cloak and cast it into the sea. Then with a loud voice he cried out, "O needle rise again from the midst of the sea and come back again into my hands." Without a moment's delay thousands of fishes rose to the surface of the sea, each bearing in its mouth a golden needle, and cried out, "O Shaikh, take these needles of God!" Ibrahim then turned to the noble, saying, "Is not the kingdom of the heart better than the contemptible earthly kingdom I formerly possessed? What you have just seen is a very trifling sign of my spiritual power as it were, a mere leaf plucked to show the beauty of a garden. You have now caught the scent of this garden, and it ought to attract your soul to the garden itself, for you must know that scents have great influence, e.g., the scent of Joseph's coat, 1 which restored Jacob's sight, and the scents which were loved by the Prophet." 2
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xii. 93. 
 2. There is a Hedis: "The Prophet loved perfumes and fair women and brightness of eyes in prayer." 

 STORY XV.
 The Man who boasted that God did not punish 
 him for his sins, and Jethro's answer to him.
 That person said in the time of Shu'aib (Jethro),
 "God has seen many faults done by me;
 Yea, how many sins and faults of mine has He seen,
 Nevertheless of His mercy He punishes me not."
 God Almighty spake in the ear of Shu'aib,
 Addressing him with an inner voice in answer thereto,
 "Why hast thou said I have sinned so much,
 And God of His mercy has not punished my sins?"
 Thou sayest the very reverse of the truth, O fool!
 Wandering from the way and lost in the desert!
 How many times do I smite thee, and thou knowest not?
 Thou art bound in my chains from head to foot.
 On thy heart is rust on rust collected,
 So thou art blind to mysteries.
 Thy rust, layer on layer, O black kettle!
 Makes the aspect of thy inner parts foul.
 If that smoke touched a new kettle,
 It would show the smut, were it only as a grain of barley;
 For everything is made manifest by its opposite,
 In contrast with its whiteness that black shows foul.
 But when the kettle is black, then afterwards
 Who can see on it the impression of the smoke?
 If the blacksmith be a negro,
 His face agrees in color with the smoke.
 But if a man of Rum does blacksmith's work,
 His face becomes grimed by the smoke fumes;
 Then he quickly perceives the impression of his fault,
 So that he wails and cries 'O Allah!'
 When he is stubborn and follows his evil practices,
 He casts dust in the eyes of his discernment.
 He recks not of repentance, and, moreover, that sin
 Becomes dear to his heart, so that he becomes without faith,
 Old shame for sin and calling on God quit him,
 Rust five layers deep settles on his mirror,
 Rust spots begin to gnaw his iron,
 The color in his jewel grows less and less.
 When you write on white paper,
 What is written is read at a glance;
 But when you write on the face of a written page,
 It is not plain, reading it is deceptive;
 For that black is written on the top of other black,
 Both the writings are illegible and senseless.
 Or if, in the third place, you write on the page,
 And then blacken it like an infidel's soul,
 Then what remedy but the aid of the Remedier?
 Despair is copper and sight its elixir.
 Lay your despair before Him,
 That you may escape from pain without medicine."
 When Shu'aib spoke these aphorisms to him,
 From that breath of the soul roses bloomed in his heart,
 His soul heard the revelations of heaven;
 He said, "If He has punished me, where is the sign of it?"
 Shu'aib said, "O Lord, he repels my arguments,
 He seeks for a sign of that punishment."
 The Veiler of sins replied, "I will tell him no secrets,
 Save only one, in order to try him. 
 One sign that I punish him is this, 
 That he observes obedience and fasting and prayer, 
 And devotions and almsgiving, and so on, 
 Yet never feels the least expansion of soul. 
 He performs the devotions and acts enjoined by law, 
 Yet derives not an atom of relish from them. 
 Outward devotion is sweet to him, spirit is not sweet, 
 Nuts in plenty, but no kernel in any of them. 
 Relish is needed for devotions to bear fruit, 
 Kernels are needed that seeds may yield trees. 
 How can seeds without kernels become trees? 
 Form without soul (life) is only a dream."

 STORY XVI.
 The Gluttonous Sufi.
 In a certain convent there lived a Sufi whose conduct gave just offence to the brethren. They brought him before their Shaikh and thus accused him, "This Sufi has three very bad qualities; he babbles exceedingly like a bell, at his meals he eats more than twenty men and when he sleeps he is as one of the Seven Sleepers." The Shaikh then admonished him, insisting on the obligation of keeping to the golden mean; and reminding him that even the prophet Moses 1 was once rebuked by Khizr for speaking to excess. But the delinquent excused himself on the grounds that the mean is relative, what is excess in one man being moderation in another, that he who is led by the spirit is no longer subject to the outward law, and that, the "inner voice," which rules such an one s conduct, is its own evidence.
 The mean is relative.

 He said, "Though the path of the mean is wisdom,
 Yet is this same mean also relative.
 The water which is insufficient for a camel
 Is like an ocean to a mouse.
 Whoso has four loaves as his daily allowance,
 Whether he eat two or three, he observes the mean.
 But if he eat all four he transgresses the mean,
 A very slave to greed, and voracious as a duck.
 Whoso has an appetite for ten loaves,
 Know, though he eat six, he observes the mean.
 If I have an appetite for fifty loaves,
 While you can manage only six, we are not on a par.
 You are wearied with ten prostrations in prayer,
 Whilst I can endure five hundred.
 Such an one goes barefoot to the Ka'ba,
 Whilst another faints with going to the mosque."
 The ecstatic state which exalts the subject of it above law.
 "At times my state resembles a dream,
 My dreaming seems to them infidelity.
 Know my eyes sleep, but my heart is awake;
 My body, though torpid, is instinct with energy.
 The Prophet said, 'Mine eyes sleep,
 But my heart is awake with the Lord of mankind.'
 Your eyes are awake and your heart fast asleep,
 My eyes are closed, and my heart at the 'open door.'
 My heart has other five senses of its own;
 These senses of my heart view the two worlds.
 Let not a weakling like you censure me,
 What, seems night to you is broad day to me;
 What seems a prison to you is a garden to me.
 Busiest occupation is rest to me.
 Your feet are in the mire, to me, mire is rose, 
 What to you is funeral wailing is marriage drum to me. 
 While I seem on earth, abiding with you in the house, 
 I ascend like Saturn to the seventh heaven. 
 'Tis not I who companion with you, 'tis my shadow; 
 My exaltation transcends your thoughts, 
 Because I have transcended thought, 
 Yea, I have sped beyond reach of thought. 
 I am lord of thought, not overlorded by thought, 
 As the builder is lord of the building. 
 All creatures are enslaved to thought; 
 For this cause are they sad at heart and sorrowful. 
 I send myself on an embassy to thought, 
 And, at will, spring back again from thought. 
 I am as the bird of heaven and thought as the fly, 
 How can the fly lend a helping hand to me?
 Whoso has in him a spark of the light of Omnipotence, 
 However much he eats, say ' Eat on;' 'tis lawful to him."
 To the spiritual man the "inner voice" is its 
 own evidence, and needs no other proof.
 "If you are a true lover of my soul, 
 This truth-fraught saying of mine is no vain pretence, 
 'Though I talk half the night I am superior to you;' 
 And again, 'Fear not the night; here am I, your kinsman.' 
 These two assertions of mine will both seem true to you 
 The moment you recognize the voice of your kinsman. 
 Superiority and kinsmanship are both mere assertions, 
 Yet both are recognized for truth by men of clear wit. 
 The nearness of the voice proves to such an one 
 That the voice proceeds from a friend who is near. 
 The sweetness of the kinsman's voice, too, O beloved, 
 Proves the veracity of that kinsman. 
 But the uninspired fool who from ignorance 
 Cannot tell the voice of a stranger from a friend's,
 To him the friend's saying seems a vain pretension, 
 His ignorance is the material cause of his disbelief. 
 To the wise, whose hearts are enlightened, 
 The mere sound of that voice proves its truth."
 "When you say to a thirsty man, 'Come quickly; 
 This is water in the cup, take and drink it,' 
 Does the thirsty man say, 'This is a vain pretension; 
 Go, remove yourself from me, O vain pretender, 
 Or proceed to give proofs and evidence 
 That this is generic water, and concrete water thereof'? 
 Or when a mother cries to her sucking babe, 
 'Come, O son, I am thy mother,' 
 Does the babe answer, 'O mother, show a proof 
 That I shall find comfort from taking thy milk'? 
 In the hearts of every sect that has a taste of the truth 
 The sight and the voice of prophets work miracles. 
 When the prophets raise their cry to the outward ear, 
 The souls of each sect bow in devotion within; 
 Because never in this world hath the soul's ear 
 Heard from any man the like of that cry. 
 That poor man in that strange sweet voice 
 Recognizes the voice of God, 'Verily I am nigh.'" 2
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xviii. 77. 
 2. "And when my servants ask thee concerning me then will I be nigh unto them. I will answer the cry of him that crieth, when he crieth unto me." (Koran ii. l82). 

 STORY XVII.
 The Tree of Life.
 The preceding story is followed by a short anecdote of the infants of the Virgin Mary and the mother of John the Baptist leaping in their mothers' wombs, 1 and in reply to matter of fact cavillers and questioners of this anecdote, the poet says we must look at its spirit and essential basis rather than its outward form. This introduces the story of the tree of life. A certain wise man related that in Hindustan there was a tree of such wonderful virtue that whosoever ate of its fruit lived forever. Hearing this, a king deputed one of his courtiers to go in quest of it. The courtier accordingly proceeded to Hindustan, and traveled all over that country, inquiring of every one he met where this tree was to be found. Some of these persons professed their entire ignorance, others joked him, and others gave him false information; and, finally, he had to return to his country with his mission unaccomplished. He then, as a last resource, betook himself to the sage who had first spoken of the tree, and begged for further information about it, and the sage replied to him as follows:
 The Shaikh laughed, and said to him, "O friend,
 This is the tree of knowledge, O knowing one;
 Very high, very fine, very expansive,
 The very water of life from the circumfluent ocean.
 Thou hast run after form, O ill-informed one,
 Wherefore thou lackest the fruit of the tree of substance.
 Sometimes it is named tree, sometimes sun,
 Sometimes lake, and sometimes cloud.
 'Tis one, though it has thousands of manifestations;
 Its least manifestation is eternal life!
 Though 'tis one, it has a thousand manifestations,
 The names that fit that one are countless.
 That one is to thy personality a father,
 In regard to another person He may be a son.
 In relation to another He may be wrath and vengeance,
 In relation to another, mercy and goodness.
 He has thousands of names, yet is One,
 Answering to all of His descriptions, yet indescribable.
 Every one who seeks names, if he is a man of credulity,
 Like thee, remains hopeless and frustrated of his aim.
 Why cleavest thou to this mere name of tree,
 So that thou art utterly balked and disappointed?
 Pass over names and look to qualities,
 So that qualities may lead thee to essence!
 The differences of sects arise from His names;
 When they pierce to His essence they find His peace!"
 This story is followed by another anecdote illustrative of the same thesis that attending merely to names and outward forms, rather than to the spirit and essence of religion, leads men into error and delusion. Four persons, a Persian, an Arab, a Turk, and a Greek, were traveling together, and received a present of a dirhem. The Persian said he would buy "angur" with it, the Arab said he would buy "inab," while the Turk and the Greek were for buying "uzum" and "astaphil" (staphyle), respectively. Now all these words mean one and the same thing, viz. "grapes;" but, owing to their ignorance of each other's languages, they fancied they each wanted to buy something different, and accordingly a violent quarrel arose between them. At last a wise man who knew all their languages came up and explained to them that they were all wishing for one and the same thing.
 *NOTES:
 1. Luke i. 41. 

 STORY XVIII.
 The Young Ducks who were brought up under a Hen.
 Although a domestic fowl may have taken thee,
 Who art a duckling, under her wing and nurtured thee,
 Thy mother was a duck of that ocean.
 Thy nurse was earthy, and her wing dry land.
 The longing for the ocean which fills thy heart,
 That natural longing of thy soul comes from thy mother.
 Thy longing for dry land comes to thee from thy nurse;
 Quit thy nurse, for she will lead thee astray.
 Leave thy nurse on the dry land and push on,
 Enter the ocean of real Being, like the ducks!
 Though thy nurse may frighten thee away from water,
 Do thou fear not, but haste on into the ocean!
 Thou art a duck, and flourishest on land and water,
 And dost not, like a domestic fowl, dig up the house.
 Thou art a king of "the sons of Adam honored by God," l
 And settest foot alike on sea and land;
 For impress on thy mind, "We have carried them by sea,"
 Before the words, "We have carried them by land."
 The angels go not on dry land,
 And the animals know nothing of the sea;
 Thou in body art an animal, in thy soul an angel;
 Hence thou goest both upon earth and on heaven."
 Hence to outward view "He is a man like you," 2
 While to his sharp-seeing heart "it hath been revealed."
 His earthy form has fallen on earth,
 His spirit revolving above highest heaven.
 O boy, we are all of us waterfowl,
 The sea knows full well our language.
 Solomon 3 is, as it were, that sea, and we as the birds;
 In Solomon we hold our course to eternity.
 Along with Solomon plunge into the ocean, 4
 Then, like David, the water will make us coats-of-mail.
 That Solomon is present to every one,
 But negligence closes their eyes and bewitches them.
 Hence, through ignorance, sloth, and folly,
 Though he stands hard by us, we are shut off from him.
 The noise of thunder makes the head of the thirsty ache;
 When he knows not that it unlocks the blessed showers,
 His eyes are fixed on the running stream,
 Unwitting of the sweetness of the rain from heaven.
 He urges the steed of his desire towards the caused,
 And perforce remains shut off from the Causer.
 Whoso beholds the Causer face to face,
 How can he set his heart on things caused on earth?
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xvi. 72: "And now have we honored the sons of Adam, by sea and by land have we carried them." 
 2. Koran xviii. 110: "Say, in sooth I am only a man like you. It hath been revealed unto me that your God is one only God." 
 3. Koran xxvii. 16: "Solomon said, O men, we have been taught the speech of birds." 
 4. Koran xxvii. 44 and xxi. 80. 

     
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book III.

 STORY I.
 The Travelers who ate the Young Elephant.

 A PARTY of travelers lost their way in a wilderness, and were well nigh famished with hunger. While they were considering what to do, a sage came up and condoled with them on their unfortunate plight. He told them that there were many young elephants in the adjacent woods, one of which would furnish them an ample meal, but at the same time he warned them that if they killed one, its parents would in all probability track them out and be revenged on them for killing their offspring. Shortly after the travelers saw a plump young elephant, and could not resist killing and eating it. One alone refrained. Then they lay down to rest; but no sooner were they fast asleep than a huge elephant made his appearance and proceeded to smell the breath of each one of the sleepers in turn. Those whom he perceived to have eaten of the young elephant's flesh he slew without mercy, sparing only the one who had been prudent enough to abstain.
 God's care for His children.
 O son, the pious are God's children,
 Absent or present He is informed of their state.
 Deem Him not absent when they are endangered,
 For He is jealous for their lives.
 He saith, "These saints are my children,
 Though remote and alone and away from their Lord.
 For their trial they are orphans and wretched,
 Yet in love I am ever holding communion with them. 
 Thou art backed by all my protection; 
 My children are, as it were, parts of me. 
 Verily these Darveshes of mine 
 Are thousands on thousands, and yet no more than One; 
 For if not, how did Moses with one magic staff 
 Turn the realm of Pharaoh upside down? 
 And if it were not so, how did Noah with one curse 
 Make East and West alike drowned in his flood? 
 Nor could one prayer of eloquent Lot 
 Have razed their strong city against their will, 
 Their mighty city, like to Paradise, 
 Became as a Tigris of black water; go, see its vestige! 
 Towards Syria is this vestige and memorial, 
 Thou seest it in passing on the way to Jerusalem. 
 Thousands of God-fearing prophets 
 In every age hold divine chastisements in hand. 
 Should I tell of them my limits would be exceeded, 
 And not hearts only but very hills would bleed."
 Evil deeds give men's prayers an ill savour in Gods nostrils.
 Thou art asleep, and the smell of that forbidden fruit
 Ascends to the azure skies,
 Ascends along with thy foul breath,
 Till it overpowers heaven with stench;
 Stench of pride, stench of lust, stench of greed.
 All these stink like onions when a man speaks.
 Though thou swearest, saying, "When have I eaten?
 Have I not abstained from onions and garlic?"
 The very breath of that oath tells tales,
 As it strikes the nostrils of them that sit with thee.
 So too prayers are made invalid by such stenches, 1
 That crooked heart is betrayed by its speech.
 The answer to that prayer is, "Be ye driven into hell," 2 
 The staff of repulsion is the reward of all deceit. 
 But, if thy speech be crooked and thy meaning straight, 
 Thy crookedness of words will be accepted of God.
 That faithful Bilal, when he called to prayer, 
 Would devoutly cry, "Come hither, come hither!" 
 At last men said, "O Prophet, this call is not right, 
 This is wrong; now, what is thy intention? 
 O Prophet, and O ambassador of the Almighty, 
 Provide another Mu'azzin of better talent. 
 'Tis an error at the beginning of our divine worship 
 To utter the words, 'Come to the asylum!'" 3 
 The wrath of the Prophet boiled up, and he said 
 (Uttering one or two secrets from the fount of grace), 
 "O base ones, in God's sight the 'Ho!' of Bilal 
 Is better than a hundred 'Come hithers' and ejaculations. 
 Ah! excite not a tumult, lest I tell forth openly 
 Your secret thoughts from first to last. 
 If ye keep not your breath sweet in prayer, 
 Go, desire a prayer from the Brethren of Purity!"
 For this cause spake God to Moses, 
 At the time he was asking aid in prayer, 
 "O Moses! desire protection of me 
 With a mouth that thou hast not sinned withal." 
 Moses answered, "I possess not such a mouth." 
 God said, "Call upon me with another mouth! 
 Act so that all thy mouths 
 By night and by day may be raising prayers. 
 When thou hast sinned with one mouth, 
 With thy other mouth cry, 'O Allah!' 
 Or else cleanse thy own mouth, 
 And make thy spirit alert and quick. 
 Calling on God is pure, and when purity approaches, 
 Impurity arises and takes its departure. 
 Contraries flee away from contraries; 
 When day dawns night takes flight. 
 When the pure name (of God) enters the mouth, 
 Neither does impurity nor that impure mouth remain!"
 The man whose calling "O Allah" was equivalent
 to God's answering him, "Here am I" 4.

 That person one night was crying, "O Allah!" 
 That his mouth might be sweetened thereby, 
 And Satan said to him, "Be quiet, O austere one! 
 How long wilt thou babble, O man of many words? 
 No answer comes to thee from nigh the throne, 
 How long wilt thou cry 'Allah' with harsh face?" 
 That person was sad at heart and hung his head, 
 And then beheld Khizr present before him in a vision, 
 Who said to him, "Ah! thou hast ceased to call on God, 
 Wherefore repentest thou of calling upon Him?" 
 The man said, "The answer 'Here am I' came not, 
 Wherefore I fear that I am repulsed from the door." 
 Khizr replied to him, "God has given me this command; 
 Go to him and say, 'O much-tried one, 
 Did not I engage thee to do my service? 
 Did not I engage thee to call upon me? 
 That calling 'Allah' of thine was my 'Here am I,' 
 And that pain and longing and ardour of thine my messenger; 
 Thy struggles and strivings for assistance 
 Were my attractions, and originated thy prayer. 
 Thy fear and thy love are the cove,rt of my mercy, 
 Each 'O Lord!' of thine contains many 'Here am I's."
 The soul of fools is alien from this calling on God, 
 Because it is not their wont to cry, 'O Lord!' 
 On their mouths and hearts are locks and bonds, 5 
 That they may not cry to God in time of distress. 
 God gave Pharaoh abundance of riches and wealth, 
 So that he boasted that he was 'Lord Supreme.' 
 In the whole of his life he suffered no headache, 
 So that he never cried to God, wretch that he was. 
 God granted him the absolute dominion of the world, 
 But withheld from him pain and sorrow and cares; 
 Because pain and sorrow and loads of cares 
 Are the lot of God's friends in the world. 
 Pain is better than the dominion of the world, 
 So that thou mayest call on God in secret. 
 The cries of those free from pain are dull and cold, 
 The cries of the sorrowful come from the burning hearts."
 *NOTES:
 1. "Whoever eats garlic or onions must keep away from me or from the Masjid." (Mishkat ut Masabih, ii. 321). 
 2. Koran xxiii. 110: "He will say 'Be ye driven down into it, and address me not.'" 
 3. Rules for the call to prayer are given in Mishkat ul Masabih i. 141. 
 4. Or, "What dost thou require of me?" 
 5. Koran ii. 6. 

 STORY II.
 The Villager who invited the Townsman to visit him.

 A certain villager paid a visit to the town, and there received hospitality from one of the townsmen. At his departure the villager was profuse of thanks, and pressed the townsman to come and see him in his village, and bring his family with him. The townsman hesitated long before accepting his invitation, having doubts as to his sincerity, and remembering the Hadis, "Caution consists in suspecting others." 1 But after ten years' solicitation he at length yielded, and set off with his family to the village. On his arrival the villager shut the door in his face, saying that he did not know him, and the townsman had to pass five nights in the cold and rain. At last, exhausted with suffering, he implored the villager to give him shelter, promising to render service in return. The villager granted it on condition that he would protect his garden from the wolves. The townsman accepted this condition, and taking bow and arrows, proceeded to patrol the garden, but, owing to the rain and the darkness, and his own fears, ended by shooting the villager's pet ass in mistake for a wolf. The villager abused him roundly, saying that he himself would not have taken an ass for a wolf, even on the darkest night. The townsman replied, "If that be so, you are self-convicted of inhumanity, for you must have recognized me, your friend of ten years' standing, the moment I knocked at your door. As for me, I am ignorant of all but Allah, and, moreover, was unable to see in the darkness; and God has said, 'No criminality is imputed to the blind.'2 But your blindness in refusing to recognize me was willful, and your claims to humanity are thus proved to be false by the test to which you have been submitted."
 Jesus healing the sick.
 The house of 'Isa was the banquet of men of heart,
 Ho! afflicted one, quit not this door!
 From all sides the people ever thronged,
 Many blind and lame, and halt and afflicted,
 To the door of the house of 'Isa at dawn,
 That with his breath he might heal their ailments.
 As soon as he had finished his orisons,
 That holy one would come forth at the third hour;
 He viewed those impotent folk, troop by troop,
 Sitting at his door in hope and expectation;
 He spoke to them, saying, "O stricken ones!
 The desires of all of you have been granted by God;
 Arise, walk without pain or affliction,
 Acknowledge the mercy and beneficence of God!"
 Then all, as camels whose feet are shackled,
 When you loose their feet in the road,
 Straightway rush in joy and delight to the halting-place,
 So did they run upon their feet at his command.
 How many afflictions caused by thyself to thyself
 Hast thou escaped through these princes of the faith?
 How long that lameness of thine was thy steed!
 How seldom was thy soul void of sorrow and grief!
 O careless straggler, bind a rope upon thy feet,
 Lest thou lose even thine own self!
 But thy ingratitude and unthankfulness
 Forget the honey draught thou hast sipped.
 That road was perforce closed to thee
 When thou didst wound the hearts of the men of heart.
 Quick! clasp them and ask pardon of them;
 Like the clouds, shed tears of lamentation,
 So that their rose-garden may bloom for thee,
 And their ripe fruits burst open of themselves.
 Press around that door, be not viler than a dog,
 If thou wouldest rival the Seven Sleepers' dog.
 God's claims to our gratitude.
 Whereas want of fidelity is shameful even in dogs,
 How can it be right in men?
 God Almighty Himself makes boast of fidelity,
 Saying, "Who more faithful to his promise than We?" 3
 Know, infidelity is fidelity to God's adversary,
 No one has pre-eminence over the rights of God.
 The claims of a mother are less than God's, for He,
 That bounteous One, made her debtor for thy embryo.
 He gave thee a form whilst thou wast in her womb,
 In her womb He gave thee needful rest and nurture.
 He viewed her as a part united to thee,
 Then His wisdom separated that united part.
 God devised a thousand plans and arts,
 To make thy mother lavish affection upon thee.
 Wherefore the claims of God predominate over the mother's,
 Whoso acknowledges not God's claims is a fool.
 He who made mother and breast and milk
 United mother to father also, despise Him not!
 O Lord, O Ancient of days, Thy mercies,
 Whether known to us or unknown, are all from Thee!
 Thou hast commanded, saying, "Remember thy God,"
 Because God's claims are never exhausted!
 Since thou hast been led astray by faithless men, 
 Turn now from thy evil doubts to the opposite mind. 
 I am free from error and all faithlessness; 
 Thou must come to me and rescind evil doubts. 
 Cut off these evil doubts and cast them away, 
 For in the presence of such thou becomest double. 
 Therefore thou hast chosen harsh friends and companions; 
 If I ask where they are thou sayest they are gone. 
 The good friend goes up to highest heaven, 
 Evil friends sink beneath the bottom of the earth, 
 Whilst thou art left alone in the midst, forlorn, 
 Even as the fires left by the departed caravan."
 O brave friend, grasp His skirt, 
 Who is removed alike from the world above and below; 
 Who neither, like. Jesus, ascends to heaven, 
 Nor, like Korah, sinks into the earth; 
 Who will abide with thee in the house and abroad 
 When thou lackest house and home. 
 He will bring forth peace out of perturbations, 
 And when thou art afllicted will keep His promise.
 How false pretensions to sanctity are 
 distinguished from true sanctity.
 O son, a hundred thousand tests await thee, 
 Whoever thou art who sayest "I am a prince of the gate," 
 If the vulgar detect not such an one by tests, 
 Yet the skilled wayfarers seek of him a sign. 
 When a man makes pretension to be a tailor, 
 The master places before him a piece of silk, 
 Saying, "Cut out a large head-dress," 
 And failure in the test leads him to the pillory. 
 If all the evil men were not tested, 
 Every catamite would through fraud pass for a Rustam. 
 Suppose he wears the semblance of one clad in mail, 
 Yet when wounded he is at once taken captive. 
 The God-intoxicated are not sobered by old age, 
 They remain beside themselves till the last trump. 
 The wine of God is true, and not false, 
 But thou hast drunk only sour whey. 
 Thou makest thyself out to be a Junaid or a Bayazid; 
 Go! for do I not know a hatchet from a ploughshare? 
 O plotter, how canst thou conceal by fraud 
 Baseness, sloth, covetousness, and lust?
 Thou holdest thyself out as a lover of God, 
 But thou hast coquetted with the evil demon. 
 The lover and the beloved on the last day 
 Will be joined together and raised in sight of all. 
 How foolish and silly thou hast made thyself! 
 Thou hast drunk blood of grapes, nay, my blood! 
 Go! for I know thee not. Get away! 
 I am a lover beside himself, whose words are wild. 
 Thou fanciest thyself near to God, 
 Saying, "The maker of the dish is not far from the dish." 
 Knowest thou not that the nearness of saints to God 
 Involves the power to do mighty works and signs? 
 Iron was as wax in the hands of David, 
 Wax in thy hands is as iron. 
 God's nearness and His beneficence are common to all, 
 But only eminent saints enjoy inspired love. 
 Nearness is of various kinds, O son, 
 The sun shines alike on rocks and on gold. 
 Yet the sun possesses a nearness to gold, 
 Whereof the common willow has no cognizance. 
 The dry branch and the green are alike near the sun, 
 Does the sun veil himself from either? 
 Yet what is the nearness of that green branch, 
 Wherefrom thou eatest ripe fruits? 
 But as for the dry branch) from its nearness to the sun, 
 What does it but more quickly grow dry and sapless? 
 Be not intoxicated after the manner of this branch, 
 Which, when it becomes sober, has cause for repentance, 
 But, like those drunkards who, when they drink wine, 
 Bear ripe fruits of wisdom of penitence.
 *NOTES:
 1. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. p. 370, ascribes this saying to the poet, Aqzam bin zaid. 
 2. Koran xxiv. 60. 
 3. Koran. ix. 112. 

 STORY III.
 The Jackal who pretended to be a Peacock.
 A jackal fell into a dye-pit, and his skin was dyed of various colors. Proud of his splendid appearance, he returned to his companions, and desired them to address him as a peacock. But they proceeded to test his pretensions, saying, "Dost thou scream like a peacock, or strut about gardens as peacocks are wont to do?" And he was forced to admit that he did not, whereupon they rejected his pretensions. Another story, also on the subject of false pretenders, follows. A proud man who lacked food procured a skin full of fat, greased his beard and lips with it, and called on his friends to observe how luxuriously he had dined. But his belly was vexed at this, because it was hungry, and he was destroying his chance of being invited to dinner by his friends. So the belly cried to God, and a cat came and carried off the skin of fat, and so the man's false pretences were exposed. The poet takes occasion to point out that Pharaoh's pretensions to divinity exactly resembled the pretensions of this jackal, and adds that all such false pretenders may be detected by the mark noted in the Koran, "Ye shall know them by the strangeness of their speech." 1 This recalls the story of Harut and Marut, two angels who were very severe on the frailties of mankind, and whom God sent down upon the earth to be tempted, with the result that they both succumbed to the charms of the daughters of men.2
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xlvii. 32. 
 2. Koran ii. 96. 

 STORY IV.
 Moses and Pharaoh.
 Then follows a long account of the birth of Moses, of Pharaoh's devices to kill him in his infancy, of his education in Pharaoh's house, of his desiring Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go, and of his contest with the magicians of Egypt, and his victory over them. In the course of the story the following anecdote is narrated: 
 A snake-catcher, who was following his occupation in the mountains, discovered a large snake frozen by the cold, and, imagining it to be dead, he tied it up and took it to Baghdad. There all the idlers of the city flocked together to see it, and the snake, thawed by the warmth of the sun, recovered life, and immediately destroyed the spectators.
 Comparison of fleshly lust to the snake.

 Lust is that snake; How say you it is dead?
 It is only frozen by the pangs of hunger.
 If it obtains the state of Pharaoh,
 So as to command the (frozen) rivers to flow,
 Straightway it is led to pride like Pharaoh's,
 And it plunders the goods of many a Moses and Aaron.
 Through pressure of want this snake is as a fly,
 It becomes a gnat through wealth and rank and luxury.
 Beware, keep that snake in the frost of humiliation,
 Draw it not forth into the sunshine of 'Iraq!
 So long as that snake is frozen, it is well;
 When it finds release from frost you become its prey.
 Conquer it and save yourself from being conquered,
 Pity it not, it is not one who bears affection.
 For that warmth of the sun kindles its lust,
 And that bat of vileness flaps its wings.
 Slay it in sacred war and combat,
 Like a valiant man will God requite you with union.
 When that man cherished that snake,
 That stubborn brute was happy in the luxury of warmth;
 And of necessity worked destruction, O friend;
 Yea, many more mischiefs than I have told.
 If you wish to keep that snake tied up
 Without trouble, be faithful, be faithful!
 But how can base men attain this wish?
 It requires a Moses to slay serpents; 
 And a hundred thousand men were slain by his serpent, 
 In dire confusion, according to his purpose.

 STORY V.
 The Elephant in a Dark Room.
 Some Hindoos were exhibiting an elephant in a dark room, and many people collected to see it. But as the place was too dark to permit them to see the elephant, they all felt it with their hands, to gain an idea of what it was like. One felt its trunk, and declared that the beast resembled a water-pipe; another felt its ear, and said it must be a large fan; another its leg, and thought it must be a pillar; another felt its back, and declared the beast must be like a great throne. According to the part which each felt, he gave a different description of the animal. One, as it were, called it "Dal" and another "Alif."
 Comparison of the sensual eye to the 
 hand of one that felt the elephant.
 The eye of outward sense is as the palm of a hand,
 The whole of the object is not grasped in the palm.
 The sea itself is one thing, the foam another;
 Neglect the foam, and regard the sea with your eyes.
 Waves of foam rise from the sea night and day,
 You look at the foam ripples and not the mighty sea.
 We, like boats, are tossed hither and thither,
 We are blind though we are on the bright ocean.
 Ah! you who are asleep in the boat of the body,
 You see the water; behold the Water of waters!
 Under the water you see there is another Water moving it,
 Within the spirit is a Spirit that calls it.
 Where were Moses and Jesus when that Sun
 Showered down water on the fields sown with corn?
 Where were Adam and Eve what time
 God Almighty fitted the string to His bow?
 The one form of speech is evil and defective; 
 The other form, which is not defective, is perfect. 
 If I speak thereof your feet stumble, 
 Yet if I speak not of it, woe be to you! 
 And if I speak in terms of outward form, 
 You stick fast in that same form, O son. 
 You are footbound like the grass in the ground, 
 And your head is shaken by the wind uncertainly. 
 Your foot stands not firmly till you move it, 
 Nay) till you pluck it not up from the mire. 
 When you pluck up your foot you escape from the mire, 
 The way to this salvation is very difficult. 
 When you obtain salvation at God's hands, O wanderer, 
 You are free from the mire, and go your way. 
 When the suckling is weaned from its nurse, 
 It eats strong meats and leaves the nurse. 
 You are bound to the bosom of earth like seeds, 
 Strive to be weaned through nutriment of the heart. 
 Eat the words of wisdom, for veiled light 
 Is not accepted in preference to unveiled light. 
 When you have accepted the light, O beloved, 
 When you behold what is veiled without a veil, 
 Like a star you will walk upon the heavens; 
 Nay, though not in heaven, you will walk on high.
 Keep silence, that you may hear Him speaking 
 Words unutterable by tongue in speech. 
 Keep silence, that you may hear from that Sun 
 Things inexpressible in books and discourses. 
 Keep silence, that the Spirit may speak to you; 
 Give up swimming and enter the ark of Noah; 
 Not like Canaan when he was swimming, 
 Who said, "I desire not to enter the ark of Noah passing by."
 Noah and his unbelieving son Canaan.
 Noah cried, "Ho! child, come into the ark and rest, 
 That you be not drowned in the flood, O weak one." 1 
 Canaan said, "Nay! I have learned to swim, 
 I have lit a torch of my own apart from thy torch." 
 Noah replied, "Make not light of it, for 'tis the flood of destruction, 
 Swimming with hands and feet avails naught today. 
 The wind of wrath and the storm blow out torches; 
 Except the torch of God, all are extinguished." 
 He answered "Nay! I am going to that high mountain, 
 For that will save me from all harm." 
 Noah cried, "Beware, do not so, mountains are now as grass; 
 Except the Friend none can save thee." 
 He answered, "Why should I listen to thy advice? 
 For thou desirest to make me one of thy flock. 
 Thy speech is by no means pleasing to me, 
 I am free from thee in this world and the next."
 Thus the more good advice Noah gave him, 
 The more stubborn refusals he returned. 
 Neither was his father tired of advising Canaan, 
 Nor did his advice make any impression on Canaan; 
 While they were yet talking a violent wave 
 Smote Canaan's head, and he was overwhelmed.
 Reconciliatian of the two traditions, "Acquiescence in infidelity is infidelity" and "Whoso acquiesces not in God's ordinance desires another Lord besides me".
 Yesterday an inquirer questioned me, 
 Since he was interested in the foregoing narrative, 
 Saying, "The Prophet, whose words are as a seal, 
 Said, 'Acquiescence in infidelity is infidelity.' 
 And again, 'Acquiescence in God's ordinance 
 Is incumbent on all true believers.' 
 Infidelity and hypocrisy are not ordained of God; 
 If I acquiesce in them I am at variance with God. 
 And yet, if I acquiesce not, that again is wrong; 
 What way of escape is there from this dilemma? " 
 I said to him, "This infidelity is ordained, not ordinance, 2 
 Though this infidelity is the work of the ordinance. 
 Therefore distinguish the ordinance from the ordained, 
 That thy difficulty may be at once removed. 
 I acquiesce in infidelity so far as it is God's ordinance, 
 Not so far as it is our evil and foul passions. 
 Infidelity qua ordinance is not infidelity, 
 Call not God an infidel. Set not foot in this place. 
 Infidelity is folly, ordained infidelity wisdom, 
 How can mercy and vengeance be the same? 
 Ugliness of the picture is not ugliness of the painter, 
 Not so, for he erases ugly pictures. 
 The ability of the painter is shown in this, 
 That he can paint both ugly and beautiful pictures. 
 If I should pursue this argument properly, 
 So that questions and answers should be prolonged, 
 The unction of the mystery of love would escape me, 
 The picture of obedience would become another picture."
 Bewilderment from intense love of God puts 
 an end to all thinking and argument 3.
 A certain man whose hair was half gray came in haste 
 To a barber who was a friend of his, 
 Saying, "Pluck out the white hairs from my beard, 
 For I have selected a young bride, O my son. 
 The barber cut off his beard and laid it before him, 
 Saying, "Do you part them, the task is beyond me." 
 Questions are white and answers black; do you choose, 
 For the man of faith knows not how to choose.
 Thus, one smote Zaid a blow, 
 And Zaid attacked him for his treachery. 
 The striker said, "Let me first ask you a question, 
 Give me an answer to it and then strike me; 
 I struck your back and a bruise appeared, 
 Now I ask you a question in all kindliness, 
 Did this bruise proceed from my hand, 
 Or from the smitten part of your back, O complainer?" 
 Zaid replied, "Through pain I am not in a condition 
 To enter upon thought and consideration of this. 
 You, who are free from pain, think this out; 
 Such trifling thoughts occur not to a man in pain."
 Men in pain have no time for other thoughts, 
 Whether you enter mosque or Christian church. 
 Your carelessness and injustice suggest thoughts 
 And unprecedented difficulties to your imagination. 
 The man in pain cares only for the faith, 
 He is aware only of man and his work. 
 He set's God's command upon his head and face, 
 And for thinking, he puts it aside. 4
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xi. 44. 
 2. Or "decreed, not decree" (maqzi nai qaza). I confess I do not understand the distinction. 
 3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 287. 
 4. The four last couplets are omitted in the Bulaq edition. 

 STORY VI.
 The Lover who read Sonnets to his Mistress. 

 A lover was once admitted to the presence of his mistress, but, instead of embracing her, he pulled out a paper of sonnets and read them to her, describing her perfections and charms and his own love towards her at length. His mistress said to him, "You are now in my presence, and these lover's sighs and invocations are a waste of time. It is not the part of a true lover to waste his time in this way. It shows that I am not the real object of your affection, but that what you really love is your own effusions and ecstatic raptures. I see, as it were, the water which I have longed for before me, and yet you withhold it. I am, as it were, in Bulgaria, and the object of your love is in Cathay. One who is really loved is the single object of her lover, the Alpha and Omega of his desires. As for you, you are wrapped up in your own amorous raptures, depending on the varying states of your own feelings, instead of being wrapped up in me."
 The true mystic must not stop at mere subjective religious emotions, but seek absolute union with God. 1
 Whoso is restricted to religious raptures is but a man;
 Sometimes his rapture is excessive, sometimes deficient.
 The Sufi is, as it were, the "son of the season,"
 But the pure (Safi) is exalted above season and state.
 Religious raptures depend on feelings and will,
 But the pure one is regenerated by the breath of Jesus.
 You are a lover of your own raptures, not of me;
 You turn to me only in hope of experiencing raptures.
 Whoso is now defective, now perfect,
 Is not adored by Abraham; he is "one that sets."
 Because the stars set, and are now up, now down,
 He loved them not; "I love not them that set." 2
 Whoso is now pleasing and now unpleasing
 Is at one time water, at another fire.
 He may be the house of the moon, but not the true moon;
 Or as the picture of a mistress, but not the living one.
 The mere Sufi is the " child of the season;"
 He clings to seasons as to a father,
 But the pure one is drowned in overwhelming love.
 A child of any one is never free from season and state.
 The pure one is drowned in the light cc that is not begotten,"
 "What begets not and is not begotten" is God. 3
 Go I seek such love as this, if you are alive;
 If not, you are enslaved by varying seasons. 
 Gaze not on your own pictures, fair or ugly, 
 Gaze on your love and the object of your desire. 
 Gaze not at the sight of your own weakness or vileness, 
 Gaze at object of your desire, O exalted one.
 *NOTES:
 1. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 850. 
 2. Koran vi. 77. 
 3. Koran cxii. 3. 

 STORY VII.
 The Man who prayed earnestly to be fed without work.
 In the time of the prophet David there was a man who used to pray day and night, saying, "Thou hast created me weak and helpless; give me my daily bread without obliging me to work for it." The people derided him for making such a foolish petition, but he still persisted, and at last a cow ran into his house of its own accord, and he killed and ate it. This illustrates the saying of the Prophet that God loves earnest petitioners, because He regards the sincerity of the prayer more than the nature of the thing prayed for. All things praise God, but the praises of inanimate things are different from the praises of men, and those of a Sunni different from those of a Compulsionist (Jabri). Each says the other is in the way of error, but none but the truly spiritual man knows the truth.
 Knowledge or conviction, opposed to opinion.
 Little is known by any one but the spiritual man,
 Who has in his heart a touchstone of vital truth.
 The others, hovering between two opinions,
 Fly towards their nest on a single wing.
 Knowledge has two wings, opinion only one wing;
 Opinion is weak and lopsided in its flight.
 The bird having but one wing quickly drops down,
 And again flies on two steps or more.
 This bird of opinion goes on rising and falling
 On one wing, in hope to reach his nest.
 When he escapes from opinion and knowledge is seen,
 This bird gains two wings and spreads both of them.
 Afterwards he "goes upright on a straight path,
 Not grovelling on his face or creeping." l
 He flies up on two wings even as the angel Gabriel,
 Free of opinion, of duplicity, and of vain talk.
 Though the whole world say to him,
 "Thou art firm in the road of God's faith,"
 He is not made more ardent by their saying this,
 Nor is his lofty soul inclined from its course.
 And though all say to him, "Thou art in the wrong way
 Thou thinkest thyself a rock who art but a blade of grass,"
 He relapses not into opinion at their rebukes,
 Nor is he vexed at their malevolence.
 Nay, even if sea and mountains should cry out,
 Saying, "Thou art mated with error,"
 He would not relapse one jot into vain imaginations,
 Nor would he be grieved by the reproaches of his foes.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxvii, 22. 

 STORY VIII.
 The Boys and their Teacher.
 To illustrate the force of imagination or opinion, a story is told of a trick played by boys upon their master. The boys wished to obtain a holiday, and the sharpest of them suggested that when the master came into the school each boy should condole with him on his alleged sickly appearance. Accordingly, when he entered, one said, "O master, how pale you are looking!" and another said, "You are looking very ill today," and so on. The master at first answered that there was nothing the matter with him, but as one boy after another continued assuring him that he looked very ill, he was at length deluded into imagining that he must really be ill. So he returned to his house, making the boys follow him there, and told his wife that he was not well, bidding her mark how pale he was. His wife assured him he was not looking pale, and offered to convince him by bringing a mirror; but he refused to look at it, and took to his bed. He then ordered the boys to begin their lessons; but they assured him that the noise made his head ache, and he believed them, and dismissed them to their homes, to the annoyance of their mothers. Apropos of the sharpness of the boy who devised this trick, the poet takes occasion to controvert the opinion of the Mu'tazalites, that all m en are born with equal ability, and to express his agreement with the doctrine of the Sunnis, that the innate capacities of men vary very greatly.

 STORY IX.
 The Darvesh who Broke his Vow.
 There was once a Darvesh who took up his abode in the mountains, in order to enjoy perfect solitude. In that place were many fruit-trees, and the Darvesh made a vow that he would never pluck any of the fruit, but eat only what was shaken down by the wind. For a long time he kept his vow; but a time came when there was no wind, and consequently no fruit was shaken down. The Darvesh was true to his vow for five days, but ho could then endure the pangs of hunger no longer, and he stretched out his hand and plucked some of the fruit from the branches. The reason of this lapse on his part was that he had omitted to say "If God will" when making his vow; and as nothing can be accomplished without God's aid, ho could not possibly keep his vow. Shortly afterwards the chief of the police visited the mountains in pursuit of a band of robbers, and arrested the Darvesh along with them, and cut off his hand. When he discovered his mistake he apologized very earnestly; but the Darvesh reassured him, saying that men were not to blame, as God had evidently designed to punish him for breaking his vow 'by depriving him of the hand which had sinned in plucking the fruit. 1
 All things dependent upon the will of God.

 Therefore hath God commanded, "Make an exception,
 Couple the words 'If God will' with your vows. 2
 Because the governance of actions is in my hands,
 The wills of all are subject to my will.
 Every moment I impart a fresh bias to the heart,
 Every instant I set a fresh mark on the heart;
 Each day I am engaged in a fresh work, 3
 There is naught that swerves from my purpose."
 There is a tradition, "The heart is like a feather
 In the desert, which is borne captive by the winds; 4
 The wind drives it everywhere at random,
 Now to right and now to left in opposite directions."
 According to another tradition, know the heart is like
 To water in a kettle boiling on the fire.
 So every moment a fresh purpose occurs to the heart,
 Not proceeding from itself, but from its situation.
 Why, then, are you confident about the heart's purposes?
 Why make you vows only to be covered with shame?
 All these changes proceed from the effect of God's will;
 Although you see the pit, you cannot avoid it.
 The strange thing is, not that winged fowl
 Fall into the deadly snare without seeing it,
 But that they see the snare and the limed twig,
 And yet fall into it, whether they will or no;
 Their eyes and ears are open and the snare is in front,
 Yet they fly into the snare with their own wings!
 Comparison of the divine decrees to something
 that is hidden, yet whose effects are seen.
 Behold that king's son clad in rags,
 With bare head and fallen into distress;
 Consumed by lusts and riotous living,
 Having sold all his clothes and substance; 
 Having lost house and home, utterly disgraced, 
 Fulfilling the desire of his enemies by his disgrace. 
 If he sees a pious man he cries, "O sir, 
 Aid me, for the love of God; 
 For I have fallen into this dire disgrace; 
 I have squandered goods and gold and wealth. 
 Aid me so that perchance I may escape hence, 
 And extricate myself from this deep slough." 
 He repeats this prayer to high and low, 
 " Release me, release me, release me!" 
 His eyes and ears are open, and he is free from bonds, 
 No jailer watches him, no chain binds him; 
 What, then, is the bond from which he asks release? 
 What is the prison from which ho seeks an exit? 
 'Tis the bond of God's purpose and hidden decrees; 
 Ah! none but the pure in sight can see that bond; 
 Though not visible, that bond exists in concealment; 
 'Tis more stringent than prison or chains of iron, 
 For the mason can pull down prison walls, 
 And blacksmiths can break asunder iron chains; 
 But, strange to say, this ponderous hidden bond,
 Blacksmiths are impotent to break this asunder!
 Ahmad alone could see that bond on Omm Jahil's back, 5 
 And the rope of palm fiber bound upon her neck; 
 Yea, he saw wood on the back of the wife of Bu Lahab, 
 And she, the bearer of the firewood, said it was heavy. 
 No eye but his saw that rope and that firewood, 
 For to him things unseen were visible. 
 The others explained it, saying 
 That Ahmad was beside himself, and they in their senses. 
 Nevertheless from the weight of the load her back bent, 
 And she complained of its weight before him, 
 Saying, "Aid me to escape from this load, 
 And to shake off this grievous burden." 
 He who sees clearly these indications, 
 Does he not know also the doomed from the elect? 
 Yea, he knows them, yet conceals it by command of God, 
 Since God permits him not to reveal it.
 *NOTES:
 1. cp. Cranmer. 
 2. Koran xviii. 23. 
 3. Koran lv. 29; cp. John v. 17. 
 4. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. p. 490. 
 5. See Koran cxi.: Abu Labab, at the instigation of his wife, Omm Jahil, rejected Muhammad's claim to the prophetic office and Muhammad declared that they should be burned in the fiery flame," and the wife "laden with firewood, and on her neck a rope of palm fiber." 

 STORY X.
 The Old Man who made no Lamentation at the Death of his Sons.

 After short anecdotes of Pharaoh's magicians, of the mule who complained to the camel that he was always stumbling, and of the prophet Ezra, comes the story of the old man who wept not for the death of his sons.
 An old man who was noted for sanctity, and who realized the saying of the Prophet, "The 'ulama of the faith are as the prophets of Israel," lost all his sons, but showed no grief or regret. His wife therefore rebuked him for his want of feeling, whereupon he replied to her as follows:
 He turned to his wife and said, "O dame,
 The harvest of December is not as that of July;
 Though they be dead or though they be living,
 Are they not equally visible to the eyes of the heart?
 I behold them clearly before me,
 Wherefore should I disfigure my countenance like you?
 Though they have gone forth by revolution of fortune,
 They are with me still, playing round me.
 The cause of lamentation is separation or parting,
 But I am still with my dear ones, and embrace them.
 Ordinary people may see them in dreams,
 But I see them clearly, though wide awake.
 I conceal myself a while from this world,
 I shake down the leaves of outward sense from the tree.
 Know, O wife, outward sense is captive to reason,
 And reason, again, is captive to spirit.
 Spirit unlooses the chained hands of reason; 
 Yea, it opens all things that are closed. 
 Sensations and thoughts resemble weeds 
 Which occupy the surface of pure water. 
 The hand of reason puts these weeds aside, 
 And the pure water is then visible to the wise. 
 Weeds in plenty cover the stream like bubbles; 
 When they are swept aside, the water is seen; 
 But when God unlooses not the hands of reason, 
 The weeds on our water grow thick through carnal lust; 
 Yea, they cover up your water more and more, 
 While your lust is smiling and your reason weeping. 
 When fear of God binds the hands of lust, 
 Then God unlooses the two hands of reason. 
 Then the powerful senses are subdued by you, 
 When you submit to reason as your commander 
 Then your sleepless sense is lulled into sleep, 
 That mysteries may appear to the soul. 
 You behold visions when broad awake, 
 And the gates of heaven are open before you."

 STORY XI.
 Bahlol and the Darvesh.
 The foregoing story is followed by anecdotes of a blind saint who was miraculously enabled to read the Koran, of Luqman and David, and a description of the saints who, mindful of the saying, "Patience is the key of happiness, resign themselves to the dispensations of Providence, and never pray to have them altered. The story of Bahlol and the Darvesh is then given as an example of this resignation to the will of God. Bahlol once paid a visit to a saintly Darvesh, and asked him how he fared. The Darvesh replied, "I fare like a man who directs the course of the world as he wills, to whom death and life are subservient, and whom tho stars themselves obey." Bahlol then pressed him to explain his meaning more clearly, and the Darvesh replied as follows:
 He said, "This at least is notorious to all men,
 That the world obeys the command of God.
 Not a leaf falls from a tree
 Without the decree and command of that Lord of lords;
 Not a morsel goes from the mouth down the throat
 Till God says to it, 'Go down.'
 Desire and appetite, which are the reins of mankind,
 Are themselves subservient to the rule of God.
 Hear this much, that, whereas the totality of actions
 Is not effected without God's direction,
 When the decree of God becomes the pleasure of man,
 Then man desires the fulfillment of God's decrees;
 And this too spontaneously, not in hope of reward,
 But because his very nature is congruous therewith.
 He desires not even his own life for himself,
 Nor is he relying on the hope of sweets of life to come.
 Whatever path is taken by the eternal decree,
 Whether it be life or death, 'tis all one to him.
 He lives for the sake of God, not for wealth;
 He dies for the sake of God, not in fear and grief.
 His faith is based on his desire to do God's will,
 Not on hope to gain paradise with its groves and founts.
 His avoidance of infidelity is also for God's sake,
 It proceeds not from fear of falling into the fire.
 Thus this temper of his arises from his very nature,
 Not from any discipline and endeavor of his own.
 At times he laughs when he contemplates God's pleasure,
 God's decrees are to him as sweetmeats of sugar.
 I ask, does not the world march agreeably to the will
 And commands of a man rejoicing in this disposition?
 Why, then, should such a one make prayers and petitions,
 Saying, 'O God, change such and such a decree?'
 His own death and his children's deaths
 For God's sake seem to him as sweets in the mouth.
 In the view of that faithful one his children's deaths
 Are as sweetmeats to a starving beggar.
 Why, therefore, should he make prayers 
 Unless he pray for what is pleasing to God? 
 These prayers and petitions, not those of self-pity 
 Make that man to be endued with salvation. 
 He utterly burned up all his self-pity, 
 At the time when he lit the lamp of love to God. 
 His love was the hell that burned up his inclinations; 
 Yea, ho burned up his own inclinations one by one."

 STORY XII.
 The Visions seen by the Saint Daquqi.
 To illustrate the exalted state of identification of the will with the Divine will just described, the poet tells the story of the visions and mighty works of the holy Daquqi. Daquqi was journeying in pious fervor, and in hope to see the splendour of "The Friend" in human shape, the Ocean in a drop of water, and the Sun in an atom, when late one evening he arrived at the seashore. Turning his eyes to heaven, he saw seven great lights never before seen of men, for "God directs whom He will." 1 Overwhelmed with awe, he watched these lights, and while he still watched them they united into one light. Still more amazed, he watched on, and the single light shortly assumed the likeness of seven men. Afterwards these seven men changed into seven trees; but, strange to say, although crowds of people were passing by, none of them could see these trees, so that Daquqi shared the feelings of the apostles "who lost all hope" (of convincing the world), "and deemed that, they were reckoned as liars." 2 Possessing his soul in patience, Daquqi still watched on, and saw the seven trees bowing down in prayer, and was reminded of the text, "Plants and trees bend in adoration." 3 Presently the seven trees again changed into seven men, and Daquqi was appointed to conduct their devotions. While he was yet acting as Imam in front of them, and they were following the prayers he recited, a ship was seen in great distress and all but lost. At Daquqi's earnest prayer the crew were saved, but straightway vanished from sight; and this led his followers to doubt the reality of the miracle which had just been performed before their eyes.
 Description of a saint whose will was identified with God's will.
 That Daquqi possessed a sweet aspect,
 As a lover of God and a worker of miracles.
 He resembled the moon of heaven come down on earth,
 He was as a light to them that walked in darkness.
 He rarely tarried in one place,
 And seldom stayed two days in one village.
 He said, "If I tarry in one house two days,
 Attachment to that house becomes a passion with me.
 I guard myself from being deceived into loving a home;
 Up! Soul, and travel in search of eternal wealth.
 My heart's inclination is not satisfied by houses,
 So that they should be places of temptation for me."
 Thus by day he traveled, and by night prayed,
 His eyes were always gazing on the King as a falcon's;
 Cut off from mankind, though not for any fault,
 Severed from men and women, though not for baseness;
 Having compassion on mankind, and wholesome as water,
 A kind intercessor, and one whose prayers were heard.
 Benevolent to the good and the bad, and a firm ally,
 Better than a mother, and kinder than a father.
 The Prophet said, "To you, O blessed ones,
 I am as a father, affectionate and indulgent;
 For this cause, that you are all portions of me."
 Wherefore should you tear away the parts from the whole?
 If the part be severed from its whole it is useless;
 If a limb be rent from the body it dies.
 Till it is again joined to its whole,
 'Tis a dead thing, and a stranger to life.
 Thus Daquqi, in devotions and praises and prayers, 
 Was ever seeking the particular favorites of God. 
 Throughout his long journeys his object was this, 
 To interchange a word with the favorites of God. 
 He cried continually as he went his way, 
 "O Lord, let me draw near to Thy chosen ones!"
 So Daquqi (the mercy of God be upon him!) 
 Said, "I journeyed long time to East and to West, 
 I journeyed years and months for love of that Moon, 
 Heedless of the way, absorbed in God. 
 With bare feet I trod upon thorns and flints, 
 Seeing I was bewildered, and beside myself, and senseless. 
 Think not my feet touched the earth, 
 For the lover verily travels with the heart. 
 What knows the heart of road and stages? 
 What of distant and near, while it is drunk with love? 
 Distance and nearness are attributes of bodies, 
 The journeys of spirits are after another sort. 
 You journeyed from the embryo state to rationality 
 Without footsteps or stages or change of place, 
 The journey of the soul involves not time and place. 
 And my body learnt from the soul its mode of journeying, 
 Now my body has renounced the bodily mode of journeying; 
 It journeys secretly and without form, though under a form." 
 He added, "One day I was thus filled with longing 
 To behold in human form the splendours of 'The Friend,' 
 To witness the Ocean gathered up into a drop, 
 The Sun compressed into a single atom; 
 And when I drew near to the shore of the sea 
 The day was drawing to a close."
 All religions are in substance one and the same.
 In the adorations and benedictions of righteous men 
 The praises of all the prophets are kneaded together. 
 All their praises are mingled into one stream, 
 All the vessels are emptied into one ewer. 
 Because He that is praised is, in fact, only One, 
 In this respect all religions are only one religion. 
 Because all praises are directed towards God's light, 
 Their various forms and figures are borrowed from it. 
 Men never address praises but to One deemed worthy, 
 They err only through mistaken opinions of Him. 
 So, when a light falls upon a wall, 
 That wall is a connecting-link between all its beams; 
 Yet when it casts that reflection back to its source, 
 It wrongly shows great as small, and halts in its praises. 
 Or if the moon be reflected in a well, 
 And one looks down the well, and mistakenly praises it, 
 In reality he is intending to praise the moon, 
 Although, through ignorance, he is looking down the well. 
 The object of his praises is the moon, not its reflection; 
 His infidelity arises from mistake of the circumstances. 
 That well-meaning man goes wrong through his mistake; 
 The moon is in heaven, and he fancies it in the well. 
 By these false idols mankind are perplexed, 
 And driven by vain lusts to their sorrow.
 The Man in the time of the Prophet David who prayed
 to be fed without having to work for his food.

 After the petitioner had slain and eaten the cow, the owner of the cow came up and accused him of theft, and seizing him by the collar, dragged him before the judgment-seat of the prophet David. When he had stated his case, David ordered the accused to make restitution, telling him that he must not break the law. At this order the accused redoubled his cries, telling David that he was siding with an oppressor. David was staggered at the man's assurance, and finally resolved to take further time for consideration before deciding the case. After private meditation he re-versed his former sentence, and directed the plaintiff to relinquish his claim. On the plaintiff refusing to do this, and stoutly protesting against David's injustice. David further ordered that all the plaintiff's goods should be given to the accused. The reason for this decision was, that David discovered the plaintiff had formerly slain the grandfather of the accused, and stolen all his goods. David then led all the Mosalmans to a tree in the desert where the murder had been perpetrated, and there put the murderer to death.
 The hands and feet of criminals betray
 their crimes even in this world.
 He of himself lifted the veil that hid his crime;
 Had he not done so, God would have kept it hidden.
 Criminals and sinners, even in the course of sinning,
 Themselves rend the coverings of their crimes.
 Their sins are veiled among the heart's secrets,
 Yet the criminal himself exposes them to view,
 Saying, "Behold me wearing a pair of horns,
 A cow of hell in sight of all men."
 Thus, even here, in the midst of thy sin, thy hand and foot
 Bear witness of the secrets of thy heart.
 Thy secret thought is as a governor who says to thee,
 "Tell forth thy convictions, withhold them not;"
 Especially in seasons of passion and angry talk
 It betrays thy secrets one by one.
 Thy secret sins and crimes govern hand and foot,
 Saying, "Disclose us to men, O hand and foot!"
 And since these witnesses take the bit in their mouths,
 Especially in times of passion and wrath and revenge,
 Therefore the same God who appointed this governor 
 To blazen forth thy secret sins to the world 
 Is also able to create many more governors 
 To divulge thy secret sins on the day of judgment. 4
 O man whose only handiwork is crime and sin; 
 Thy secret sins are manifest; no divulging is needed. 
 There is no need to proclaim thy sins, 
 All men are cognizant of thy sin-burnt heart. 
 Thy soul every moment casts up sparks of fire, 
 Which say, "See me a man destined to the fire; 
 I am a part of the fire, and go to join my whole; 
 Not a light, so that I should join the Source of light."
 Comparison of lust to the murderer in the story.
 Kill thine own lust and give life to the world;
 It has killed its lord, reduce it to servitude.
 That claimant of the cow is thy lust; Beware!
 It has made itself lord and master.
 That slayer of the cow is thy reason; Go!
 Be not obdurate to the prayers of him that kills the cow.
 Reason is a poor captive, and ever cries to God
 For meat on its dish without laboring and toiling.
 On what depends its getting meat without toiling?
 On its killing the cow of the body, the source of evil.
 Lust says, "Why hast thou killed my cow?"
 It says, "Because lust's cow is the form of the body." 5
 Reason, the Lord's child, has become a pauper,
 Lust, the murderer, has become a lord and chief.
 Know'st thou what is meat untoiled for?
 'Tis the food of spirits and the aliment of the Prophet.
 But it is attainable only by slaying the cow;
 Treasure is gained by digging, O digger of treasure!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lv. 5. 
 2. Koran xii. 110. 
 3. Koran ii. 136. 
 4. "On that day shall their hands speak unto us, and their feet shall bear witness of that which they have done" (Koran xxxvi. 65). 
 5. Bahau-'d-Din Amili, in his Nan wa Halwa, chap. iv., compares lust to a cow, referring to Koran ii. 63. 

 STORY XIII.
 The People of Saba.
 After an anecdote of 'Isa being obliged to ascend a mountain to get away from the fools comes the story of the men of Saba. "A sign there was to Saba in their dwelling-places two gardens, the one on the right hand and the other on the left; 'Eat ye of your Lord's supplies, and give thanks to Him; goodly is the country and gracious is the Lord.' But they turned aside, so we sent upon them the flood of lram. Such was our retribution on them for their ingratitude." 1 The men of Saba were all fools, and brought destruction on themselves by their ingratitude to God. One was far-sighted, and yet blind; another sharp of hearing, and yet deaf; and a third naked, and yet wearing a long robe. Avarice is blind to its own faults, but sees those of others; the sharp-eared deaf man hears death approaching others, but not himself, and the long-robed naked man is he who fears robbers, though he has nothing to lose. In fact, all these men of Saba were afflicted with follies and self-delusions of this kind, and gave no thanks to God for the blessings which they enjoyed. Accordingly thirteen prophets were sent to admonish them, but their admonitions were not listened to, the men of Saba questioning their divine mission and demanding a miracle as a sign. They also told the prophets a parable of a clever hare, who, wishing to frighten an elephant away from a fountain, went to the elephant, pretending to be an ambassador from the moon.2 The prophets were naturally indignant at the effrontery of the men of Saba in misapplying parables to discredit their divine mission, and reminded them that wicked men had flouted the prophet Noah in the same way when he was warning them of the flood. And they demonstrated at length how the men of Saba had misapplied the parable of the hare and the elephant, and again adjured them to believe. But the men of Saba continued refractory, and would not, accept the Prophets' counsels. They plied the prophets with the arguments of the Compulsionists (Jabriyan), and refused to be convinced of the fallacy of their reasoning. So at last the prophets despaired of them, and left them to their doom.
 Not every one can properly use similitudes and parables in divine matters.
 The faculty of using similitudes is peculiar to a saint
 Who is signally marked by knowledge of hidden mysteries.
 What know you of the mystery hid in aught, that you
 In your folly should use similitudes of curl and cheek?
 Moses took his staff to be a stick, though it was not;
 It was a serpent, and its mystery was revealed.
 If a saint such as he knew not the mystery of a stick,
 What know you of the mystery of the snare and grains?
 When the eye of a Moses erred as to a similitude,
 How can a presumptuous mouse understand one?
 Those similitudes of yours are changed into serpents
 To tear you into pieces with their jaws.
 Such a parable did cursed Iblis use,
 So that he became cursed of God till the day of doom.
 Such a parable did Korah use in his argument,
 So that he was swallowed up in the earth with his wealth.
 Such parables know to be as crows and owls,
 Whereby a hundred households are annihilated.
 When Noah was building the ark in the desert,
 A hundred parable-mongers attacked him with irony,
 Saying, "In the desert, where is no water or well,
 He builds a boat! What ignorant folly is this!"
 The arguments of the Jabriyan, i.e., the Fatalists or Compulsionists.
 The men of Saba said, "O preachers, enough!
 What you say is enough, if there are any wise here.
 God has placed a 'lock upon our hearts,' 3
 And no man can overcome the Creator.
 That great Painter has painted us thus;
 His painting cannot be altered by argument.
 Keep telling forever a stone to become a ruby,
 Keep telling forever the old to become young!
 Tell earth to assume the quality of water,
 Bid water to become honey or milk!
 God is the creator of heaven and them that dwell therein;
 Also of water and of earth, and them that dwell therein;
 To heaven He gave its revolutions and its purity,
 To the earth its dark look and appearance.
 Can the heaven will to become as dregs?
 Can earth will to assume the clearness of pure wine?
 That Person has assigned 'to each its lot,
 Can mountain by endeavor become as grass?"
 The prophets answered, "Verily God has created
 Some qualities in you which you cannot alter;
 But He has created other accidental qualities,
 Which, being objectionable, may be made good.
 Bid stone become gold that is impossible;
 Bid copper become gold that is possible.
 Bid sand bloom as a rose it cannot;
 Bid dust turn to mud that is within its capacity.
 God has sent some pains for which there is no cure,
 Such, for instance, as lameness, loss of nose, and blindness.
 God has sent other pains for which there are cures,
 To wit, crooked mouth and headache.
 God has ordained these remedies of His mercy;
 The use of these in pain and anguish is not in vain.
 Nay, the majority of pains may be cured; 
 When you seek those cures earnestly you find them."
 The men of Saba replied, "O men, these pains of ours 
 Are not of the sort 'that admit of cure. 
 Long time ye utter these presages and warnings, 
 But our bonds are made thereby heavier every moment. 
 If our sickness admitted of a cure, 
 It would certainly have been lessened by your spells. 
 When the body is obstructed water reaches not the liver, 
 Though one drinks the ocean, it passes elsewhere. 
 Then of course the hands and feet become dropsical, 
 And. yet that draught does not quench his thirst."
 The prophets replied, "To despair is wrong, 
 The mercy and grace of God are boundless. 
 One must not despair of the grace of such a Benefactor, 
 One must cling to the stirrup-straps of God. 
 Ah! many are the conditions which at first are hard, 
 But, are afterwards relieved and lose their harshless. 
 Oftentimes hope succeeds to hopelessness, 
 Many times does sunlight succeed to darkness. 
 We admit that ye are weighted as with stones, 
 _And that ye have locks upon your ears and your hearts. 4 
 No condition of ours is altogether as we wish, 
 Our business is to be resigned and to obey. 
 God has enjoined this servitude upon us; 
 We say not this merely on our own authority. 
 We enjoy life on condition of doing His will; 
 If He bids us, we sow our seed upon the sand. 
 The soul of the prophet cares for naught but God, 
 It has naught to do with approving or disapproving His works."
 The men of Saba replied, "If ye yourselves are happy, 
 Ye make us miserable and annoy and disturb us. 
 Our souls were void of all anxieties, 
 And ye have plunged us into cares and anxieties. 
 The comfort and harmony which we enjoyed heretofore 
 Have been rent in pieces by your evil presages. 
 We used to be as parrots munching sugar, 
 Ye have made us as fowls brooding on death. 
 On every side stories inspiring anxiety, 
 On every side sounds exciting fears: 
 On every side in the world an evil presage, 
 On every side evil portents threatening punishment: 
 This is the burden of your parables and presages, 
 This the purport of your awe-inspiring stories."
 The prophets replied, "Our evil presages 
 Are corroborated by the state of your souls. 
 Suppose you are sleeping in a place of danger, 
 And serpents are drawing near to bite your heads, 
 A kind friend will inform you of your danger, 
 Saying, 'Jump up, lest the serpent devour you.' 
 You reply, 'Why do you utter evil presages?' 
 He answers, 'What presage? Up, and see for yourself! 
 By means of this evil presage I rouse you, 
 And release you from danger and lead you to your home.' 
 Like a prophet he warns you of hidden danger, 
 For a prophet sees what worldlings cannot see."
 Mercy inclines the good to devotion, but vengeance the bad.
 If you do a kindness to a generous man, 'tis fitting, 
 For each kindness he will return seven hundredfold. 
 When you treat a base man with scorn and contumely, 
 He will become your slave in all sincerity. 
 Infidels when enjoying prosperity do wrong, 
 When they are in hell they cry, "O our Lord!" 
 For base men are purified when they suffer evil, 
 And when they enjoy prosperity they do evil. 
 Wherefore the mosque of their devotion is hell, 
 As the snare is the fetter of wild fowl. 
 The prison is the hermitage of the wicked thief,
 For when he is there he is ever crying to God. 
 Whereas the object of man's being is to worship God, 
 Hell is ordained as a place of worship for the proud; 5
 Man has the power to engage in any actions soever, 
 But worship of God is the main object of his existence. 
 Read the text, 6 "I have not created Jinns and men but to worship me." 
 The only object of the world is to worship God. 
 Though the object of a book is to teach an art, 
 If you make a pillow of it, it serves that purpose too. 
 Yet its main object is not to serve as a pillow, 
 But to impart knowledge and useful instruction. 
 If you use a sword for a tent-peg, 
 You prefer the worse use of it to the better. 
 Though the object of all men's being is wisdom, 
 Yet each man has a different place of worship. 
 The place of worship of the noble is nobility, 
 The place of worship of the base is degradation. 
 Smite the base to make them bow the head. 
 Give to the noble to make them repay liberally. 
 Inasmuch as the base are evil and arrogant, 
 Hell and humbling are the "small gate" for them. 
 Verily God has created two places of adoration, 
 Hell for the base and increased bliss for the noble. 
 Even so Moses made a small gate in Jerusalem, 7 
 To make the Israelites bow the head in entering it.
 The discussion is continued and illustrated by anecdotes of the Sufi who preferred a table with no food upon it, because he ever sought "not-being," of Jacob's vision of Joseph, and of a devout slave who obtained leave of his master to say his prayers in a mosque, but tarried there so long that the doors were shut, and he could not get out, nor his master in. The prophets at last despaired of making any impression upon the unbelievers, but called to mind the text "When at last the Apostles lost all hope, and deemed that they were reckoned as liars, our aid reached them, and we delivered whom we would, but our vengeance was not averted from the wicked." 8
 The despair of the prophets.
 The prophets said, "How long, in our benevolence,
 Shall we give to this and that one good advice?
 How long shall we hammer cold iron in vain?
 How long waste breath in blowing into a lattice?
 Men are moved by God's decree and fixed ordinance, 9
 As sharp-set teeth are caused by heat of belly.
 'Tis Primal Soul that dominates the Second Soul,10
 Fish begins to stink at the head, not the tail.
 Yet be advised and keep your steed straight as an arrow,
 When God says 'Proclaim' we must obey. 11
 O men, ye know not to which party ye belong, 12
 Exert yourselves then, till ye see which ye are.
 When you place goods upon a ship,
 You do it in trust that the voyage will be prosperous;
 You know not which of the two events will befall you,
 Whether you will be drowned or come safe to land.
 If you say, 'Till I know which will be my fate
 I will not set foot upon the ship;
 Shall I be drowned on the voyage or a survivor?
 Reveal to me in which class I shall be.
 I shall not undertake the voyage on the chance
 On the bare hope of reaching land, as the rest do.'
 In that case no trade at all will be undertaken by you,
 As the secret of these two events is always hidden.
 The lamp of the heart, that is a timid trader,
 Acquires neither loss nor gain by its ventures.13 
 Nay, it acquires loss, for it is precluded from gain; 
 'Tis the lamp that takes fire that acquires light. 
 Since all things are dependent on probability, 
 Religion is so first of all, for thereby you find release. 
 In this world no knocking at the door is possible 
 Save hope, and God knows what is best."
 Probability the guide of life in religion as well as in common matters. "Religion dependent an hope and fear." 14
 The final cause of trading is hope or probability, 
 When traders work themselves lean as spindles. 15 
 When the merchant goes to his shop in the morning, 
 He does so in hope and probability of gaining bread. 
 If you have no hope of getting bread, why go? 
 There is the fear of loss, since you are not strong. 
 But does not this fear of utter loss in your trade 
 Become weakened in the course of your exertions? 
 You say, "Although the fear of loss is before me, 
 Yet I feel greater fear in remaining idle. 
 I have a better hope through exerting myself; 
 My fear is increased by remaining idle." 
 Why then, O faint-hearted one, in the matter of religion 
 Are you paralysed by the fear of loss? 
 See you not how the traders in this market of ours 
 Make large profits, both apostles and saints? 
 What a mine of wealth awaits them on leaving it, 
 Seeing they make such profits while still here! 
 Fire is soft to them as cotton raiment, 
 The ocean bears them gently like a porter; 
 Iron in their hands is soft as wax, 
 The winds are their obedient slaves.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xxxiv. 14. 
 2. Anvar i Suhaili, chap. iv. Story IV. 
 3. Koran xxxvi. 6. 
 4. Koran lxi. 5: "God led their hearts astray." 
 5. God said, "Come ye either in obedience, or in spite of your wishes" (Koran xli. 10). 
 6. Koran li. 56. 
 7. See Koran ii. 55, with Sale's note. 
 8. Koran xii. 11. 
 9. "All things have we created after a fixed decree, every action great and small is written." Koran liv. 49. 
 10. The Logos or first Emanation produced the second or "Universal Soul." 
 11. "O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down" (Koran v. 71). 
 12. "Which party," i.e., those doomed to be saved or those doomed to destruction. 
 13. "Nothing shall be reckoned to a man save that for which he hath made effort" (Koran liii. 40). 
 14. So Sa'di Bostan Book I. Cp. Butler's Analogy, Conclusion. 
 15. i.e., exert themselves much. 

 STORY XIV.
 Miracles performed by the Prophet Muhammad.

 It is related that the Prophet was once present at a banquet, and after he had eaten and drunk, his servant Anas threw the napkin which he had used into the fire, and the napkin was not burnt, 'but only purified by the fire. On another occasion a caravan of Arabs was traveling in the desert, and was in sore distress through lack of water, whereupon the Prophet miraculously increased the water in a single water-skin, so that it sufficed to supply the needs of all the travelers. Moreover, the negro who carried the water-skin was rendered as white and fair as Joseph. Again, a heathen woman came to the Prophet carrying her infant, aged only two months, and the infant saluted the Prophet as the veritable apostle of God. Again, when the prophet was about to put on his sandals, an eagle swooped down upon one of them and carried it off, when a viper was seen to drop from the sandal. The Prophet was at first inclined to grumble at this stroke of ill-luck; but when he saw the viper his discontent was turned into thankfulness to God, who had thus miraculously saved him from being bitten by the viper.
 In difficulties there is provided a way of salvation 1.
 In this tale there is a warning for thee, O Soul,
 That thou mayest acquiesce in God's ordinances,
 And be wary and not doubt God's benevolence,
 When sudden misfortunes befall thee.
 Let others grow pale from fear of ill fortune,
 Do thou smile like the rose at loss and gain;
 For the rose, though its petals be torn asunder,
 Still smiles on, and it is never cast down.
 It says, "Why should I fall into grief in disgrace?
 I gather beauty even from the thorn of disgrace."
 Whatsoever is lost to thee through God's decree
 Know of a surety is so much gained from misfortune.
 What is Sufiism? 'Tis to find joy in the heart
 Whensoever distress and care assail it.
 Know troubles to be that eagle of the Prophet's
 Which carried off the sandal of that holy one,
 In order to save his foot from the bite of the viper
 O excellent device! to preserve him from harm.
 'Tis said, "Mourn not for your slaughtered cattle
 If a wolf has harried your flocks;"
 For that calamity may avert a greater calamity,
 And that loss may ward off a more grievous loss.
 *NOTES:
 1. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. iii. p. 334. 

 STORY XV.
 The Man who asked Moses to teach him the language of animals.
 A certain man came to Moses and desired to be taught the language of animals, for, he said, men used their language only to get food and for purposes of deception, and possibly a knowledge of animals' languages might stimulate his faith. Moses was very unwilling to comply with his request, as he knew such knowledge would prove destructive to him, but, on his persisting, took counsel of God, and finally taught him the language of fowls and dogs. Next morning the man went amongst the fowls, and heard a discussion between the cock and the dog. The dog was abusing the cock for picking up the morsels of bread which fell from their master's table, because the cock could find plenty of grains of corn to eat, whereas the dog could only eat bread. The cock, to appease him, said that on the morrow the master's horse would die, and then the dog would have enough and to spare. The master, hearing this, at once sold his horse, and the dog, being disappointed of his meal, again attacked the cock. The cock then told him the mule would die, whereupon the master sold the mule. Then the cock foretold the death of a slave, and the master again sold the slave. At this the dog, losing patience, upbraided the cock as the chief of deceivers, and the cock excused himself by showing that all three deaths had taken place just as he had predicted, but the master had sold the horse, mule, and slave, and had thrown the loss on others. He added that, to punish him for his fraudulent dealing, the master would himself die on the morrow, and there would be plenty for the dog to eat at the funeral feast. Hearing this, the master went to Moses in great distress, and prayed to be saved. Moses besought the Lord for him, and gained permission that he should die in the peace of God.
 Why freewill is good for man.
 God said, "Do thou grant his earnest request,
 Enlarge his faculty according to his freewill.
 Freewill is as the salt to piety,
 Otherwise heaven itself were matter of compulsion.
 In its revolutions reward and punishment were needless,
 For 'tis freewill that has merit at the great reckoning.
 If the whole world were framed to praise God,
 There would be no merit in praising God.
 Place a sword in his hand and remove his impotence,
 To see if he turns out a warrior or a robber.
 Because freewill is that wherewith 'we honor Adam,' 1
 Half the swarm become bees and half wasps.
 The faithful yield honeycombs like bees,
 The infidels yield store of poison like wasps.
 For the faithful feed on choice herbs,
 So that, like bees, their chyle yields life-giving food,
 Whilst infidels feed on filth and garbage,
 And generate poison according to their food."
 Men inspired of God are the fountain of life;
 Men of delusions are a synonym for death.
 In the world the praise "Well done faithful servant!"
 Is given to freewill which is used with prudence.
 If all dissolute men were shut up in prison,
 They would all be temperate and devout and pious.
 When power of choice is absent actions are worthless;
 But beware lest death snatch away your capital!
 Your power of choice is a capital yielding profit,
 Remember well the day of final account!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xvii. 72. 

 STORY XVI.
 The Woman who lost all her infants.
 A woman bore many children in succession, but none of them lived beyond the age of three or four months. In great distress she cried to God, and then beheld in a vision the beautiful gardens of Paradise, and many fair mansions therein, and upon one of these mansions she read her own name inscribed. And a voice from heaven informed her that God would accept the sorrows she had endured in lieu of her blood shed in holy war, as, owing to her sex, she was unable to go out to battle like the men. On looking again, the woman beheld in Paradise all the children she had lost, and she cried, "O Lord ! they were lost to me, but were safe with Thee!"
 This story is followed by anecdotos of Hamza going out to battle without his coat-of-mail, of the Prophet advising a man who complained of being cheated in his bargains to take time before completing them, and of the death of Bilal, Muhammad's crier, and by illustrations of the illusive nature of the world, of the difference between things self-evident and mere matters of inference, and between knowing a thing through illustrations and on the authority of others and knowing it as it really is in its essence.
 The difference between knowing a thing merely by similitudes and on the authority of others, and knowing the very essence thereof.
 God's mercy is known through the fruits thereof,
 But who save God knows His essence? 1
 No one knows the very essence of God's attributes
 But only in their effects and by similitudes.
 A child knows naught of the nature of sexual intercourse,
 Except what you tell him, that it is like sweetmeats.
 Yet how far does the pleasure of sexual intercourse
 Really resemble that derived from sweetmeats?
 Nevertheless the fiction produces a relation
 Between you, with your perfect knowledge, and the child;
 So that the child knows the matter by a similitude,
 Though he knows not its essence or actual nature.
 Hence if he says, "I know it," 'tis not far wrong
 And if he says, "I know it not," 'tis not wrong.
 Should one say, "Do you know Noah,
 That prophet of God and luminary of the Spirit?"
 If you say, "Do I not know him, for that moon
 Is more famed than the sun and moon of heaven?
 Little children in their schools,
 And elders in their mosques,
 All read his name prominently in the Koran,
 And preachers tell his story from times of yore;"
 You say true, for you know him by report,
 Though the real nature of Noah is not revealed to you.
 On the other hand, if you say, "What know I of Noah
 As his contemporaries knew him?
 I am a poor ant what can I know of the elephant?
 What knows a fly of the motions of the elephant?"
 This statement also is true, O brother,
 Seeing that you know not his real nature.
 But this impotence to perceive real essence,
 Though common to ordinary men, is not universal; 
 Because essence and its deepest secrets 
 Are open and manifest to the eyes of the perfect.
 Negation and affirmation of one proposition are lawful; 
 When the aspects differ the relation is double. 
 "Thou castest not when thou castest" 2 shows such relation, 
 Here negation and affirmation are both correct. 
 Thou castest it, since it is in thy hand, 
 Thou castest not, since 'tis God who affords the strength. 
 The might of the sons of Adam is limited, 
 How can a handful of sand shatter an army? 
 The sand was in man's hands, the casting was God's. 
 Owing to the two relations negation and affirmation are both true. 
 The infidels know the prophets, 
 As well as they doubtless know their own children; 
 Yea, the infidels know them as well as their own sons, 
 By a hundred tokens and a hundred evidences, 
 But from envy and malice conceal their knowledge, 
 And incline themselves to say, "We know them not." 
 So when God says in one place "knows them," 
 In another He says, "None knows them beside me." 
 For in truth they are hid under God's overshadowing, 3 
 And none but God knows them by actual experience. 
 Therefore take this declaration with its context, 
 Remembering how you know and do not know Noah.
 *NOTES:
 1. There is a Hadis, "Think on God's mercies, and not on His essence." 
 2. Koran viii. 17. Said of the sand cast into the eyes of the men of Mecca at Beder. 
 3. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 354, where the commentator says the allusion is to Moses at Mount Sinai. Koran vii. 139. 

 STORY XVII.
 The Vakil of the Prince of Bokhara.
 The Prince of Bokhara had a Vakil who, through fear of punishment for an offence he had committed, ran away and remained concealed in Kuhistan and the desert for the space of ten years. At the end of that time, being unable to endure absence from his lord and his home any longer, he determined to return to Bokhara and throw himself at his lord's feet, and endure whatever punishment his lord might be pleased to inflict upon him. His friends did all they could to dissuade him, assuring him that the Prince's wrath was still hot against him, and that if he appeared at Bokhara he would be put to death, or at least imprisoned for the rest of his life. He replied, "O advisers, be silent, for the force of the love which is drawing me to Bokhara is stronger than the force of prudent counsels. When love pulls one way all the wisdom of Abu Hanifa and Ash-Shafi'i is impotent to withstand it. If it shall please my lord to slay me, I will yield up my life without reluctance, for this life of estrangement from him which I am now leading is the same as death, and release from it will be eternal happiness. I will return to Bokhara and throw myself at my lord's feet, and say to him, 'Deal with me as thou wilt, for I can no longer bear absence from thee, and life or death at thy hands is all the same to me!'" Accordingly, he journeyed back to Bokhara, counting the very toils and discomforts of the road sweet and delightful, because they were steps in his homeward course. When he reached Bokhara his friends and relations all warned him not to show himself, as the Prince was still mindful of his offence and bent on punishing him; but he replied to them as to his other advisers, that he was utterly regardless of his life, and was resolved to commit himself to his lord's good pleasure. He then went to the court and threw himself at his lord's feet and swooned away. The Prince, seeing the strong affection borne to him by his repentant servant, conceived a similar affection towards him, and descended from his throne and graciously raised him from the ground, and pardoned his offence. Thus it is that eternal life is gained by utter abandonment of one's own life. When God appears to His ardent lover the lover is absorbed in Him, and not so much as a hair of the lover remains. True lovers are as shadows, and when the sun shines in glory the shadows vanish away. He is a true lover of God to whom God says, "I am thine, and thou art mine!"
 In the course of this story, which is narrated at great length, are introduced anecdotes of a lover and his mistress, of the Virgin Mary being visited by the "Blessed Spirit" or Angel Gabriel, 1 of the fatal mosque, of Galen's devotion to carnal learning, of Satan's treachery to the men of Mecca at the battle of Bedr, 2 and of Solomon and the gnat. There also occur comments on various texts, and a curious comparison of the trials and wholesome afflictions of the righteous to the boiling of potherbs in a saucepan by the cook.
 The reply of the lover when asked by his mistress which city of all those he had seen was most pleasing in his sight.

 A damsel said to her lover, "O fond youth,
 You have visited many cities in your travels;
 Which of those cities seems most delightful to you?"
 He made answer, "The city wherein my love dwells.
 In whatever nook my queen alights,
 Though it be as the eye of a needle, 'tis a wide plain;
 Wherever her Yusuf-like face shines as a moon,
 Though it be the bottom of a well, 'tis Paradise.
 With thee, my love, hell itself were heaven,
 With thee a prison would be a rose-garden.
 With thee hell would be a mansion of delight,
 Without thee lilies and roses would be as flames of fire!"
 The answer of the Vakil to those who advised him not to court death by yielding himself up to his lord.
 He said, "I am a drawer of water; water attracts me, 
 Even though I know water may be my death. 
 No drawer of water flees from water, 
 Even though it may cause him a hundred deaths. 
 Though it may make my hand and belly dropsical, 
 My love for water will never be lessened. 
 I should say, when they asked me about my belly, 
 'Would that the ocean might flow into it!' 
 Though the bottle of my belly were burst with water, 
 And though I should die, my death would be acceptable. 
 Wheresoever I see one seeking water, I envy him, 
 And cry, 'Would I were in his place!' 
 My hand is a tabor and my belly a drum, 
 Like the rose I beat the drum of love of water. 
 Like the earth or like a fetus I devour blood, 
 Since I became a lover this is my occupation. 
 If that 'Faithful Spirit' should shed my blood, 
 I would drink it up drop by drop like the earth. 
 At night I boil on the fire like a cooking-pot, 
 From morn till eve I drink blood like the sand. 
 It repents me that I planned a stratagem, 
 And that I fled from before his wrath. 
 Tell him to sate his wrath on my poor life, 
 He is the 'Feast of Sacrifice,' and I his loving cow. 3
 The cow, whether it eats or sleeps, 
 Thinks of naught but sacrificing itself. 
 Know me to be that cow of Moses which gave its life, 
 Each part of me gives life to the righteous. 
 That cow of Moses was made a sacrifice, 
 And its least part became a source of life. 
 That murdered man leapt up from his deadness 
 At the words, ' Strike the corpse with part of her.' 4
 O pious ones, slay the cow (of lust), 
 If ye desire true life of soul and spirit!
 I died as inanimate matter and arose a plant, 
 I died as a plant and rose again an animal. 5 
 I died as an animal and arose a man. 
 Why then should I fear to become less by dying? 
 I shall die once again as a man 
 To rise an angel perfect from head to foot! 
 Again when I suffer dissolution as an angel, 
 I shall become what passes the conception of man! 
 Let me then become non-existent, for non-existence 
 Sings to me in organ tones, 'To him shall we return.' 6 
 Know death to be the gathering together of the people. 
 The water of life is hidden in the land of darkness. 
 Like a water-lily seek life there! 
 Yea, like that drawer of water, at the risk of life, 
 Water will be his death, yet he still seeks water, 
 And still drinks on, and God knows what is right. 
 O lover, cold-hearted and void of loyalty, 
 Who from fear for your life shun the beloved! 
 O base one, behold a hundred thousand souls 
 Dancing towards the deadly sword of his love: 
 Behold water in a pitcher; pour it out; 
 Will that water run away from the stream? 
 When that water joins the water of the stream 
 It is lost therein, and becomes itself the stream. 
 Its individuality is lost, but its essence remains, 
 And hereby it becomes not less nor inferior. 
 I will hang myself upon my lord's palm-tree 
 In excuse for having fled away from him!"
 Even as a ball rolling along on head and face,
 He fell at the feet of the Prince with streaming eyes. 
 The people were all on the alert, expecting 
 That the Prince would burn him or hang him, 
 Saying, "Moth-like he has seen the blaze of the light, 
 And fool-like has plunged therein and lost his life." 
 But the torch of love is not like that torch, 
 'Tis light, light in the midst of light, 
 'Tis the reverse of torches of fire, 
 It appears to be fire, but is all sweetness.
 Love generates love. "If ye love God, God will love you" 7
 That. Bokharian then cast himself into the flame, 
 But his love made the pain endurable; 
 And as his burning sighs ascended to heaven, 
 The love of the Prince was kindled towards him.
 The heart of man is like the root of a tree, 
 Therefrom grow the leaves on firm branches. 8 
 Corresponding to that root grow up branches 
 As well on the tree as on souls and intellects. 
 The tops of the perfect trees reach the heavens, 
 The roots firm, and the branches in the sky. 
 Since then the tree of love has grown up to heaven, 
 How shall it not also grow in the heart of the Prince? 
 A wave washes away the remembrance of the sin from his heart, 
 For from each heart is a window to other hearts. 
 Since in each heart there is a window to other hearts, 
 They are not, separated and shut off like two bodies. 
 Thus, even though two lamp-dishes be not joined, 
 Yet their light is united in a single ray. 
 No lover ever seeks union with his beloved, 
 But his beloved is also seeking union with him. 
 But the lover's love makes his body lean, 
 While the beloved's love makes hers fair and lusty. 
 When in this heart the lightning spark of love arises, 
 Be sure this love is reciprocated in that heart. 
 When the love of God arises in thy heart, 
 Without doubt God also feels love for thee.
 The noise of clapping of hands is never heard 
 From one of thy hands unaided by the other hand 
 The man athirst cries, "Where is delicious water?" 
 Water too cries, "Where is the water-drinker?" 
 This thirst in my soul is the attraction of the water; 
 I am the water's and the water is mine. 
 God's wisdom in His eternal foreknowledge and decree 
 Made us to be lovers one of the other. 
 Nay more, all the parts of the world by this decree 
 Are arranged in pairs, and each loves its mate. 
 Every part of the world desires its mate, 
 Just as amber attracts blades of straw. 
 Heaven says to earth, "All hail to thee! 
 We are related to one another as iron and magnet." 
 Heaven is man and earth woman in character; 
 Whatever heaven sends it, earth cherishes. 
 When earth lacks heat, heaven sends heat; 
 When it lacks moisture and dew, heaven sends them. 
 The earthy sign 9 succours the terrestrial earth, 
 The watery sign (Aquarius) sends moisture to it; 
 The windy sign sends the clouds to it, 
 To draw off unwholesome exhalations. 
 The fiery sign (Leo) sends forth the heat of the sun, 
 Like a dish heated red-hot in front and behind. 
 The heaven is busily toiling through ages, 
 Just as men labor to provide food for women. 
 And the earth does the woman's work, and toils 
 In bearing offspring and suckling them. 
 Know then earth and heaven are endued with sense, 
 Since they act like persons endued with sense. 
 If these two lovers did not suck nutriment from each other, 
 Why should they creep together like man and wife? 
 Without the earth how could roses and saffron grow? 
 For naught can grow from the sole heat and rain of heaven. 
 This is the cause of the female seeking the male, 
 That the work of each may be accomplished. 
 God has instilled mutual love into man and woman,
 That the world may be perpetuated by their union.
 Earth says to the earth of the body, "Come away, 
 Quit the soul and come to me as dust. 
 Thou art of my genus, and wilt be better with me, 
 'Thou had'st better quit the soul and fly to me!" 
 Body replies "True, but my feet are fast bound, 
 Though like thee I suffer from separation." 
 Water calls out to the moisture of the body, 
 "O moisture, return to me from your foreign abode!" 
 Fire also calls out to the heat of the body, 
 "Thou art of fire; return to thy root!"
 In the body there are seventy-and-two diseases; 
 It is ill compacted owing to the struggle of its elements. 
 Disease comes to rend the body asunder, 
 And to drag apart its constituent elements. 
 The four elements are as birds tied together by the feet; 
 Death, sickness and disease loose their feet asunder. 
 The moment their feet are loosed from the others, 
 'The bird of each element flies off by itself. 
 The repulsion of each of these principles and causes 
 Inflicts every moment a fresh pang on our bodies. 
 That it may dissolve these composite bodies of ours, 
 The bird of each part tries to fly away to its origin; 
 But the wisdom of God prevents this speedy end, 
 And preserves their union till the appointed day. 
 He says, "O parts, the appointed time is not yet; 
 It is useless for you to take wing before that day."
 But as each part desires reunion with its original, 
 How is it with the soul who is a stranger in exile? 
 It says, "O parts of my habitation here below, 
 My absence is sadder than yours, as I am heaven-born. 
 The body loves green pastures and running water, 
 For this cause that its origin is from them. 
 The love of the soul is for life and the living one, 
 Because its origin is the Soul not bound to place. 
 The love of the soul is for wisdom and knowledge, 
 That of the body for houses, gardens, and vineyards; 
 The love of the soul is for things exalted on high, 
 That of the body for acquisition of goods and food. 
 The love too of Him on high is directed to the soul: 
 Know this for 'He loves them that love Him.'" 10 
 The sum is this, that whoso seeks another, 
 The soul of that other who is sought inclines to him.
 Let us quit the subject. Love for that soul athirst 
 Was kindled in the breast of the Prince of Bokhara. 
 The smoke of that love and the grief of that burning heart 
 Ascended to his master and excited his compassion.
 The praises addressed to the Prince by the Vakil.

 He said, "O phoenix of God and goal of the spirit 
 I thank thee that thou hast come back from Mount Qaf! 
 O Israfil of the resurrection-day of love, 
 O love, love, and heart's desire of love! 
 Let thy first boon to me be this, 
 To lend thine ear to my orisons. 
 Though thou knowest my condition clearly, 
 O protector of slaves, listen to my speech. 
 A thousand times, O prince incomparable, 
 Has my reason taken flight in desire to see thee, 
 And to hear thee and to listen to thy words,
 And to behold thy life-giving smiles. 
 Thy inclining thine ear to my supplications 
 Is as a caress to my misguided soul. 
 The baseness of my heart's coin is known to thee, 
 But thou hast accepted it as genuine coin. 
 Thou art proud towards the arrogant and proud; 
 All clemencies are as naught to thy clemency. 
 First hear this, that while I remained in absence, 
 First and last alike escaped me. 
 Secondly, hear this. O prince beloved, 
 That I searched much, but found no second to thee. 
 Thirdly, that when I had departed outside thee, 
 I said it was like the Christian Trinity. 11
 Fourthly, when my harvest was burned up, 
 I knew not the fourth from the fifth. 
 Wheresoever thou findest blood on the roads, 
 Trace it, and 'tis tears of blood from my eyes. 
 My words are thunder, and these sighs and tears 
 Are drawn by it as rain from the clouds. 
 I am distracted between speaking and weeping. 
 Shall I weep, or shall I speak, or what shall I do? 
 If I speak, my weeping ceases; 
 If I weep, I cease to praise and magnify thee."
 He spoke thus, and then fell to weeping, 
 So that high and low wept with him. 
 So many "Ahs" and "Alases" proceeded from his heart, 
 That the people of Bokhara formed a circle round him. 
 Talking sadly, weeping sadly, smiling sadly, 
 Men and women, small and great, were all assembled. 
 The whole city wept in concert with him; 
 Men and women mingled together as on the last day. 
 Then Heaven said to Earth, 
 "If you never saw a resurrection-day, see it here!" 
 Reason was amazed, saying, "What love, what ecstasy! 
 Is his separation more wondrous, or his reunion?"
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xix. 18. 
 2. Koran viii. 10. 
 3. The Id ul Azha, or the Feast of Sacrifices, held on the tenth day of the month Zul Hijja. It is also called "The Cow Festival." 
 4. This refers to Koran ii. 63. The cow was to be sacrificed in order that a murderer might be discovered by striking the corpse with a piece of her flesh. 
 5. i.e., Earth losing its own form becomes vegetable, vegetable again perishes to feed and be transmuted into animal, , and in like manner animal becomes man. See the passage of Milton quoted below, and Gulshan i Raz, I. 490 and note. 
 6. Koran ii. 153: "Verily we are God's, and to Him shall we return." 
 7. Koran iii. 29. 
 8. "Seest thou not to what God likeneth a good word? To a good tree, its root firmly fixed, and its branches in the heaven" (Koran xiv. 29). 
 9. i.e., of the zodiac. 
 10. Koran v. 59. 
 11. "They surely are infidels who say, 'God is the third of three,' for there is no God but one God" (Koran v. 77). 

 STORY XVIII.
 The Deadly Mosque.

 In the suburbs of a certain city there was a mosque in which none could sleep a night and live. Some said it was haunted by malevolent fairies; others, that it was under the baneful influence of a magic spell; some proposed to put up a notice warning people not to sleep there, and others advised that the door should be kept locked. At last a stranger came to that city and desired to sleep in the mosque, saying that he did not fear to risk his life, as the life of the body was naught, and God has said, "Wish for death if you are sincere." 1 The men of the city warned him again and again of the danger, and rebuked him for his foolhardiness, reminding him that not improbably Satan was tempting him to his own destruction, as he tempted the men of Mecca at the battle of Bedr. 2 The stranger, however, would not be dissuaded, but persisted in his purpose of sleeping in the mosque. He said that he was as one of the devoted agents of the Ismailians, who were always ready to sacrifice their lives at the bidding of their chiefs, and that the terrors of death did not appal him any more than the noise of a little drum beaten by a boy to scare away birds could appal the great drum-bearing camel that used to march at the head of King Mahmud's army. Accordingly, he slept in the mosque, and at midnight he was awakened by a terrible voice, as of one about to attack him. But instead of being dismayed, he bethought himself of the text "Assault them with thy horsemen and thy footmen," 3 and confronted his unseen foe, challenging him to show himself and stand to his arms. At these words the spell was dissipated, and showers of gold fell on all sides, which the brave hero proceeded to appropriate.
 The "knowledge of certainty" and the "eye of certainty".
 Our body and substance are snow, doomed to perish,
 God is He who buys them, for "God hath bought them." 4
 You prefer this perishing snow to God's price
 Because you are in doubt and have not certainty;
 And, strange to say, opinion abides in you, O weak one,
 And never flies away to the garden of certainty.
 Every opinion is aiming at certainty, O son,
 And more and more moves its wings towards certainty.
 When it reaches knowledge it stands erect,
 And its knowledge again hastes on towards certainty,
 Because in the approved road of the faith
 Knowledge is lower than certainty, but above opinion.
 Know knowledge aspires to certainty,
 And certainty again to sight and ocular evidence.
 In the chapter, "Desire of riches occupieth you," 5
 After "Nay," read "Would that ye knew!"
 Knowledge conducts you to sight, O knower!
 "If ye are certain, ye shall see hell-fire."
 Sight follows on certainty with no interval,
 Just as reasoned knowledge is born of opinion.
 See the account of this in the chapter cited,
 How knowledge of certainty becomes the eye of certainty.
 As for me, I am above both opinion and certainty;
 My head is not affected by your cavils.
 Since my mouth has eaten of His sweetmeats,
 I am become clear-sighted, and see him face to face!
 The righteous are exposed to trials for their improvement, as potherbs are boiled to make them fit for food.

 Behold these potherbs boiling in the pot, 
 How they jump and toss about in the heat of the fire. 
 Whilst they are boiling, they keep leaping up, 
 Even to the top of the pot, and utter cries, 
 Saying to the housewife, "Why do you set us on the fire? 
 Now you have bought us, why should you afflict us?" 
 The housewife pushes them down with her spoon, saying, 
 "Be still, and boil well, and leap not off the fire. 
 I do not boil you because I dislike you, 
 But that you may acquire a good savor and taste. 
 When you become food you will be mingled with life; 
 This trial is not imposed on you to distress you. 
 In the garden you drank water soft and fresh; 
 That water-fed one was reserved for this fire. 
 Mercy was first shown to it before vengeance, 
 That mercy might train it to be proof against trial; 
 Mercy was shown to it previously to vengeance, 
 That it might acquire its substance of being. 
 Because flesh and skin grow not without tender care, 
 How should they not grow when warmed by the Friend's love. 
 If vengeance follows as a necessary consequence, 
 That you may make an offering of that substance, 
 Mercy follows again to compensate for it, 
 That you may be purified and raised above your nature.
 I am Abraham, and you his son under the knife. 
 Lay down your head! 'I have seen I must sacrifice you.' 6
 Yield your head to vengeance, your heart to constancy, 
 That I may cut your throat like an Ismailian's. 
 I cut off your head, but that head is such 
 That it is restored to life by being cut off!"
 My main object herein is to inculcate resignation, 
 O Mosalman! it behoves you to seek resignation. 7 
 O potherbs, you boil in trials and sufferings 
 That neither existence nor self may remain in you. 
 Though you once smiled in that earthly garden, 
 You are really roses of the garden of life and sight. 
 If you are torn away from the garden of earth, 
 You become sweet food to revive man's life; 
 Yea, become his food and strength and thought! 8 
 You were only milk, you become a lion of the forest! 
 You issue from God's attributes at first; 
 Return again back to those attributes with all speed! 
 You come from the clouds and sunshine and sky, 
 Then assume moral qualities and ascend the sky. 
 You come in the form of rain and sunshine, 
 You depart endued with excellent attributes. 
 You begin as a part of the sun, clouds, and stars, 
 You rise to be breath, act, word, and thought! 
 The life of animals comes from the death of plants. 
 True is the saying, 'Kill me, O faithful ones!' 
 Since such exaltation awaits us after death. 
 True it is that 'In our death is life.' 
 Acts, words, and faith are the food of the King, 
 So that in this ascent one attains to heaven. 
 Thus, as potherbs become the food of men, 
 They rise above the grade of minerals to that of animals.
 Objections of fools to the Masnavi.
 A certain goose pops his head out of his coop, 
 And displays himself as a critic of the Masnavi, 
 Saying, "This poem, the Masnavi, is childish; 
 'Tis but a story of the prophets, and so on. 
 'Tis not an account of the arguments and deep mysteries, 
 Whereto holy men direct their attention; 
 Concerning asceticism, and so on to self-annihilation, 
 Step by step, up to communion with God; 
 An explanation and definition of each several state, 
 Whereto the men of heart ascend in their flight." 
 Whereas the Book of God resembles the Masnavi in this, 
 The infidels abused it, in the same manner, 
 Saying, 'It contains old tales and stories; 9 
 There is no deep analysis or lofty investigation therein. 
 Little boys can understand it; 
 It only contains commands and prohibitions, 
 Accounts of Yusuf and his curled locks, 
 Accounts of Jacob, of Zulaikha and her love, 
 Accounts of Adam, of the wheat, and of the serpent Iblis, 
 Accounts of Hud, of Noah, of Abraham, and the, fire."
 Know the words of the Koran are simple, 
 But within the outward sense is an inner secret one. 10 
 Beneath that secret meaning is a third, 
 Whereat the highest wit is dumbfoundered. 
 The fourth meaning has been seen by none 
 Save God, the Incomparable and All-sufficient. 
 Thus they go on, even to seven meanings, one by one, 
 According to the saying of the Prophet, without doubt. 
 Do thou, O son, confine not thy view to the outward meaning, 
 Even as the demons saw in Adam only clay. 11 
 The outward meaning of the Koran is like Adam's body, 
 For its semblance is visible, but its soul is hidden.
 O reviling dog! thou makest a clamour, 
 Thou makest thy abuse of the Koran thy destruction. 12
 This is not a lion, wherefrom thou canst save thy life, 
 Or canst secure thyself from his talons! 
 The Koran cries out even to the last day, 
 "O people, given up as a prey to ignorance, 
 If ye have imagined me to be only empty fables, 
 Ye have sown the seed of reviling and infidelity. 
 Ye yourselves who abuse me will see yourselves 
 Annihilated, and made like a tale that is told!"
 Solomon and the gnat.
 A gnat came in from the garden and fields, 
 And called on Solomon for justice, 
 Saying, "O Solomon, you extend your equity 
 Over demons and the sons of Adam and fairies. 
 Fish and fowl dwell under the shelter of your justice; 
 Where is the oppressed one whom your mercy has not sought? 
 Grant me redress, for I am much afflicted, 
 Being cut off from my garden and meadow haunts."
 Then Solomon replied, "O seeker of redress, 
 Tell me from whom do you desire redress? 
 Who is the oppressor, who, puffed up with arrogance 
 Has oppressed you and smitten your face?"
 The gnat replied, "He from whom I seek redress is the Wind, 
 'Tis he who has emitted the smoke of oppression at me; 
 Through his oppression I am in a grievous strait, 
 Through him I drink blood with parched lip!"
 Solomon replied to him, "O sweet voiced one, 
 You must hear the command of God with all your heart. 
 God has commanded me saying, 'O dispenser of justice, 
 Never hear one party without the other!' 
 Till both parties come into the presence, 
 The truth is never made plain to the judge."
 When the Wind heard the summons, it came swiftly, 
 And the gnat instantly took flight. 
 In like manner the seekers of God's presence-seat, 
 When God appears, those seekers vanish. 
 Though that union is life eternal, 
 Yet at first that life is annihilation.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran ii. 88. 
 2. Koran viii. 50 
 3. Koran xvii. 66. 
 4. "Verily of the faithful hath God bought their persons and their substance, on condition of Paradise for them in return" (Koran ix. 112). 
 5. "The desire of riches occupieth you till ye come to the grave. Nay! but in the end ye shall know. Nay! would that ye knew it with knowledge of certainty. Surely ye shall see hell-fire. Ye shall surely see it with the eye of certainty" (Koran cii.) 
 6. Koran xxxvii. 101. 
 7. According to its etymology. Islam means self-surrender to God as well as safety, peace, and obedience to divine laws. 
 8. Cp. Milton, Paradise Lost, v. 482: 
 "Flow'rs and their fruit, 
 Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublim'd, 
 To vital spirits aspire, to animal, 
 To intellectual." 
 9. Koran xxvii. 7. 
 10. There is a Hadis to the effect that each word of the Koran has seven meanings. See Koran iii. 5. 
 11. Koran xvii. 63. 
 12. The Lucknow commentator says that Faizi (brother of Abul Fazl Akbar's minister) once spoke disrespectfully of the Koran and the Masnavi, and on the leaves being turned over, this passage presented itself. 
 The book ends with the beginning of a story which is finished in the fourth book.

     
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book IV.

 STORY I.
 The Lover and his Mistress.

 THE fourth book begins with an address to Husamu-'d-Din, and this is followed by the story of the lover and his mistress, already commenced in the third book. A certain lover had been separated from his mistress for the space of seven years, during which he never relaxed his efforts to find her. At last his constancy and perseverance were rewarded, in accordance with the promises "The seeker shall find," and "Whoso shall have wrought an atom's weight of good shall behold it." 1 One night, as he was wandering through the city, he was pursued by the patrol, and, in order to escape them, took refuge in a garden, where he found his long-sought mistress. This occasioned him to reflect how often men "hate the things that are good for them," 2 and led him to bless the rough patrol who had procured him the bliss of meeting with his mistress.
 Apropos of this, an anecdote is told of a preacher who was in the habit of blessing robbers and oppressors, because their evil example had turned him to righteousness. The moment the lover found himself alone with his mistress, he attempted to embrace her, but his mistress repulsed him, saying, that though no men 'were present, yet the wind was blowing and that showed that God, the mover of the wind, was also present. The lover replied, "It may be I am lacking in good manners, but I am not lacking in constancy and fidelity towards you." His mistress replied, "One must judge of the hidden by the manifest; I see for myself that your outward behavior is bad, and thence I cannot but infer that your boast of hidden virtues is not warranted by actual facts. You are ashamed to misconduct yourself in the sight of men, but have no scruple to do so in the presence of the All-seeing God, and hence I doubt the existence of the virtuous sentiments which you claim to possess, but which can only be known to yourself." To illustrate this, she told the story of a Sufi and his faithless wife. This wife was one day entertaining a paramour, when she was surprised by the sudden return of her husband. On the spur of the moment she threw a woman's dress over her paramour and presented him to her husband as a rich lady who had come to propose a marriage between her son and the Sufi's daughter, saying she did not care for wealth, but only regarded modesty and rectitude of conduct. To this the Sufi replied, that as from her coming unattended it was plain that the lady had not the wealth she pretended to have, it was more than probable that her pretensions to extraordinary modesty and humility were also fictitious. The lover then proceeded to excuse himself by the plea that he had wished to test his mistress, and ascertain for himself whether she was a modest woman or not. He said he of course knew beforehand that she would prove to be a modest woman, but still he wished to have ocular demonstration of the fact. His mistress reproved him for trying to deceive her with false pretences, assuring him that, after he had been detected in a fault, his only proper course was to confess it, as Adam had done. Moreover, she added that an attempt to put her to the test would have been an extremely unworthy proceeding, only to be paralleled by Abu Jahl's attempt to prove the truth of the Prophet's claims by calling on him to perform a miracle.
 The soul of good in things evil. Evil only relative.
 The lover invoked blessings on that rough patrol,
 Because their harshness had wrought bliss for him.
 They were poison to most men, but sweets to him,
 Because those harsh ones had united him with his love.
 In the world there is nothing absolutely bad;
 Know, moreover, evil is only relative.
 In the world there is neither poison nor antidote,
 Which is not a foot to one and a fetter to another;
 To one the power of moving, to another a clog;
 To one a poison, to another an antidote.
 Serpents' poison is life to serpents,
 In relation to mankind it is death.
 To the creatures of the sea the sea is a garden,
 To the creatures of the land it is fatal.
 In the same way, O man, reckon up with intelligence
 The relations of these things in endless variety.
 In relation to this man Zaid is as Satan,
 In relation to another he is as a Sultan.
 The latter calls Zaid a sincere Mussulman,
 The former calls him a Gueber deserving to be killed.
 Zaid, one and the same person, is life to the one,
 And to the other an annoyance and a pest.
 If you desire that God may be pleasing to you,
 Then look at Him with the eyes of them that love Him.
 Look not at that Beauty with your own eyes,
 Look at that Object of desire with His votaries' eyes;
 Shut your own eyes from beholding that sweet Object,
 And borrow from His admirers their eyes;
 Nay, borrow from Him both eyes and sight,
 And with those eyes of His look upon His face,
 In order that you may not be disappointed with the sight.
 God says, "Whoso is God's, God also is his."
 God says, "I am his eye, his hand, his heart," 3
 That his good fortune may emerge from adversity.
 Whatsoever is hateful to you, if it should lead you
 To your beloved, at once becomes agreeable to you.
 Why God is named "Hearing," "Seeing" and "Knowing".
 God calls himself "Seeing," to the end that
 His eye may every moment scare you from sinning.
 God calls himself "Hearing," to the end that
 You may close your lips against foul discourse.
 God calls himself "Knowing," to the end that
 You may be afraid to plot evil.
 These names are not mere accidental names of God,
 As a negro may be called Kafu'r (white);
 They are names derived from God's essential attributes,
 Not mere vain titles of the First Cause.
 For if so, they would be only empty pleasantries,
 Like calling the deaf a hearer and the blind a seer,
 Or a name like "impudent" for a modest man,
 Or "beautiful" for an ugly negro,
 Or such a title as "Haji" for a new-born boy,
 Or that of "Ghazi" applied to a noble idler.
 If such titles as these are used in praising persons
 Who do not possess the qualities implied, 'tis wrong;
 'Twould be jesting or mockery or madness.
 "God is exalted above" what is said by evil men. 4
 I knew you before I met you face to face;
 That you had a fair face but an evil heart;
 Yea, I knew you before I saw you,
 That you were rooted in iniquity through guile.
 When my eye is red owing to inflammation,
 I know 'tis so from the pain, though I see it not.
 You regarded me as a lamb without a shepherd; 
 You fancied that I had no guardian. 
 Lovers have suffered chastisement for this cause, 
 That they have cast ill-timed looks at fair ones. 
 They have supposed the fawn to have no shepherd, 
 They have supposed the captive to be going a begging; 
 Till in the twinkling of an eye an arrow pierces them, 
 Saying, "I am her guardian; look not at her rashly!" 
 What! am I less than a lamb or a fallow deer, 
 That I should have none to shepherd me? 
 Nay, I have a Guardian worthy of dominion, 
 Who knows every wind that blows upon me. 
 He is aware whether that wind is chill or mild, 
 He is not ignorant nor absent, O mean one. 
 The carnal soul is made by God blind and deaf; 
 I saw with the heart's eye your blindness afar off. 
 For this cause I never inquired about you for eight years 
 Because I saw you filled with ignorance and duplicity. 
 Why indeed should I inquire about one in the furnace, 
 Who is bowed down with reproach, like yourself?
 Comparison of the world to a bath stove, 
 and of piety to the hot bath.
 The lust of the world is like a bath stove, 
 Whereby the bath of piety is heated; 
 But the lot of the pious is purity from the stove's filth, 
 Because they dwell in the bath and in cleanliness. 
 The rich are as those that carry dung 
 To heat the furnace of the bath withal. 
 God has instilled into them cupidity, 
 That the bath may be warmed and pleasant. 
 Quit this stove and push on into the bath; 
 Know quitting the stove to be the bath itself. 
 Whoso is in the stove-room is as a servant 
 To him who is temperate and prudent.
 Your lust is as fire in the world, 
 With a hundred greedy mouths wide open. 
 In the judgment of reason this gold is foul dung, 
 Although, like dung, it serves to kindle the fire.
 Whoso was born in the stove-room and never saw purity, 
 The smell of sweet musk is disagreeable to him.
 In illustration of this, a story follows of a tanner who was accustomed to bad smells in the course of his trade, and who was half killed by the smell of musk in the bazaar of the perfumers, but was cured by the accustomed smell of dung.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xcix. 7. 
 2. Koran ii. 213. 
 3. "My servant draws nigh to me by pious deeds till I love him, and, when I love him, I am his eye, his ear, his tongue, his foot, his hand, and by me he sees, hears, talks, walks, and feels." Hadis. 
 4. Cp. Koran xvi 3. 

 STORY II.
 The Building of the "Most Remote Temple" at Jerusalem.
 King David purposed to build a temple at Jerusalem, but was forbidden to do so by a divine voice, because he had been a man of blood. But, it was added, the work should be accomplished by his son Solomon, and Solomon's work would be reckoned the same as David's, in accordance with the texts, "The faithful are brethren," and "Sages are as a single soul," and "We make no distinction between any of the apostles." 1 Accordingly, when Solomon came to the throne, he set about the building, which was attended with many miraculous circumstances, e.g., the stones in the quarry crying out and moving of themselves to the site of the temple. Bilqis, Queen of Saba, sent Solomon a present of forty camels laden with ingots of gold; but Solomon would not receive them, and sent her messengers back with a letter commanding her to abandon the worship of the sun and embrace Islam. 2 At the same time he charged the messengers to report fully to the Queen all they had seen in his kingdom, and to urge her to comply with his commands to renounce her sovereignty and present herself in all humility at his court. As she delayed to come, Solomon again sent to assure her that he had no sinister views regarding her, and desired her attendance at his court solely for her own spiritual benefit. At last Bilqis renounced her royal state and cast away all care for worldly things, and, impelled by earnest desire to learn the true faith, presented herself at the court of King Solomon. Then Solomon commanded that the throne of Bilqis should be brought from Saba, and an 'Afrit offered to fetch it, but Asaf, the vizier anticipated him. 3 Afterwards Solomon proceeded with the building of the temple, wherein he was assisted by devils and fairies. Then God tried Solomon by placing on his throne a false counterpart of him. His miracle working signet was stolen by a devil named Sakhar who thereupon assumed his shape and personated him for forty days, during which Solomon had to wander about and beg his bread. After this he regained his throne, and having completed the temple, began to worship therein. One day he observed that a tuft of coarse grass had sprung up in a corner of the temple, and he was greatly distressed because he thought it portended the ruin of the building, but he took comfort from the thought that while he himself lived the temple would not be allowed to fall into ruin; so long as he lived, at least, he would root up all evil weeds that threatened the safety of the temple, as well the temple built with hands as the spiritual temple in his heart.
 In the course of this story, which is told at great length, there occur anecdotes of the beginning of the reign of 'Othman, of the miracles of 'Abdullah Moghrabi, and others, of which abstracts are given below.
 Though philosophers call man the microcosm, divines call him the macrocosm.
 In outward form thou art the microcosm,
 But in reality the macrocosm. 4
 Seemingly the bough is the cause of the fruit, 5
 But really the bough exists because of the fruit.
 Were he not impelled by desire of fruit,
 The gardener would never have planted the tree.
 Therefore in reality the tree is born from the fruit,
 Though seemingly the fruit is born from the tree.
 For this cause Mustafa said, "Adam and all prophets
 Are my followers and gather under my standard.
 Though to outward view I am a son of Adam,
 In reality I am his first forefather,
 Because the angels worshipped him for my sake,
 And 'twas in my footsteps that he ascended to heaven.
 Hence in reality our first parent was my offspring,
 As in reality the tree is born of its own fruit."
 What is first in thought is last in act.
 Thought is the special attribute of the Eternal.
 This product goes forth from heaven very swiftly,
 And comes to us like a caravan. 6
 'Tis not a long road that this caravan travels;
 Can the desert stop the deliverer?
 The heart travels to the Ka'ba every moment,
 And by divine grace the body acquires the same power.
 Distance and nearness affect only the body,
 What do they matter in the place where God is?
 When God changes the body,
 It regards not parasangs or miles.
 Even on earth there is hope of approaching God.
 Press on like a lover, and cease vain words, O son!
 In the course of his rebuke to the messengers of Bilqis for bringing him mere gold instead of a humble heart, Solomon tells the story of the druggist who used soapstone or Persian earth for a weight. A man came to him to buy sugar-candy, and as he had no weight at hand, he used a lump of soapstone instead; but, while his back was turned, the purchaser stole a bit of the soapstone. The druggist, though he saw what he was doing, would not interrupt him, for he knew that the more soapstone the purchaser stole, the less sugar-candy he would get. In like manner the more men grasp at the transitory wealth of this world, the less they will obtain of the stable wealth of the world to come.
 Part of Soloman's message to Bilqis.
 Report to Bilqis what marvels ye have seen,
 And what plains of gold belong to Solomon;
 How ye beheld forty mansions faced with gold,
 And how ye were ashamed of your presents;
 That she may know Solomon is not covetous of gold;
 He has received gold from the Creator of gold.
 The moment he wills it, every grain of earth's dust
 Is changed into gold and precious pearls.
 For this cause, O thou that lovest gold,
 On the last day God will make earth all silver (white). 7
 Quit thy wealth, even if it be the realm of Saba;
 Thou wilt find many realms not of this earth.
 What thou callest a throne is only a prison;
 Thou thinkest thyself enthroned, but art outside the door.
 Thou hast no sovereignty over thine own passions,
 How canst thou sway good and evil?
 Thy hair turns white without thy concurrence,
 Take shame to thyself for thy evil passions.
 Whoso bows his head to the King of kings
 Will receive a hundred kingdoms not of this world;
 But the delight of bowing down before God
 Will seem sweeter to thee than countless glories."
 An anecdote follows of a darvesh who saw in a dream some saints, and prayed them to provide him with his daily bread without obliging him to mix in worldly affairs. The saints ordered him to go to the forest, and there he found that all the wild fruits were rendered fit for his food. Having a few grains of gold by him, which he had gained by worldly labour before this miracle had been wrought for him, he was about to give them to a poor woodcutter who was passing that way. But this woodcutter was a saint, and at once read his thoughts, and to show, like Solomon, that he had no need of worldly wealth, he offered up a short prayer to God, and straightway his bundle of firewood was changed into gold, and immediately after, at another prayer, was changed back again into firewood.
 Ibrahim bin Adham aud his fondness for music. 8

 Haste to renounce thy kingdom, like Ibrahim bin Adham,
 To obtain, like him, the kingdom of eternity.
 At night that king would sleep on his throne,
 With his guards of state surrounding his palace,
 Though he needed no guards for the purpose
 Of warding off robbers and vagabonds;
 For he who is a just king knows everything,
 And is safe from harm and his mind is at peace.
 Justice is the guardian of his steps,
 Not guards with drums round his palace.
 His purpose in having this band of music was this,
 To recall to his longing heart that call of God. 9
 The wailing of horn and the thunder of drum
 Resemble in some sort that dread "trumpet blast." 10 
 Wherefore philosophers say that we have learned
 Our melodies from those of the revolving spheres.
 The song of the spheres in their revolutions
 Is what men sing with lute and voice.
 The faithful hold that the sweet influences of heaven
 Can make even harsh voices melodious.
 As we are all members of Adam,
 We have heard these melodies in Paradise;
 Though earth and water have cast their veil upon us,
 We retain faint reminiscences of those heavenly songs.
 But while we are thus shrouded by gross earthly veils,
 How can the tones of the dancing spheres reach us? 11
 Hence it is that listening to music is lovers' food,
 Because it recalls to them their primal union with God.
 The inward feelings of the mind acquire strength,
 Nay, are shown outwardly, under influence of music.
 The fire of love burns hotter under stimulus of music,
 Even as occurred in the case of the nut-gatherer.
 Ibrahim's abdication.
 Once that noble Ibrahim, as he sat on his throne,
 Heard a clamour and noise of cries on the roof,
 Also heavy footsteps on the roof of his palace.
 He said to himself, "Whose heavy feet are those?"
 He shouted from his window, "Who goes there?
 'Tis no man's step; surely 'tis a fairy."
 His guards, filled with confusion, bowed their heads,
 Saying, "It is we who are going the rounds in search."
 He said, "What seek ye?" They said "Our camels" 12
 He said, "Who ever searched for camels on a housetop?"
 They said, "We follow thy example,
 Who seekest union with God while sitting on a throne."
 This was all, and no man ever saw him again,
 Just as fairies are invisible to men.
 His substance was hid from men, though he was with them,
 For what can men see save the outward aspect and dress?
 As he was removed from the sight of friends and strangers,
 His fame was noised abroad like that of the 'Anka.
 For the soul of every bird that reaches Mount Qaf
 Confers glory on the whole family of birds. l3
 The anecdote of the nut-gatherer, introduced in the above story, is only another version of the story of the thirsty man who threw bricks into the water in order to hear the sound of the splash. 14 This is followed by an address to Husamu-'d-Din, in which the poet says that his object in writing the Masnavi was to elicit words from Husam, as his words were the same as the words of God.
 Solomon's preaching to the people of Bilqis. The art of preaching.
 I tell the tale of Saba in lovers' style.
 When the breeze bore Solomon's words to that garden,
 'Twas as when bodies meet souls at the resurrection,
 Or as when boys return to their loved homes.
 The people of love are hidden amongst the peoples,
 As a liberal man encompassed by the contumely of the base.
 Souls are disgraced by union with bodies,
 Bodies are ennobled by union with souls.
 Arise, O lovers; this sweet draught is yours;
 Ye are they that endure; eternal life is yours.
 Ho! ye that seek, arise and take your fill of love,
 Snuff up that perfume of Yusuf!
 Approach, O Solomon, thou that knowest birds' language, 
 Sound the note of every bird that draws near; 15
 When God sent, thee to the birds, 
 He taught thee first the notes of all the birds. 
 To the predestinarian bird talk predestination, 
 To the bird with broken wings preach patience, 
 To the patient well-doer preach comfort and pardon, 
 To the spiritual 'Anka relate the glories of Mount Qaf, 
 To the pigeon preach avoidance of the hawk, 
 To the lordly hawk mercy and self-control; 
 As for the bat, who lingers helpless in the dark, 
 Acquaint him with the society of the light; 
 To the fighting partridge teach peace, 
 To the cock the signs of dawning day. 
 In this way deal with all from the hoopoo to the eagle.
 Then follows a long account of various miraculous incidents that occurred during the childhood of the Prophet, how he was suckled by Halima, a woman of the Bani Sa'ad, how the idols bowed down before him, how he strayed from home, how his grandfather, Abd ul Muttalib, prayed to God that he might be found, and how he was at last found in the Ka'ba and restored to his grandfather.
 Next a story is told of a cur who attacked a blind man (Kur) in the street, rather than hunt the wild ass (Gor) on the mountains in company with well-bred dogs. This is an illustration of the thesis that mankind is prone to run after mean earthly objects, and to neglect aspiring to the spiritual world.
 Solomon's admonitions to Bilqis.
 Ah! Bilqis, bestir thyself now the market is thronged, 
 Flee away from them whose traffic is unprofitable! 16 
 Arise, Bilqis, now that thou hast the choice, 
 Before that death lays his heavy hand upon thee. 
 Soon will death pull thy ears, as if thou wert 
 A thief dragged before the officer in deadly fear. 
 How long wilt thou steal shoes from asses of the world? 
 If thou must steal, steal pearls of the world above. 
 Thy sisters have found the kingdom that lasts forever, 
 Thou cleavest to the kingdom of darkness. 
 Happy is he who quits this earthly kingdom, 
 Which sooner or later death will destroy. 
 Arise! O Bilqis, at least behold 
 The kingdom of the royal kings of the faith! 
 In reality they are seated in the garden of the spirit, 
 Though to outward view they are guiding their friends. 
 That spiritual garden accompanies them everywhere, 
 Yet it is never revealed to the eyes of the people, 
 Its fruits ever asking to be gathered, 
 Its fount of life welling up to be drunk! 
 Go round about the heavens without aid of wings, 
 Like sun or full moon or new moon! 
 Thou wilt move as a spirit without aid of feet, 
 Thou wilt eat sweet viands without mouth or palate. 
 No crocodile of sorrow will attack thy bark, 
 Nor will sad thoughts of death assail thee. 
 Thou wilt be at once queen, army, and throne, 
 Endued with good fortune and fortune itself. 17 
 Thou sayest thou art a great queen of good fortune; 
 But thy fortune is apart from thee and will soon fade, 
 Thou wilt be left like a, beggar without sustenance; 
 Therefore, O chosen one, become thy own fortune. 
 When, O spiritual one, thou hast become thy own fortune, 
 Then, being thyself thy fortune, thou wilt never lose it. 
 How. O fortunate one, canst thou ever lose thyself, 
 When thy real self is thy treasure and thy kingdom?
 How men and demons helped Solomon in building the temple.
 When Solomon laid the foundations of the temple,
 Men and Jinns came and lent their aid to the work,
 Some of them with good-will, and others on compulsion,
 Even as worshippers follow the road of devotion.
 Men are as demons, and lust of wealth their chain,
 Which drags them forth to toil in shop and field.
 This chain is made of their fears and anxieties.
 Deem not that these men have no chain upon them.
 It causes them to engage in labor and the chase,
 It forces them to toil in mines and on the sea,
 It urges them towards good and towards evil.
 God saith, "On their necks is a rope of palm fibre," 18
 And "Verily on their necks have we placed ropes,'' 19
 "We make this rope out of their own dispositions;
 There is none either impure or intelligent,
 But we have fastened his work about his neck." 20
 Thy lust is even as fire burning in thy evil deeds;
 The black coal of these deeds is lighted by the fire;
 The blackness of the coal is first hidden by the fire,
 But, when it is burnt, the blackness is made visible.
 The building of the prophets was without lust,
 And accordingly its splendor ever increased.
 Yea, many are the noble temples they have raised,
 Though all were not named "The Most Remote Temple."
 The Ka'ba, whose renown waxes greater every moment,
 Owed its foundation to the piety of Abraham.
 Its glory is not derived from stones and mortar,
 But from being built without lust or strife.
 Neither are the prophets' writings like other writings;
 Nor their temples, nor their works, nor their families;
 Nor their manners, nor their wrath, nor their chastisements;
 Nor their dreams, nor their reason, nor their words.
 Each one of them is endued with a different glory,
 Each soul's bird winged with different feathers.
 Ho! pious ones, build the lively temple of the heart,
 That the Divine Solomon may be seen, and peace be upon you!
 And if your demons and fairies be recalcitrant,
 Your good angels must place collars on their necks.
 If your demons go astray through guile and fraud,
 Chastisement must overtake them swift as lightning.
 Be like Solomon, so that your demons
 May dig stones for your spiritual edifice.
 Be like Solomon, free from evil thoughts and guile,
 So that carnal demons and Jinns may be submissive to you.
 Your heart is as Solomon's signet; take good care
 That it falls not a prey to demons,
 For then demons will rule over you as over Solomon.
 Guard then your signet from the demons, and be at peace.
 Then follows a story of a poet who recited a panegyric in honor of a liberal king. The king commanded that he should receive one thousand pieces of gold, but the vazir, named Abul-Hasan, gave him ten thousand. The poet went to his home well contented, but after some years fell into poverty, and naturally bethought him of the generous king and his vazir, who had before assisted him. Sibawayh, the grammarian of Shiraz says "Allah" is derived from "Alah" (fleeing for refuge) and thus we see all creatures, and even the elements themselves, ever looking to Allah to sustain them in existence. The poet, therefore, again presented himself to the king with a new panegyric, and the king, on hearing it, commanded as before that a thousand pieces of gold should be given him. But the new vazir, who was also named Abul-Hasan, persuaded the king that the exchequer could not afford this large outlay, and kept the poet waiting so long for his money, that at last he was glad to get away with only one hundred pieces of gold. These two vazirs recall Asaf, the good vazir of King Solomon, who deserves the title "Light upon light," 21 and Haman, the evil vazir of Pharaoh, who turned his he,art against Moses, and brought many plagues upon the kingdom of Egypt.
 How all creatures cry to God for sustenance.

 Yea, all the fish in the seas,
 And all feathered fowl in the air above,
 All elephants, wolves, and lions of the forest,
 All dragons and snakes, and even little ants,
 Yea, even air, water, earth, and fire,
 Draw their sustenance from Him, both winter and summer.
 Every moment this heaven cries to Him, saying,
 "O Lord, quit not Thy hold of me for a moment!
 The pillar of my being is Thy aid and protection;
 The whole is folded up in that right hand of Thine." 22
 And earth cries, "O keep me fixed and steadfast,
 Thou who hast placed me on the top of waters!"
 All of them are waiting and expecting His aid,
 All have learned of Him to represent their needs.
 Every prophet extols this prescription,
 "Seek ye help with patience and with prayer." 23
 Ho! seek aid of Him, not of another than Him
 Seek water in the ocean, not in a dried-up channel.
 The next anecdote is that of the raven who taught Cain the art of digging graves and burying corpses, as told in Koran v. 34. This is designed to illustrate the thesis that unaided human reason can discover no now truth, unless inspired by Divine wisdom, of which the prophets, and especially "Universal Reason," or the Prophet Muhammed, are the channels. Thus physicians and herbalists have derived their knowledge of the virtues of plants from the instructions originally given by King Solomon when he classified the plants that grew in the court of the temple. The inner eye sees more than is visible to the sight of the vulgar. To illustrate this, an anecdote is told of a Sufi who had accompanied his friends to a beautiful garden, but instead of looking about and enjoying the fragrance of the flowers and fruits, sat with his head sunk on his breast in Sufi fashion. His friends said to him, in the words of the Koran, "Look at the signs of God's mercy, how after its death He quickeneth the earth!" 24 He answered them that these signs were far more plainly visible to him in his heart than in the outward creation, which was merely as it were a blurred reflection from the spiritual creation enshrined in his heart. For God says, "The life of the world is naught but a cheating fruition." 25 In other words, "Nature conceals God, but the supernatural in man reveals Him." 26
 On cleansing the inward temple of the heart from self-conceit and reliance on carnal reason.
 When the body bows in worship, the heart is a temple,
 And where there is a temple, there bad friends are weeds
 When a liking for bad friends grows up in you,
 Flee from them, and avoid converse with them.
 Root up those weeds, for, if they attain full growth,
 They will subvert you and your temple together.
 O beloved, this weed is deviation from the "right way,"
 You crawl crookedly, like infants unable to walk.
 Fear not to acknowledge your ignorance and guilt,
 That the Heavenly Master may not withhold instruction.
 When you say, "I am ignorant; O teach me,"
 Such open confession is better than false pride.
 O ingenuous one, learn of our father Adam,
 Who said of yore, "O Lord, we have dealt unjustly." 27
 He made no vain excuses and prevaricated not,
 Nor did he raise the standard of guile and craft.
 On the other hand, Iblis raised arguments, saying,
 "I used to be honorable; Thou hast disgraced me.
 My stain is owing to Thee; Thou art my dyer;
 Thou hast caused my sin and transgression."
 Read the text, "Lord, Thou hast caused me to err," 28
 That you plead not compulsion, and so err (like Iblis).
 How long will you climb into that tree of compulsion?
 How long cast out of sight your own freewill?
 How long, like Iblis and his evil crew,
 Throw the blame of your own sins upon God?
 How were you compelled to sin when you took such pleasure
 And pride in engaging in those sins?
 Does a man feel such pleasure in acting on compulsion
 As he exhibits when committing wrong actions?
 You battle like twenty men against those
 Who give you good advice not to do that act;
 Saying to them, "This is right and quite proper;
 Who dissuades me from it but men of no account?"
 Does a man acting on compulsion talk like this?
 Or rather one who is erring of his own freewill?
 Whatever your lust wills you deem freewill,
 What reason demands you deem compulsion.
 Whoso is wise and prudent knows this,
 That cleverness comes from Iblis, but love from Adam.
 Cleverness is like Canaan's swimming in the ocean; 29
 'Tis no river or small stream; 'tis the mighty ocean.
 Away with this attempt to swim; quit self-conceit.
 'Twill not save you; Canaan was drowned at last.
 Love is as the ark appointed for the righteous,
 Which annuls the danger and provides a way of escape.
 Sell your cleverness and buy bewilderment;
 Cleverness is mere opinion, bewilderment intuition.
 Make sacrifice of your reason at the feet of Mustafa,
 Say, "God Sufficeth me, for He, is sufficient for me." 30
 Do not, like Canaan, hang back from entering the ark,
 Being puffed up with vain conceit of cleverness.
 He said, "I will escape to the top of high mountains,
 Why need I put myself under obligation to Noah?"
 Ah! better for him had he never learnt swimming!
 Then he would have based his hopes on Noah's ark.
 Would he had been ignorant of craft as a babe!
 Then like a babe he would have clung to his mother.
 Would he had been less full of borrowed knowledge!
 Then he would have accepted inspired knowledge from his father.
 When, with inspiration at hand, you seek book-learning,
 Your heart, as if inspired, loads you with reproach. 31
 Traditional knowledge, when inspiration is available,
 Is like making ablutions with sand when water is near.
 Make yourself ignorant, be submissive, and then
 You will obtain release from your ignorance.
 For this cause, O son, the Prince of men declared,
 "The majority of those in Paradise are the foolish." 32
 Cleverness is as a wind raising storms of pride;
 Be foolish, so that your heart may be at peace;
 Not with the folly that doubles itself by vain babble,
 But with that arising from bewilderment at "The Truth."
 Those Egyptian women who cut their hands were fools 33
 Fools as to their hands, being amazed at Yusuf's face. 
 Make sacrifice of reason to love of "The Friend," 
 True reason is to be found where He is. 
 Men of wisdom direct their reason heavenwards, 
 Vain babblers halt on earth where no "Friend" is. 
 If through bewilderment your reason quits your head, 
 Every hair of your head becomes true reason and a head.
 Then follow commentaries on the text, "O thou enfolded in thy mantle;" 34 on the proverb, "Silence is the proper answer to a fool;" on the Hadis, "God created the angels with reason and the brutes with lust, but man he created with both reason and lust; the man who follows reason is higher than the angels, and the man who follows lust is lower than the brutes;" on the text, "As to those in whose heart is a disease, it will add doubt to their doubt, and they shall die infidels," 35 and a comparison of the struggle between reason and lust to that between Majnun and his she-camel, he trying to get to his mistress Laila, and the she-camel trying to run home to her foal.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xlix. 10; xxxi. 27; ii. 285. 
 2. The letter is given in Koran xxvii. 30. 
 3. All these legends are derived from Koran xxi., xxvii., and xxxviii. See Sale's notes. 
 4. This refers to Muhammad, who is at once the "First reason" (Logos) and the "Perfect man," who is "the sum of all the worlds" and the "Great world." See Notices et Extraits des MSS., x. p. 86. 
 5. He was also the final cause of creation. "If it had not been for thee, the world had not been created." 
 6. Muhammad as the Logos is the channel by which divine grace is conveyed to man. The "change of the body" is an allusion to the ascension of Muhammad (Mi raj). 
 7. A Hadis. 
 8. Music is much used in the religious services of the "Maulavi" order of Darveshes, founded by Jalalu -d-Din Rumi. See "The Dervishes," by J.P. Brown, p. 197. 
 9. "Am not I your lord?" (Koran vii. 171). 
 10. "When there shall be a trumpet blast, that shall be a dreadful day" (Koran lxxiv. 7). 
 11. The so-called Pythagorean doctrine of the "Harmony of the spheres" was as well known to Persian poets as to Shakespeare. 
 12. This is an allusion to the story of the "Believer's lost camel." Book ii., Story xi. 
 13. This alludes to the well-known poem of Faridu-d-Din 'Attar the "Mantiqu-t-Tair." 
 14. Book ii. Story v. 
 15. Koran xxvii. 16. There is a Hadis, "Speak to men according to the amount of their intelligence." 
 16. "These are they who have bought error at the price of guidance, but their traffic hath not been gainful" (Koran ii. 15). 
 17. Union attained, all duality and separate phenomenal existence are swallowed up in the One (Noumenon). (See Gulshan i Raz, I. 835 and 845). 
 18. Koran iii. 5. 
 19. Koran xxxvi. 7. 
 20. "And every man's work have we fastened about his neck, and on the last day will we bring forth to him a book, which shall be shown to him wide open. Read thy book; there needeth none but thyself to make out an account against thee that day " (Koran xvii. 14). 
 21. Koran xxiv. 35. 
 22. Koran xxxix. 67. 
 23. Koran ii. 148. 
 24. Koran xxx. 49. 
 25. Koran iii. 182. 
 26. "But is it unreasonable to confess that we believe in God, not by reason of the nature which conceals him, but by reason of the supernatural in man, which alone reveals him and proves him to exist? " (Jacobi, quoted in Sir W. Hamilton's Lectures on Metaphysics, vol. i. p. 40). 
 27. Koran vii. 22. 
 28. He said, "That thou hast caused me to err" (Koran vii. 15). This is the burden of many of 'Omar Khayyam's poems. 
 29. Koran xi. 43. See Book iii., Story 5. 
 30. Koran ix. 130. 
 31. Knowledge of "The Truth" is to be attained not by exercise of the reason, but by illumination from above. When the light of "The Truth" is revealed, reason is drowned in bewilderment. Gulshan i Raz, Answer ii. 
 32. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol. ii. p. 898; 1 Cor. iv. 10. 
 33. "They were amazed at Yusuf, and cut their hands, and said, 'God keep us, this is no man!'" (Koran xii. 31). 
 34. Koran lxxiii. 1. 
 35. Koran ix. 126. 

 STORY III.
 The Youth who wrote a letter of complaint 
 about his rations to the King.
 A certain youth in the service of a great king was dissatisfied with his rations, so he went to the cook and reproached him with dishonoring his master by his stinginess. The youth would not listen to his excuses, but wrote off an angry letter of complaint to the king, in terms of outward compliment and respect, but betraying an angry spirit. On receiving this letter, the king observed that it contained only complaints about meat and drink, and evinced no aspirations after spiritual food, and therefore needed no answer, as "the proper answer to a fool is silence." 1 When the youth received no answer to his letter, he was much surprised, and threw the blame on the cook and on the messenger, ignoring the fact that the folly of his own letter was the real reason of its being left unanswered. He wrote in all five letters, but the king persisted in his refusal to reply, saying that fools are enemies to God and man, and that he who has any dealings with a fool fouls his own nest. Fools only regard material meat and drink, whereas the food of the wise is the light of God, as it is said by the Prophet, "I pass the night in the presence of my Lord, who giveth me meat and drink," 2 and again, "Fasting is the food of God," i.e., the means by which spiritual food is obtained. 3
 Explanation of the text "And Moses conceived a secret fear within him. We said 'Fear not, for thou shalt be uppermost (over Pharaoh's magicians) '". 4
 Moses said, "Their sorcery confuses them;
 What can I do? These people have no discernment."
 God said, "I will generate in them discernment;
 I will make their undiscerning reason to see clearly.
 Although like a sea their waves cast up foam,
 O Moses, thou shalt prevail over them; fear not!"
 The magicians gloried in their own achievements,
 But when Moses' rod became a snake, they were confounded.
 Whoso boasts of his beauty and wit,
 The stone of death is a touchstone of his boasts.
 Sorcery fades away, but the miracles of Moses advance.
 Both resemble a dish falling from a roof:
 The noise of the dish of sorcery leaves only cursing;
 The noise of the dish of faith leaves edification.
 When the touchstone is hidden from the sight of all,
 Then come forth to battle and boast, O base coin!
 Your time for boasting is when the touchstone is away;
 The hand of power will soon crush your exaltation. 
 The base coin says to me with pride every moment, 
 "O pure gold, how am I inferior to you?" 
 The gold replies, "Even so, O comrade; 
 But the touchstone is at hand; be ready to meet it!" 
 Death of the body is a benefaction to the spiritual; 
 What damage has pure gold to dread from the shears? 
 If the base coin were of itself far-sighted, 
 It would reveal at first the blackness it shows at last. 
 If it had showed its blackness at first on its face, 
 'Twould have avoided hypocrisy now and misery at last. 
 'Twould have sought the alchemy of grace in due time; 
 Its reason would have prevailed over its hypocrisy. 
 If it became broken-hearted through its own bad state, 
 'Twould look onward to Him that heals the broken; 
 'Twould look to the result and be broken-hearted 
 And be made whole at once by the Healer of broken hearts. 
 Divine grace places base copper in the alembic, 
 Adulterated gold is excluded from that favor. 
 O adulterated gold, boast not, but see clearly 
 That thy Purchaser is not blind to thy defects. 
 The light of the judgment-day will enlighten his eyes 
 And destroy the glamour of thy fascinations. 
 Behold them that have regard to the ultimate result, 
 And also the regrets of foolish souls and their envy. 
 Behold them that regard only the present, 
 And cast away thoughts of evil to come from their minds.
 *NOTES:
 1. See Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 551, for a parallel. 
 2. Koran xxvi. 79. 
 3. See Mishkat ul Masabih, vol. i. p. 463. 
 4. Koran xx. 70. 

 STORY IV.
 Bayazid and his impious sayings when beside himself.
 The holy saint Bayazid before his death predicted the birth of the saint Abul-Hasan Khirqani, and specified all the peculiar qualities which would be seen in him. And after his death it came to pass as he had predicted, and Abul-Hasan, hearing what Bayazid had said, used to frequent his tomb. One day he visited the tomb as usual, and found it covered with snow, and a voice was heard saying, "The world is fleeting as snow. I am calling thee! Follow me and forsake the world!"
 How Bayazid cried out, when beside himself, "Glory be to me!" and how his disciples were scandalized at this saying, and how Bayazid answered them.

 Once that famous saint Bayazid came to his disciples,
 Saying, "Lo, I myself am God Almighty."
 That man of spiritual gifts being visibly beside himself;
 Said, "There is no God beside me; worship me!"
 Next morning, when his ecstatic state had passed,
 They said, "You said so and so, which was impious."
 He answered, "If I do so again,
 Straightway slay me with your knives!
 God is independent of me; I am in the body.
 If I say that again you must kill me!"
 When that holy person had given this injunction,
 Each of his disciples made ready his knife.
 Again that overflowing cup became beside himself,
 And his recent injunctions passed from his mind.
 Alienation came upon him, reason went astray,
 The dawn shone forth and his lamp paled at its light.
 Reason is like an officer when the king appears;
 The officer then loses his power and hides himself.
 Reason is God's shadow; God is the sun.
 What power has the shadow before the sun?
 When a man is possessed by an evil spirit
 The qualities of humanity are lost in him.
 Whatever he says is really said by that spirit,
 Though it seems to proceed from the man's mouth.
 When the spirit has this rule and dominance over him,
 The agent is the property of the spirit, and not himself;
 His self is departed, and he has become the spirit.
 The Turk without instruction speaks Arabic; 1
 When he returns to himself he knows not a word of it. 
 Seeing God is lord of spirits and of man, 
 How can He be inferior in power to a spirit?
 When the eagle of alienation from self took wing, 
 Bayazid began to utter similar speeches; 
 The torrent of madness bore away his reason, 
 And he spoke more impiously than before. 
 "Within my vesture is naught but God, 
 Whether you seek Him on earth or in heaven." 
 His disciples all became mad with horror, 
 And struck with their knives at his holy body. 
 Each one, like the assassins of Kardkoh, 2 
 Without fear aimed at the body of his chief. 
 Each who aimed at the body of the Shaikh, 
 His stroke was reversed and wounded the striker. 
 No stroke took effect on that man of spiritual gifts, 
 But the disciples were wounded and drowned in blood. 
 Each who had aimed a blow at his neck, 
 Saw his own throat cut, and gave up the ghost; 
 He who had struck at his breast 
 Had cleft his own breast and killed himself. 
 They who knew better that lord of felicity, 
 Who had not courage enough to strike a deadly blow, 
 Their half-knowledge held their hands back; 
 They saved their lives but slightly wounded themselves. 
 On the morrow those disciples, diminished in number, 
 Raised lamentations in their houses. 
 They went to Bayazid, thousands of men and women, 
 Saying, "The two worlds are hidden in thy vesture; 
 If this body of thine were that of a man, 
 It would have perished of sword-wounds, like a man's." 
 The man in his senses fought with him 'beside himself, 
 And thrust the thorn into his own eyes."
 Ah! you who smite with your sword him beside himself, 
 You smite yourself therewith; Beware! 
 For he that is beside himself is annihilated and safe; 
 Yea, he dwells in security forever. 
 His form is vanished, he is a mere mirror; 
 Nothing is seen in him but the reflection of another. 
 If you spit at it, you spit at your own face, 
 And if you hit that mirror, you hit yourself; 
 And if you see an ugly face in it, 'tis your own, 
 And if you see an 'Isa there, you are its mother Mary. 
 He is neither this nor that he is void of form; 
 'Tis your own form which is reflected back to you.
 But when the discourse reaches this point, lip is closed; 
 When pen reaches this point, it is split in twain. 
 Close then your lips, though eloquence be possible. 
 Keep silence; God knows the right way!
 This is followed by an anecdote of the Prophet appointing an Hudhaili youth to be captain of a band of warriors amongst whom were many older and more experienced soldiers, and of the objections made to this appointment, and of the Prophet's answer to the objectors.
 Why the Prophet promoted the youth to command his seniors.
 The Prophet said, "O ye who regard only the outside, 
 Regard him not as a youth void of talents. 
 Many are they whose beards are black yet are old, 
 Many too have white beards and hearts like pitch. 
 I have made trial of his wisdom often and often, 
 And that youth has shown himself old in his actions. 
 Age consists in maturity of wisdom, O son, 
 Not, in whiteness of the beard and hair. 
 How can any one be older than Iblis? 
 Yet, if he has no wisdom, he is naught. 
 Suppose him an infant, if he has 'Isa's soul, 
 He is pure from pride and from carnal lust. 
 That whiteness of the hair is a sign of maturity
 Only to purblind eyes whose vision is limited. 
 Since that shortsighted one judges by outward signs, 
 He seeks the right course by outward tokens. 
 For his sake I said that if ye desire counsel 
 Ye ought to make choice of an old man. 
 He who has emerged from the veil of blind belief 
 Beholds by the light of God all things that exist. 
 His pure light, without signs or tokens, 
 Cleaves for him the rind and brings him to the kernel. 
 To the regarder of externals, genuine and base coin are alike. 
 How can he know what is inside the basket? 
 Many are the gold coins made black with smoke, 
 So that they elude the clutches of greedy thieves; 
 Many are the copper coins gilded with gold, 
 And sold as gold to men of slender wits. 
 We who regard the inside of the world, 
 We look at the heart and disregard the outside. 
 The judges who confine their view to externals 
 And base their decisions on outward appearances, 
 As they testify and make outward show of faith, 3 
 Are straightway dubbed faithful by men of externals. 
 Therefore these heretics, who regard only externals, 
 Have secretly shed the blood of many true believers. 
 Strive then to be old in wisdom and in faith, 
 That, like Universal Reason, you may see within." 4
 *NOTES:
 1. Alluding to the story of the Kurd, Syad Abul-Wafa, Book i Story xiv. note. 
 2. A hill in Mazandaran. 
 3. "And some there are who say, 'We believe in God and in the last day,' yet they are not believers" (Koran ii. 7). 
 4. Universal Reason, here applied to Muhammad. "The first thing which God created was ('aql) Reason or Intelligence," i.e., the Logos. 

 STORY V.
 The Three Fishes.
 This story, which is taken from the book of Kalila and Damnah,1 is as follows. There was in a secluded place a lake, which was fed by a running stream, and in this lake were three fishes, one very wise, the second half wise, and the third foolish. One day some fishermen passed by that lake, and having espied the fish, hastened home to fetch their nets. The fish also saw the fishermen and were sorely disquieted. The very wise fish, without a minute's delay, quitted the lake and took refuge in the running stream which communicated with it, and thus escaped the impending danger. The half wise fish delayed doing anything till the fishermen actually made their appearance with their nets. He then floated upon the surface of the water, pretending to be dead, and the fisherman took him up and threw him into the stream, and by this device he saved his life. But the foolish fish did nothing but swim wildly about, and was taken and killed by the fishermen.
 The marks of the wise man, of the half wise, and of the fool.
 The wise man is he who possesses a torch of his own;
 He is the guide and leader of the caravan.
 That leader is his own director and light;
 That illuminated one follows his own lead.
 He is his own protector; do ye also seek protection
 From that light whereon his soul is nurtured.
 The second, he, namely, who is half wise,
 Knows the wise man to be the light of his eyes.
 He clings to the wise man like a blind man to his guide,
 So as to become possessed of the wise man's sight.
 But the fool, who has no particle of wisdom,
 Has no wisdom of his own, and quits the wise man.
 He knows nothing of the way, great or small,
 And is ashamed to follow the footsteps of the guide.
 He wanders into the boundless desert,
 Sometimes halting and despairing, sometimes running.
 He has no lamp wherewith to light himself on his way,
 Nor half a lamp which might recognize and seek light.
 He lacks wisdom, so as to boast of being alive,
 And also half wisdom, so as to assume to be dead?
 That half wise one became as one utterly dead
 In order to rise up out of his degradation.
 If you lack perfect wisdom, make yourself as dead
 Under the shadow of the wise, whose words give life.
 The fool is neither alive so as to companion with 'Isa,
 Nor yet dead so as to feel the power of 'Isa's breath.
 His blind soul wanders in every direction,
 And at last makes a spring, but springs not upwards.
 The counsels of the bird.
 A man captured a bird by wiles and snares;
 The bird said to him, "O noble sir,
 In your time you have eaten many oxen and sheep,
 And likewise sacrificed many camels;
 You have never become satisfied with their meat,
 So you will not be satisfied with my flesh.
 Let me go, that I may give you three counsels,
 Whence you will see whether I am wise or foolish.
 The first of my counsels shall be given on your wrist,
 The second on your well-plastered roof,
 And the third I will give you from the top of a tree.
 On hearing all three you will deem yourself happy.
 As regards the counsel on your wrist, 'tis this.
 'Believe not foolish assertions of any one!'"
 When he had spoken this counsel on his wrist, he flew
 Up to the top of the roof, entirely free.
 Then he said, "Do not grieve for what is past;
 When a thing is done, vex not yourself about it."
 He continued, "Hidden inside this body of mine
 Is a precious pearl, ten drachms in weight.
 That jewel of right, belonged to you,
 Wealth for yourself and prosperity for your children.
 You have lost it, as it, was not fated you should get it,
 That pearl whose like can nowhere be found."
 Thereupon the man, like a woman in her travail,
 Gave vent to lamentations and weeping.
 The bird said to him, "Did I not counsel you, saying,
 'Beware of grieving over what is past and gone?'
 When 'tis past and gone, why sorrow for it?
 Either you understood not my counsel or are deaf.
 The second counsel I gave you was this, namely,
 'Be not misguided enough to believe foolish assertions.'
 O fool, altogether I do not weigh three drachms,
 How can a pearl of ten drachms be within me?"
 The man recovered himself and said, "Well then,
 Tell me now your third good counsel!"
 The bird replied, "You have made a fine use of the others,
 That I should waste my third counsel upon you.
 To give counsel to a sleepy ignoramus
 Is to sow seeds upon salt land.
 Torn garments of folly and ignorance cannot be patched.
 O counselors, waste not the seed of counsel on them!"
 *NOTES:
 1. Anvar i Suhaili. Book i. Story 15. 

 STORY VI.
 Moses and Pharaoh. 1
 Then follows a very long account of the dealings of Moses, an incarnation of true reason, with Pharaoh, the exponent of mere opinion or illusion. It begins with a long discussion between Moses and Pharaoh. Moses tells Pharaoh that both of them alike owe their bodies to earth and their souls to God, and that God is their only lord. Pharaoh replies that he is lord of Moses, and chides Moses for his want of gratitude to himself for nurturing him in his childhood. Moses replies that he recognizes no lord but God, and reminds Pharaoh how he had tried to kill him in his infancy. Pharaoh complains that he is made of no account by Moses, and Moses retorts that in order to cultivate a waste field it is necessary to break up the soil; and in order to make a good garment, the stuff must first be cut up; and in order to make bread, the wheat must first be ground in the mill, and so on. The best return he can make to Pharaoh for his hospitality to him in his infancy is to set him free from his lust-engendered illusions, like a fish from the fish-hook which has caught him. Pharaoh then twits Moses with his sorceries in changing his staff into a serpent, and thereby beguiling the people. Moses replies that all this was accomplished not by sorcery, like that of Pharaoh's own magicians, but by the power of God, though Pharaoh could not see it, owing to his want of perception of divine things. The ear and the nose cannot see beautiful objects, but only the eye, and similarly the sensual eye, blinded by lust, is impotent to behold spiritual truth. On the other hand, men of spiritual insight, whose vision is purged from lust, become as it were all eyes, and no longer see double, but only the One sole real Being. Man's body, it is true, is formed of earth, but by discipline and contrition it may be made to reflect spiritual verities, even as coarse and hard iron may be polished into a steel mirror. Pharaoh ought to cleanse the rust of evil-doing from his soul, and then he would be able to see the spiritual truths which Moses was displaying before him. The door of repentance is always open. Moses then promised that if Pharaoh would obey one admonition he should receive in return four advantages. Pharaoh was tempted by this promise, and asked what the admonition was. Moses answered that it was this, that Pharaoh should confess that there is no God except the One Creator of all things in heaven and on earth. Pharaoh then prayed him to expound the four advantages he had promised, saying that possibly they might cure him of infidelity, and cause him to become a vessel of mercy, instead of one of wrath. Moses then explained that they were as follows:
 (1) Health.
 (2) Long life, ending in the conviction that death is gain. 
 Even as one who knows of a treasure hid in a ruined house pulls down the house to find that treasure, so does the wise man, full of years and experience, pull down the house of the body to gain the treasure of eternal life. The tradition "I was a hidden treasure," bears on this matter.
 (3) A better kingdom than that of Egypt, one of peace in place of one of enmity and contention.
 (4) Perpetual youth.
 Pharaoh then proceeded to take counsel with his wife, Asiya, whether it would be advisable to quit his infidelity and believe in the promises of Moses. Asiya, being a pious woman and well inclined to Moses, whom she had nurtured in his infancy, urged him to do so, but Pharaoh said he would first consult his vazir Haman. Asiya had a bad opinion of Haman, whom she knew to be as blind to spiritual truths as Pharaoh himself, and she did her best to dissuade Pharaoh from consulting him. To illustrate Haman's spiritual blindness, she told the story of a royal falcon who fell into the hands of an ignorant old woman. This old woman knew nothing of the virtues of a falcon, and was displeased at the falcon's appearance, and said to it, "What was your mother about to leave your claws and beak so long?" She then proceeded to trim them short, according to her fancy, and of course spoiled the falcon for all purposes of falconry. Pharaoh, however, would not be diverted from his purpose of consulting Haman, and Asiya was fain to console herself with the reflection that like always herds with like, and so Pharaoh must needs consort with Haman, who was in so many respects a duplicate of himself. To illustrate this she recalled the story of a woman whose infant had crawled to the brink of a canal, where it persisted in remaining, at the imminent peril of its life, despite all her calls and entreaties. In her distress she asked aid of Ali, who told her to place another infant on the top of the bank. She did so, and her own infant, seeing its playfellow, left the brink of its own accord and came to join its fellow. The spirit of man is of like genus with the holy prophets, but man's animal lust with the demons. And as things of like nature attract one another, so unlike things repel one another. Thus it is said that when holy men pray to be delivered from hell, hell also prays that they may be kept away from it. Pharaoh then proceeded to consult Haman, and Haman, on hearing that Moses had proposed to Pharaoh to humble himself and confess the supreme lordship of Allah, was indignant and rent his clothes, saying, "Is not the kingdom of Egypt thine? Art thou not mightier than this despicable fellow? 2 Who is he to degrade Pharaoh from his 'supreme lordship?'" So Pharaoh listened to Haman and refused to be converted to the true faith. Then Moses was much discouraged, but he was consoled by a voice from heaven assuring him that he was well-beloved of God, because in spite of disappointments and through good and evil he clung to God.
 On the tradition, "I was a hidden treasure and I desired to be known, and I created the world in order to be known".
 Destroy your house, and with the treasure hidden in it 3
 You will be able to build thousands of houses.
 The treasure lies under it; there is no help for it;
 Hesitate not to pull it down; do not tarry!
 For with the coin of that treasure
 A thousand houses can be built without labor.
 At last of a surety that house will be destroyed,
 And the divine treasure will be seen beneath it.
 But 'twill not belong to you, because in truth 4
 That prize is the wages for destroying the house.
 When one has not done the work he gets no wages;
 "Man gets nothing he has not worked for." 5
 Then you will bite your finger, saying, "Alas!
 That bright moon was hidden under a cloud.
 I did not do what they told me for my good;
 Now house and treasure are lost and my hand is empty."
 You have taken your house on lease or hired it;
 'Tis not your own property to buy and sell.
 As to the term of the lease, it is till your death;
 In that term you have to turn it to use.
 If before the end of the term of the lease
 You omit to derive profit from the house,
 Then the owner puts you out of it,
 And pulls it down himself to find the gold-mine.
 While you are now smiting your head in deep regret,
 And now tearing your beard to think of your folly,
 Saying, "Alas! that house belonged to me;
 I was blind and did not derive profit from it.
 Alas! the wind has carried off my dwelling
 Forever! 'O misery that rests on slaves!' 6
 In that house of mine I saw but forms and pictures;
 I was enchanted with that house so fleetin!
 I was ignorant of the treasure hidden beneath it,
 Otherwise I would have grasped an axe as a perfume.
 Ah! if I had administered the justice of the axe,
 I should now have been quit of sorrow.
 But I fixed my gaze on outward forms,
 Like an infant I sported with playthings.
 Well said the famous Hakim Sanai,
 'Thou art a child; thy house is full of pictures.'
 In his divine poem he gives this advice,
 'Sweep away the dust from thy house!'"
 They who recognize the almighty power of God do not ask where heaven is or where hell is.
 "O Pharaoh, if you are wise, I show you mercy;
 But if you are an ass, I give you the stick as an ass.
 So I will drive you out of your stable,
 Even as I make your head and ears bleed with my stick. 
 In this stable asses and men alike 
 Are deprived of peace by your oppressions. 
 See! I have brought a staff for the purpose of correcting 
 Every ass who does not prove tractable. 
 It turns into a serpent in vengeance against you, 
 Because you have become a serpent in deed and character. 
 You are an evil serpent, swelled to the size of a hill. 
 Yet look at the Serpent (constellation) in heaven. 
 This staff is a foretaste to you of hell, 
 Saying, 'Ho, take refuge in the light! 
 Otherwise you will fall into my jaws, 
 And will find no escape from my clutches!' 
 This staff even now became a serpent, 
 So that you need not ask, 'Where is God's hell?' 
 God makes a hell wheresover He wills; 
 He makes the very sky a snare and trap for birds. 
 He produces pains and aches in your teeth, 
 So that you say, "Tis a hell and serpent's bite.' 
 Or again He makes your spittle as honey, 
 So that you say, ''Tis heaven and wine of Paradise.' 
 He makes sugar to grow in your mouth, 
 That you may know the might of the divine decrees. 
 Therefore, bite not the innocent with your teeth; 
 Bear in mind the divine stroke that tarries not."
 God made the Nile blood to the Egyptians, 
 He preserved the Israelites from the peril, 
 That you might know how God discerns 
 Between the wise and the foolish wayfarers. 
 The Nile learned of God discernment 
 When it let the ones through and engulphed the others. 
 God's mercy made the Nile wise, 
 His wrath made Cain foolish. 
 Of His mercy He created wisdom in inanimate things, 
 And of His wrath He deprived the wise of wisdom. 
 Of His mercy wisdom accrued to inanimate things, 
 As a chastisement He took wisdom from the wise. 
 Here at His command wisdom was shed down like rain, 
 Whilst there wisdom saw His wrath and fled away. 
 Clouds and sun, and moon and lofty stars, 
 All come and go in obedience to His ordinance; 
 No one of them comes save at His appointed time; 
 It lingers not behind nor anticipates that time. 
 Whereas you understood not this secret, the prophets 
 Have instilled this knowledge into stone and staff; 
 So that you may infer that other inanimate things 
 Without doubt resemble in this stones and staves. 
 The obedience of stone and staff is shown to you, 
 And informs you of that of other inanimate things. 
 They cry, "We are all aware of God and obey Him; 
 We are not destructive by mere fortuitous chance." 
 Thus you know the water of the Nile when in flood 
 Made distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites. 
 You know the others are wise as earth, who, when cleft, 
 Knew Qarun and swallowed him up in vengeance. 
 Or like the moon, who heard the command and hasted 
 To sever itself into two halves in the sky. 7 
 Or like the trees and stones, which in all places 
 Were seen to bow down at the feet of Mustafa.
 The arguments between a Sunni and a Materialist 8 (Dahri) decided by the arbitrament of fire.
 Last night a Sunni said, "The world is transitory; 
 The heavens will pass away; 'God will be the heir.'" 9 
 A philosopher replied, "How know you they are transitory? 
 How knows the rain the transitory nature of the cloud? 
 Are you not a mere mote floating in the sunbeams? 
 How know you that the sun is transitory? 
 A mere worm buried in a dung-heap,
 How can it know the origin and end of the earth? 
 In blind belief you have accepted this from your father, 
 And through folly have clung to it ever since. 
 Tell me what is the proof of its transitoriness, 
 Or else be silent and indulge not in idle talk."
 The Sunni said, "One day I saw two persons 
 Engaged in argument on this deep question, 
 Yea, in dispute and controversy and argument. 
 At last a crowd was gathered round them. 
 I proceeded towards that company 
 To inform myself of the subject of their discourse. 
 One said, 'This sky will pass away; 
 Doubtless this building had a builder.' 
 The other said, 'It is eternal and without period; 
 It had no builder, or it was its own builder.' 
 The first said, 'Do you then deny the Creator, 
 The Bringer of day and night, the Sustainer of men?' 
 He answered, 'Without proof I will not listen 
 To what you say; 'tis only based on blind belief. 
 Go! bring proof and evidence, for never 
 Will I accept this statement without proof.' 
 He answered, 'The proof is within my heart, 
 Yea, my proofs are hidden in my heart. 
 From weakness of vision you see not the new moon; 
 If I see it, be not angry with me!' 
 Much talk followed, and the people were perplexed 
 About the origin and end of the revolving heavens. 
 Then the first said, 'O friend, within me is a proof 
 Which assures me of the transitoriness of the heavens. 
 I hold it for certain, and the sign of certainty 
 In him who possesses it is entering into fire. 
 Know this proof is not to be expressed in speech, 
 Any more than the feeling of love felt by lovers. 
 The secret I labor to express is not revealed 
 Save by the pallor and emaciation of my face. 
 When the tears course down my cheeks, 
 They are a proof of the beauty and grace of my beloved.' 
 The other said, "I take not these for a proof, 
 Though they may be a proof to common people." 
 The Sunni said, "When genuine and base coin boast, 
 Saying, 'Thou art false, I am good and genuine,' 
 Fire is the test ultimately, 
 When the two rivals are cast into the furnace."
 Accordingly both of them entered the furnace, 
 Both leapt into the fiery flame; 
 And the philosopher was burnt to ashes, 
 But the God-fearing Sunni was made fairer than before.
 *NOTES:
 1. This story is an expansion of Koran xliii. 50 and following verses, and of Koran xi. 
 2. See Koran xliii. 50. 
 3. Compare the Hadis, "Die before you die," i.e., mortify your carnal desires, and you will find spiritual treasure. 
 4. The Turkish commentator translates ruh by Haqq Yoluna, "for the sake of truth," "in the way of truth." The Lucknow commentator, as usual, shirks the difficulty. 
 5. Koran liii. 40. 
 6. Koran xxxvi, 29. 
 7. Koran liv. 1. 
 8. Ghazzali divides the ancient Greek philosophers into three classes: Dahriyun, Tabayiun, and Ilahiyun. Schmolders, Ecoles Philosophiques, p. 29. 
 9. Koran xv. 23. 

 STORY VII.
 The Courtier who quarreled with his Friend for saving his Life.
 A king was enraged against one of his courtiers, and drew his sword to slay him. The bystanders were all afraid to interfere, with the exception of one who boldly threw himself at the king's feet and begged him to spare the offender. The king at once stayed his hand, and laid down his sword, saying, "As you have interceded for him, I would gladly pardon him, even if he had acted as a very demon. I cannot refuse your entreaties, because they are the same as my own. In reality, it is not you who make these entreaties for him, but I who make them through your mouth. I am the real actor in this matter and you are only my agent. Remember the text, 'You shot not when you shot;' 1 you are, as it were, the foam, and I the mighty ocean beneath it. The mercy you show to this offender is really shown by me, the king." The offender was accordingly released and went his way; but, strange to say, he showed no gratitude to his protector, but, on the contrary, omitted to greet him when he met him, and in other ways refused to recognize the favor he had received from him. This behavior excited remark, and people questioned him as to the cause of his ingratitude to his benefactor. He replied, "I had offered up my life to the king when this man intervened. It was a moment when, according to the tradition, 'I was with God in such a manner that neither prophet nor angel found entrance along with me,' 2 and this man intruded between us. I desired no mercy save the king's blows; I sought no shelter save the king. If the king had cut off my head he would have given me eternal life in return for it. My duty is to sacrifice my life; it is the king's prerogative to give life. The night which is made dark as pitch by the king scorns the brightness of the brightest festal day. He who beholds the king is exalted above all thoughts of mercy and vengeance. Of a man raised to this exalted state no description is possible in this world, for he is hidden in God, and words like 'mercy' and 'vengeance' only express men's partial and weak views of the matter. It is true 'God taught Adam the names of all things,' 3 but that means the real qualities of things, and not such names as ordinary men use, clad in the dress of human speech. The words and expressions we use have merely a relative truth, and do not unfold absolute truth."
 He illustrates this by the reply made to the angel Gabriel by Abraham when he was cast into the fire by Nimrod. 4 Gabriel asked him if he could assist him, and Abraham answered, "No! I have no need of your help." When one has attained union with God he has no need of intermediaries. Prophets and apostles are needed as links to connect ordinary men with God, but he who hears the "inner voice" within him has no need to listen to outward words, even of apostles. Although that intercessor is himself dwelling in God, yet my state is higher and more lovely than his. Though he is God's agent, yet I desire not his intercession to save me from evil sent me by God, for evil at God's hand seems to me good. What seems mercy and kindness to the vulgar seems wrath and vengeance to God-intoxicated saints. God's severity and chastisements serve to exalt his saints, though they make the vulgar more ungodly than before, even as the water of the Nile was pure water to the Israelites, but blood to the Egyptians.
 Moses asks the Almighty, "Why hast Thou made men to destroy them?" 5
 Moses said, "O Lord of the day of account,
 Thou makest forms; wherefore, then, destroyest Thou them?
 Thou makest charming forms, both men and women;
 Wherefore, then, dost Thou lay them waste?"
 God answered, "I know that this query of thine
 Proceeds not from negation or vain curiosity.
 Otherwise I should chastise and punish thee;
 Yea, I should rebuke thee for this question.
 But thou seekest to discover in my actions
 The ruling principle and the eternal mystery,
 In order to inform the people thereof,
 And to make 'ripe' every 'raw' person.
 Yea, O messenger, thou questionest me that I may reveal
 My ways to the people, though thou knowest them.
 O Moses, go and sow seed in the ground
 In order to do justice to this question."
 When Moses had sowed and his seed had grown up,
 He took a sickle and reaped the corn,
 And then a divine voice reached his ears:
 "Why hast thou sown and nurtured the corn,
 And then cut it down directly it was ripe?"
 Moses replied, "Lord, I cut it and lay it low
 Because here I have grain and straw.
 Grain is out of place in the straw-yard,
 And straw is useless in the wheat-barn.
 'Tis wrong to mix these two,
 It is needful to sift them one from the other."
 God said, "From whom learnest thou this knowledge
 Whereby thou hast constructed a threshing-floor?"
 Moses said, "O Lord, Thou hast given me discernment."
 God said, "Then have not I also discernment?
 Amongst my creatures there are pure spirits,
 And also dark and befouled spirits.
 The oyster-shells are not all of the same value;
 Some contain pearls, and others black stones.
 It is needful to discern the bad from the good,
 Just as much as to sift wheat from straw.
 The people of this world exist in order to manifest
 And to disclose the 'hidden treasure.'
 Read, 'I was a hidden treasure, and desired to be known;
 Hide not the hidden treasure, but disclose it.
 Your true treasure is hidden under a false one,
 Just as butter is hidden within the substance of milk.
 The false one is this transitory body of yours,
 The true one your divine soul.
 Long time this milk is exposed to view,
 And the soul's butter is hidden and of no account.
 Stir up your milk assiduously with knowledge,
 So that what is hidden in it may be disclosed;
 Because this mortal is the guide to immortality,
 As the cries of revellers indicate the cup-bearer."
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran viii. 17. 
 2. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 120. 
 3. Koran ii. 29. 
 4. See Koran xxi. 68, and the Commentators thereon. 
 5. So Job x. 8: " Thy hands have made me, yet Thou dost destroy me." 

 STORY VIII.
 The Prince who, after having been beguiled by
 a Courtesan, returned to his True Love.
 A certain king dreamed that his dearly beloved son, a youth of great promise, had come to an untimely end. On awaking he was rejoiced to find that his son was still alive; but he reflected that an accident might carry him off at any moment, and therefore decided to marry him without delay, in order that the succession might be secured. Accordingly he chose the daughter of a pious Darvesh as a bride for his son, and made preparations for the wedding. But his wife and the other ladies of his harem did not approve of the match, considering it below the dignity of the prince to marry the daughter of a beggar. The king rebuked them, saying that a Darvesh who had renounced worldly wealth for the sake of God was not to be confounded with an ordinary beggar, and insisted on the consummation of the marriage. After the marriage the prince refused to have anything to do with his bride, though she was very fair to look on, and he carried on an intrigue with an ugly old woman who had bewitched him by sorcery. After a year, however, the king found some physicians who succeeded in breaking the spell, and the prince returned to his senses, and his eyes were opened to the superior attractions of his wife, and he renounced his ugly paramour and fell in love with his wife. This is a parable, the true wife being the Deity, the old paramour the world, and the physicians the prophets and saints. Another illustration is a child who played at besieging a mimic fort with his fellows, and succeeded in capturing it and keeping the others out. At this moment God "bestowed on him wisdom, though a child," 1 and it became to him a day "when a man flees from his brethren," 2 and he recognized the emptiness of this idle sport, and engaged in the pursuit of holiness and piety. This is followed by an anecdote of a devotee who had so concentrated his thoughts on things above that he was utterly careless of all earthly troubles, and was cheerful and rejoicing even in the midst of a severe famine.
 The world is the outward form of "Universal Reason" (Muhammad), and he who grieves him must expect trouble in the world. 3
 The whole world is the outward form of Universal Reason,
 For it is the father of all creatures of reason.
 When a man acts basely towards Universal Reason,
 Its form, the world, shows its teeth at him.
 Be loyal to this father and renounce disobedience,
 That this earthy house may furnish you golden carpets.
 Then the judgment-day will be the "cash of your state,"
 Earth and heavens will be transfigured before you. 4
 I am ever in concord with this father of ours,
 And earth ever appears to me as a Paradise.
 Each moment a f1###126###esh form, a new beauty,
 So that weariness vanishes at these ever-fresh sights.
 I see the world filled with blessings,
 Fresh waters ever welling up from new fountains.
 The sound of those waters reaches my ears,
 My brain and senses are intoxicated therewith.
 Branches of trees dancing like fair damsels,
 Leaves clapping hands like singers.
 These glories are a mirror shining through a veil;
 If the mirror were unveiled, how would it be?
 I tell not one in a thousand of them,
 Because every ear is stopped with doubt.
 To men of illusions these tales are mere good tidings,
 But men of knowledge deem them not tidings, but ready cash.
 This is illustrated by an anecdote of Ezra or 'Uzair and his sons.5 On his return from Babylon, whither he had been carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar, Ezra beheld the ruins of Jerusalem, and he said, "How shall God give life to this city after it hath been dead?" And God caused him to die for a hundred years, and then raised him again to life, and said to him, "How long hast thou waited?" He said, "I have waited a day." God said, "Nay, thou hast waited a hundred years. Look at the dead bones of thine ass; we will raise them and clothe them with flesh." Ezra was raised from the dead as a young man, whereas his sons were then, of course, very old men. They met him, and asked if he had seen their father. He replied, "I have seen him; he is coming." Some of them rejoiced, considering this good news; but others, who had loved him more dearly, knew him and fainted with joy. What was mere good tidings to the men of opinion was the "ready money of their state" to men of real knowledge.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xix. 13. 
 2. Koran lxxx. 34. 
 3. "Aql i Kull, Universal Reason, or the Logos, was identified with the prophet Muhammad." 
 4. Koran xiv. 49. 
 5. This story comes from Koran ii. 261. 

 STORY IX.
 The Mule and the Camel.
 A mule said to a camel, "How is it that I am always stumbling and falling down, whilst you never make a false step?" The camel replied, "My eyes are always directed upwards, and I see a long way before me, while your eyes look down, and you only see what is immediately under your feet." The mule admitted the truth of the camel's statement, and besought him to act as his guide in future, and the camel consented to do so. Just so partial reason cannot see beyond the grave, but real reason looks onward to the day of judgment, and, therefore, is enabled to steer a better course in this world. For this cause, men having only partial reason or mere opinion of their own ought to follow the guidance of the saints, according to the text, "O believers, enter not upon any affair ere God and his Apostle lead the way." 1
 Then follows another anecdote of an Egyptian who asked an Israelite to draw water for him from the Nile, because the water of the Nile turned to blood when drawn by an Egyptian. Afterwards the Egyptian asked the Israelite to pray for him, and the Israelite admonished him to renounce his egotism and conceit of his own existence, which blinded his eyes to divine verities. In illustration of this he tells the same story of an adulterous woman, which is known as the "Merchant's Tale" in Chaucer. This woman, desiring to carry on an intrigue with her paramour, climbed up a pear-tree to gather the fruit, and when she had reached the top she looked down, and pretended that she saw her husband misconducting himself with another woman. The husband assured her there was no one but himself there, and desired her to come down and see for herself. She came down and admitted there was no one there. Her husband then, at her request, ascended the tree, and she at once called her paramour, and began to amuse herself with him. Her husband saw her from his post in the tree, and began to abuse her; but she declared there was no man with her, and that the pear-tree made her husband see double, just as it had made her see double previously.
 The evolution of man.
 First he appeared in the class of inorganic things, 2
 Next he passed therefrom into that of plants.
 For years he lived as one of the plants,
 Remembering naught of his inorganic state so different;
 And when he passed from the vegetive to the animal state
 He had no remembrance of his state as a plant,
 Except the inclination he felt to the world of plants,
 Especially at the time of spring and sweet flowers.
 Like the inclination of infants towards their mothers,
 Which know not the cause of their inclination to the breast,
 Or the excessive inclination of young disciples
 Towards their noble and illustrious teachers.
 The disciple's partial reason comes from that Reason,
 The disciple's shadow is from that bough.
 When the shadows in the disciples cease,
 They know the reason of their attachment to the teachers.
 For, O fortunate one, how can the shadow move,
 Unless the tree that casts the shadow move as well?
 Again, the great Creator, as you know,
 Drew man out of the animal into the human state.
 Thus man passed from one order of nature to another,
 Till he became wise and knowing and strong as he is now.
 Of his first souls he has now no remembrance,
 And he will be again changed from his present soul.
 In order to escape from his present soul full of lusts
 He must behold thousands of reasonable souls.
 Though man fell asleep and forgot his previous states,
 Yet God will not leave him in this self-forgetfulness;
 And then he will laugh at his own former state
 Saying, " What mattered my experiences when asleep?
 When I had forgotten my prosperous condition,
 And knew not that the grief and ills I experienced
 Were the effect of sleep and illusion and fancy?
 In like manner this world, which is only a dream.
 Seems to the sleeper as a thing enduring for ever
 But when the morn of the last day shall dawn,
 The sleeper will escape from the cloud of illusion;
 Laughter will overpower him at his own fancied grieves
 When he beholds his abiding home and place.
 Whatever you see in this sleep, both good and evil,
 Will all be exposed to view on the resurrection day.
 Whatever you have done during your sleep in the world
 Will be displayed to you clearly when you awake.
 Imagine not that these ill deeds of yours exist not
 In this sleep of yours, and will not be revealed to you.
 But your present laughter will turn to weeping and woe
 On the day of revealing, O you who oppress captives!
 Your present wailing and sorrow and grieves,
 On the other hand, will be joy when you awake,
 O you, who have rent the garments of many Josephs,
 You will rise from your heavy sleep as a wolf.
 Your bad qualities will rise in the shape of wolves
 And rend you limb from limb in vengeance.
 By the law of retaliation blood sleeps not after death;
 Say not, "I shall die and obtain pardon."
 The retaliation of this world is illusive,
 It is mere sport compared to the retaliation to come.
 Therefore God calls the world "a pastime and a sport," 3
 For punishment in this world is sport compared to that.
 Here punishment is as the repression of quarrels,
 There it is as castration or circumcision.

 But this discourse is endless, O Moses,
 Go and leave these asses to their grazing!
 Let them fatten themselves with the food they love,
 For they are very wolves and objects of my wrath.
 Zu'l Qarnain at Mount Qaf. 4
 Zu'l Qarnain journeyed to Mount Qaf;
 He saw it was formed of a bright emerald,
 Forming as it were a ring round the world,
 Whereat all people are filled with wonder.
 He said, "Thou mighty hill, what are other hills?
 Before thee they are mere playthings."
 The Mount replied, "Those hills are my veins,
 But they are not like me in beauty and importance.
 A hidden vein from me runs to every city,
 The quarters of the world are bound to my veins.
 When God desires an earthquake under any city,
 He bids me shake one of my veins.
 Then in anger I shake that vein
 Which is connected with that particular city.
 When He says, 'Enough,' my vein remains still,
 I remain still, and then haste to perform my work.
 Now still like a plaster, and now operating;
 Now still like thought, and then speaking my thought.
 But they who are void of reason imagine
 That these earthquakes proceed from earth's vapors."

 Just so an ant who saw a pen writing on paper,
 Delivered himself to another ant in this way
 'That pen is making very wonderful figures,
 Like hyacinths and lilies and roses.'
 The other said, 'The finger is the real worker,
 The pen is only the instrument of its working.'
 A third ant said, ' No; the action proceeds from the arm,
 The weak finger writes with the arm's might.'
 So it went on upwards, till at last
 A prince of the ants, who had some wit
 Said, 'Ye regard only the outward form of this marvel,
 Which form becomes senseless in sleep and death.
 Form is only as a dress or a staff in the hand,
 It is only from reason and mind these figures proceed.'
 But he knew not that this reason and mind
 Would be but lifeless things without God's impulsion.
 The angel Gabriel appears to the Prophet Muhammad.
 Mustafa said to the angel Gabriel,
 "O friend, show me thy form as it really is;
 Show it to me openly and perceptibly,
 That I may behold thee with my eyes."
 Gabriel said, "Thou canst not do so, thou art too weak,
 Thy senses are exceeding weak and frail."
 Muhammad said, "Show it, that this body of mine may see
 To what extent its senses are frail and impotent.
 True, man's bodily senses are frail,
 But he possesses within him a mighty property. 5
 This body resembles flint and steel,
 But like them it has the power of kindling fire.
 Flint and steel are able to generate fire,
 From them springs fire which can destroy its parents."
 As he continued importuning him, Gabriel displayed
 His awful form, whereat the mountains were rent asunder.
 It occupied the sky from east to west.
 And Mustafa swooned with fear.
 When Gabriel beheld him swooning with fear,
 He came and clasped him in his arms.
 Address to Husamu-'d-Din.
 O light of God, Husamu-'d-Din, admit
 This ass's head into that melon-garden!
 For when this ass is killed in the slaughter-house
 That kitchen will bestow upon him a new existence.
 From me proceeds the form, from thee the spirit;
 Nay, form and spirit both proceed from thee!
 Thou art as Muhammad in heaven, O brilliant Sun!
 Be also as Muhammad on earth forever and ever!
 So that earth and heaven on high may be united
 With one heart, one worship, one aspiration!
 And schism and polytheism and duality disappear,
 And Unity abide in the Real Spiritual Being!
 When my spirit recognizes thy spirit,
 We remember our essential union and origin.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xlix. 1. 
 2. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 317, and the note. It is based on the Aristotelian doctrine of the ascending grades of the soul, or vital principle. 
 3. Koran xxix. 64. 
 4. Zu'l Qarnain, Chaucer's Dulkarn, means "He of the two horns," and here denotes Alexander the Great. 
 5. See the parallel passage in Gulshan i Raz, I. 431, and the note thereon. This property is the mystic "inner light" or spiritual intuition. 

     
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book V.

 STORY I.
 The Prophet and his Infidel Guest.

 AFTER the usual address to Husamu-'d-Din follows a comment on the precept addressed to Abraham, "Take four birds and draw them towards thee, and cut them in pieces."1 The birds are explained to be the duck of gluttony, the cock of concupiscence, the peacock of ambition and ostentation, and the crow of bad desires, and this is made the text of several stories. Beginning with gluttony, the poet tells the following story to illustrate the occasion of the Prophet's uttering the saying, Infidels eat with seven bellies, but the faithful with one." One day some infidels begged food and lodging of the Prophet. The Prophet was moved by their entreaties, and desired each of his disciples to take one of the infidels to his house and feed and lodge him, remarking that it was their duty to show kindness to strangers at his command, as much as to do battle with his foes. So each disciple selected one of the infidels and carried him off to his house; but there was one big and coarse man, a very giant Og, whom no one would receive, and the Prophet took him to his own house. In his house the Prophet had seven she-goats to supply his family with milk, and the hungry infidel devoured all the milk of those seven goats, to say nothing of bread and other viands. He left not a drop for the Prophet's family, who were therefore much annoyed with him, and when he retired to his chamber one of the servant-maids locked him in. During the night the infidel felt very unwell in consequence of having overeaten himself, and tried to get out into the open air, but was unable to do so, owing to the door being locked. Finally, he was very sick, and defiled his bedding. In the morning he was extremely ashamed, and the moment the door was opened he ran away. The Prophet was aware of what had happened, but let the man escape, so as not to put him to shame. After he had gone the servants saw the mess he had made, and informed the Prophet of it; but the Prophet made light of it, and said he would clean it up himself. His friends were shocked at the thought of the Prophet soiling his sacred hands with such filth, and tried to prevent him, but he persisted in doing it, calling to mind the text, "As thou livest, O Muhammad, they were bewildered by drunkenness," 2 and being, in fact, urged to it by a divine command. While he was engaged in the work the infidel came back to look for a talisman which he had left behind him in his hurry to escape, and seeing the Prophet's occupation he burst into tears, and bewailed his own filthy conduct. The Prophet consoled him, saying that weeping and penitence would purge the offence, for God says, "Little let them laugh, and much let them weep;" 3 and again, "Lend God a liberal loan;" 4 and again, "God only desireth to put away filthiness from you as His household, and with cleansing to cleanse you." 5 Prophet then urged him to bear witness that God was the Lord, even as was done by the sons of Adam, 6 explained how the outward acts of prayer and fasting bear witness of the spiritual light within. After being nurtured on this spiritual food the infidel confessed the truth of Islam, and renounced his infidelity and gluttony. He returned thanks to the Prophet for bringing him to the knowledge of the true faith and regenerating him, even as 'Isa had regenerated Lazarus. The Prophet was satisfied of his sincerity, and asked him to sup with him again. At supper he drank only half the portion of milk yielded by one goat, and steadfastly refused to take more, saying he felt perfectly satisfied with the little he had already taken. The other guests marveled much to see his gluttony so soon cured, and were led to reflect on the virtues of the spiritual food administered to him by the Prophet.
 Outward acts bear witness of the state of the heart within.
 Prayer and fasting and pilgrimage and holy war
 Bear witness of the faith of the heart.
 Giving alms and offerings and quitting avarice
 Also bear witness of the secret thoughts.
 So, a table spread for guests serves as a plain sign,
 Saying, "O guest, I am your sincere well-wisher."
 So, offerings and presents and oblations
 Bear witness, saying, "I am well pleased with you."
 Each of these men lavishes his wealth or pains,
 What means it but to say, "I have a virtue within me,
 Yea, a virtue of piety or liberality,
 Whereof my oblations and fasting bear witness"?
 Fasting proclaims that he abstains from lawful food,
 And that therefore he doubtless avoids unlawful food.
 And his alms say, "He gives away his own goods;
 It is therefore plain that he does not rob others."
 If he acts thus from fraud, his two witnesses
 (Fasting and alms) are rejected in God's court;
 If the hunter scatters grain
 Not out of mercy, but to catch game;
 If the cat keeps fast, and remains still
 In fasting only to entrap unwary birds;
 Making hundreds of people suspicious,
 And giving a bad name to men who fast and are liberal;
 Yet the grace of God, despite this fraud,
 May ultimately purge him from all this hypocrisy.
 Mercy may prevail over vengeance, and give the hypocrite
 Such light as is not possessed by the full moon.
 God may purge his dealings from that hypocrisy,
 And in mercy wash him clean of that defilement.
 In order that the pardoning grace of God may be seen,
 God pardons all sins that need pardon.
 Wherefore God rains down water from the sign Pisces,
 To purify the impure from their impurities. 7
 Thus acts and words are witnesses of the mind within,
 From these two deduce inferences as to the thoughts.
 When your vision cannot penetrate within,
 Inspect the water voided by the sick man.
 Acts and words resemble the sick man's water,
 Which serves as evidence to the physician of the body.
 But the physician of the spirit penetrates the soul,
 And thence ascertains the man's faith.
 Such an one needs not the evidence of fair acts and words
 "Beware of such, they spy out the heart."
 Require this evidence of act and word only from one
 Who is not joined to the divine Ocean like a stream.
 But the light of the traveler arrived at the goal,
 Verily that light fills deserts and wastes.
 That witness of his is exempt from bearing witness,
 And from all trouble and risk and good works.
 Since the brilliance of that jewel beams forth,
 It is exempted from these obligations.
 Wherefore require not from him act and word evidence,
 Because both worlds through him bloom like roses.
 What is this evidence but manifestation of hidden things,
 Whether it be evidence in word, or deed, or otherwise?
 Accidents serve only to manifest the secret essence;
 The essential quality abides, and accidents pass away.
 This mark of gold endures not the touchstone,
 But only the gold itself, genuine and undoubted.
 These prayers and holy war and fasting
 Will not endure, only the noble soul endures.
 The soul exhibits acts and words of this sort,
 Then it rubs its substance on the touchstone of God's command,
 Saying, "My faith is true, behold my witnesses!"
 But witnesses are open to suspicion.
 Know that witnesses must be purified,
 And their purification is sincerity, on that you may depend.
 The witness of word consists in speaking the truth,
 The witness of acts in keeping one's promises.
 If the witness of word lie, its evidence is rejected,
 And if the witness of act play false, it is rejected.
 Your words and acts must be without self-contradiction
 In order to be accepted without question.
 "Your aims are different," 8 and you contradict yourselves,
 You sew by day, and tear to pieces by night.
 How can God listen to such contradictory witness,
 Unless He be pleased to decide on it in mercy?
 Act and word manifest the secret thoughts and mind,
 Both of them expose to view the veiled secret.
 When your witnesses are purified they are accepted,
 Otherwise they are arrested and kept in durance.
 They enter into conflict with you, O stiff-necked one;
 "Stand aloof and wait for them, for they too wait." 9
 Prayers for spiritual enlightenment.
 O God, who hast no peer, bestow Thy favor upon me;
 Since Thou hast with this discourse put a ring in my ear,
 Take me by the ear, and draw me into that holy assembly
 Where Thy saints in ecstasy drink of Thy pure wine!
 Now that Thou hast caused me to smell its perfume,
 Withhold not from me that musky wine, O Lord of faith
 Of Thy bounty all partake, both men and women,
 Thou art ungrudging in bounties, O Hearer of prayer.
 Prayers are granted by Thee before they are uttered,
 Thou openest the door to admit hearts every moment!
 How many letters Thou writest with Thy Almighty pen!
 Through marveling thereat stones become as wax.
 Thou writest the Nun of the brow, the Sad of the eye,
 And the Jim of the ear, to amaze reason and sense.
 These letters exercise and perplex reason;
 Write on, O skilful Fair-writer!
 Imprinting every moment on Not-being the fair forms
 Of the world of ideals, to confound all thought! 10
 Yea, copying thereon the fair letters of the page of ideals,
 To wit, eye and brow and moustache and mole!
 For me, I will be a lover of Not-being, not of existence,
 Because the beloved of Not-being is more blessed. 11
 God made reason a reader of all these letters,
 To suggest to it reflections on that outpouring of grace. 12
 Reason, like Gabriel, learns day by day
 Its daily portion from the "Indelible Tablet." 13
 Behold the letters written without hands on Not-being!
 Behold the perplexity of mankind at those letters!
 Every one is bewildered by these thoughts,
 And digs for hidden treasure in hope to find it.
 This bewilderment of mankind as to their true aims is compared to the bewilderment of men in the dark looking in all directions for the Qibla, and recalls the text, "O the misery that rests upon my servants." 14
 Then follow reflections on the sacrifice by Abraham of the peacock of ambition and ostentation. Next comes a discourse on the thesis that all men can recognize the mercies of God and the wrath of God; but God's mercies are often hidden in His chastisements, and vice versa, and it is only men of deep spiritual discernment who can recognize acts of mercy and acts of wrath concealed in their opposites. The object of this concealment is to try and test men's dispositions; according to the text, "To prove which of you will be most righteous in deed." 15
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran ii. 262. 
 2. Koran xv. 72. 
 3. Koran ix. 33. 
 4. Koran lxxiii. 20. 
 5. Koran xxxiii. 33. 
 6. Koran vii. 171. 
 7. "Islam is the baptism of God" (Koran ii. 132). 
 8. Koran xcii. 4. 
 9. Koran xxxii. 30. i.e., Wait thou for their punishment, as they wait for thy downfall (Rodwell). 
 10. Here we have another Platonic doctrine. "Some say the belief of the Sufis is the same as that of the Ishraqin (Platonists)." Dabistan i Muzahib, by Shea and Troyer, iii. 281. 
 11. I.e., I will recognize the nonentity of all this phenomenal being, and court self-annihilation. 
 12. The Bulaq translator renders An naward thus. 
 13. The "Indelible Tablet" (of God's decrees) is here applied to the Logos-the channel through whom God renews the "world of creation" day by day. 
 14. Koran xxxvi. 29. 
 15. Koran lxvii. 2. 

 STORY II.
 The Arab and his Dog.
 The doctrine of the Mu'tazilites, 1 mentioned, that all men's intellects are alike and equal at birth, is again controverted, and the poet dwells on the essential differences which characterize the intellects akin to Universal Reason or the Logos, and those swayed by partial or carnal reason; the former, like the children of Israel, seeking exaltation through self-abasement; and the others, like Pharaoh, running after worldly rank and power, to their own destruction. In order to make probation of men, as already explained, God fills the world with deceptions, 2 making apparent blessings destructive to us, and apparent evils salutary. On the other hand, if men try to deceive God, they fail signally. Hypocritical weeping and wailing like that of Joseph's brethren is at once detected by God. Thus a certain Arab had a dog to which he was much attached; but one day the dog died of hunger. He at once began to weep and wail, and disturbed the whole neighborhood by his ostentatious grief One of the neighbors came and inquired into the matter, and on hearing that the dog had died of hunger, he asked the Arab why he had not fed him from the wallet of food which he had in his hand. The Arab said that he had collected this food to support himself, and made it a principle not to part with any of it to any one who could not pay for it; but that, as his tears cost him nothing, he was pouring them forth in token of the sorrow he felt for his dog's death. The neighbor, on hearing this, rebuked him for his hypocrisy, and went his way. Then follows a commentary on the text, "Almost would the infidels strike thee down with their very looks when they hear the reading of the Koran." 3
 *NOTES:
 1. The Mu'tazilites were one of the principal unorthodox sects. See Sale, Prelim. Disc., p. 112. 
 2. "Of them who devise stratagems, God is beast" (Koran iii. 47). 
 3. Koran lxviii. 51. 

 STORY III.
 The Sage and the Peacock.
 A sage went out to till his field, and saw a peacock busily engaged in destroying his own plumage with his beak. At seeing this insane self-destruction the sage could not refrain himself, but cried out to the peacock to forbear from mutilating himself and spoiling his beauty in so wanton a manner. The peacock then explained to him that the bright plumage which he admired so much was a fruitful source of danger to its unfortunate owner, as it led to his being constantly pursued by hunters, whom he had no strength to contend against; and he had accordingly decided on ridding himself of it with his own beak, and making himself so ugly that no hunter would in future care to molest him. The poet proceeds to point out that worldly cleverness and accomplishments and wealth endanger man's spiritual life, like the peacock's plumage; but, nevertheless, they are appointed for our probation, and without such trials there can be no virtue.
 "There is no monkery in Islam."1
 Tear not thy plumage off it cannot be replaced;
 Disfigure not thy face in wantonness, O fair one!
 That face which is bright as the forenoon sun,
 To disfigure it were a grievous sin.
 'Twere paganism to mar such a face as thine!
 The moon itself would weep to lose sight of it!
 Knowest thou not the beauty of thine own face?
 Quit this temper that leads thee to war with thyself!
 It is the claws of thine own foolish thoughts
 That in spite wound the face of thy quiet soul.
 Know such thoughts to be claws fraught with poison,
 Which score deep wounds on the face of thy soul.
 Rend not thy plumage off, but avert thy heart from it
 For hostility between them is the law of this holy war.
 Were there no hostility, that war would be impossible.
 lladst thou no lust, obedience to the law could not be. 2
 Hadst thou no concupiscence there could be no abstinence.
 Where no antagonist, what need is there of armies?
 Ah! make not thyself an eunuch, 3 not a monk,
 Because chastity is mortgaged to lust.
 Without lust denial of lust is impossible
 No man can display bravery against the dead.
 God says, "Expend;" 4 wherefore earn money.
 Since expenditure is impossible without previous gain?
 Although the passage contains only the word "Expend,"
 Read "Acquire first, and then expend."
 In like manner, when the King of kings says "Abstain," 5
 It implies an object of desire wherefrom to abstain.
 Again, "Eat ye," is said recognising the snares of lust,
 And afterwards, " Exceed not," 6 to enjoin temperance.
 When there is no subject,
 The existence of a predicate is not possible. 7
 When thou endurest not the pains of abstinence
 And fulfillest not the terms, thou gainest no reward.
 How easy those terms! how abundant that reward!
 A reward that enchants the heart and charms the soul!
 This is followed by the admonition that the only way to be safe from one's internal enemies is to annihilate self, a,nd to be absorbed in the eternity of God, as the light of the stars is lost in the light of the noonday sun. Everything but God is at once preyed on by others, and itself preys on others, like the fowl which, when catching a worm, was itself caught by a cat. Men are so intent on their own low objects of pursuit that they see not their foes who are trying to make them their prey. Thus it is said, "Before them have we set a barrier, and behind them a barrier, so that they shall not see." 8 Persons who lust after the vile pleasures of this world, and desire long life, not to serve God, but to satisfy their own carnal lusts, resemble the crow slain by Abraham, because he only lived for the sake of carrion; or Iblis, who prayed to be respited till the day of judgment, not for the purpose of reforming himself but only to do mischief to mankind. 9
 Prayers to God to change our base inclinations and give us higher aspirations.
 O Thou that changest earth into gold,
 And out of other earth madest the father of mankind,
 Thy business is changing things and bestowing favors,
 My business is mistakes and forgetfulness and error.
 Change my mistakes and forgetfulness to knowledge;
 I am altogether vile, make me temperate and meek.
 O Thou that convertest salt earth into bread,
 And bread again into the life of men;
 Thou who madest the erring soul a guide to men,
 And him that erred from the way a prophet; 10
 Thou makest some earth-born men as heaven,
 And muitipliest heaven-born saints on earth!
 But whoso seeks his water of life in worldly joys,
 To him comes death quicker than to the rest.
 The eyes of the heart which behold the heavens
 See that the Almighty Alchemist is ever working here.
 Mankind are ever being changed, and God's elixir
 Joins the body's garment without aid of needle.
 On the day that you entered upon existence,
 You were first fire, or earth, or air.
 If you had continued in that, your original state,
 How could you have arrived at this dignity of humanity?
 But through change your first existence remained not
 In lien thereof God gave you a better existence
 In like manner He will give you thousands of existences,
 One after another, the succeeding ones better than the former.
 Regard your original state, not the mean states,
 For these mean states remove you from your origin.
 As these mean states increase, union recedes;
 As they decrease, the unction of union increases.
 From knowing means and causes holy bewilderment fails;
 Yea, the bewilderment that leads you to God's presence.
 You have obtained these existences after annihilations;
 Wherefore, then, do you shrink from annihilation?
 What harm have these annihilations done you
 That you cling so to present existence, O simpleton?
 Since the latter of your states were better than the former,
 Seek annihilation and adore change of state.
 You have already seen hundreds of resurrections
 Occur every moment from your origin till now;
 One from the inorganic state to the vegetive state,
 From the vegetive state to the animal state of trial;
 Thence again to rationality and good discernment;
 Again you will rise from this world of sense and form.
 Ah! O crow, give up this life and live anew!
 In view of God's changes cast away your life!
 Choose the new, give up the old,
 For each single present year is better than three past.
 This is followed by a commentary on the saying of the Prophet, "Pity the pious man who falls into sin, and the rich man who falls into poverty, and the wise man who falls into the company of fools." This is illustrated by an anecdote of a young deer who was placed in the asses stable, and jeered at and maltreated by them. This suggests.
 *NOTES:
 1. A Hadis. 
 2. Cp. Bp. Butler, "On a state of probation as implying trial and danger" (Analogy, Chap. iv. Pt. 1). 
 3. Probably referring to Origin. 
 4. Koran ii. 264. 
 5. Koran iii. 200. 
 6. Koran vi. 142: "Eat of their fruit, but be not prodigal, and exceed not." 
 7. Or, "If there be no supporter, there can be nothing supported." 
 8. Koran xxxvi. 8. 
 9. Koran vii. 13. 
 10. Koran xciii. 7. 

 STORY IV.
 Muhammad Khwarazm Shah and the Rafizis of Sabzawar.
 Muhammad Shah was the last prince but one of the Khwarazm dynasty of Balkh, to which family both the poet's mother and grandmother belonged. He was the reigning prince in AD. 1209, the year in which the poet's father fled from Balkh, and was defeated by Chingiz Khan a year or two later. In one of his campaigns Muhammad Shah captured the city of Sabzawar, in Khorasan, which city as inhabited by Rafizis or rank Shi'as, naturally most obnoxious to a Sunni prince claiming descent from the first Khahif Abu Bakr. After the city was taken the inhabitants came out, and proceeded with all humility to beg their lives, offering to pay any amount of ransom and tribute that he might impose upon them. But the prince replied that he would spare their lives only on one condition, viz., that they produced from Sabzawar a man bearing the name Abu Bakr. They represented to him that it would be impossible to find in the whole city a single man bearing a name so hateful to the Shi'as; but the prince was inexorable, and refused to alter the conditions. So they went and searched all the neighbourhood, and at last found a traveler lying at the roadside at the point of death, who bore the name of Abu Bakr. As he was unable to walk, they placed him on a bier and carried him into the king's presence. The king reproached them for their contempt and neglect of this pious Sunni, the only true heart amongst them, and reminded them of the saying of the Prophet, "God regards not your outward show and your wealth, but your hearts and your deeds." In this parable, says the poet, Sabzawar is the world, the poor Sunni the man of God, despised and rejected of men, and the king is God Almighty, who seeks a true heart amongst evil men.
 Satan's snares for mankind.
 Thus spake cursed Iblis to the Almighty,
 "I want a mighty trap to catch human game withal."
 God gave him gold and silver and troops of horses
 Saying, "You can catch my creatures with these."
 Iblis said, "Bravo!" but at the same time hung his lip,
 And frowned sourly like a bitter orange.
 Then God offered gold and jewels from precious mines
 To that laggard in the faith,
 Saying, "Take these other traps, O cursed one."
 But Iblis said, "Give me more, O blessed Defender."
 God gave him succulent and sweet and costly wines,
 And also store of silken garments.
 But Iblis said, " O Lord, I want more aids than these,
 In order to bind men in my twisted rope
 So firmly that Thy adorers, who are valiant men
 May not, man-like, break my bonds asunder."
 When at last God showed him the beauty of women,
 Which bereaves men of reason and self-control,
 Then Iblis clapped his hands and began to dance,
 Saying, "Give me these; I shall quickly prevail with these!"
 This is followed by comments on the text, "Of goodliest fabric we created man, and then brought him down to the lowest of the low, saving those who believe and do the things that are right;" 1 and on the verses, 
 "If thou goest the road, they will show thee the road;
 If thou becomest naught, they will turn thee to being."
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xcv. 4. 

 STORY V.
 The Man who claimed to be a Prophet.
 A man cried out to the people, "I am a prophet; yea, the most excellent of the prophets." The people seized him by the collar, saying, "How are you any more a prophet than we are?" He replied, "Ye came to earth from the spirit-world as sleeping children, seeing nothing of the way; but I came hither with my eyes open, and marked all the stages of the way like a guide." On this they led him before the king, and begged the king to punish him. The king, seeing that he was very infirm, took pity on him, and led him apart and asked him where his home was. The man replied, "O king, my home is in the house of peace (heaven), and I am come thence into this house of reproach." The king then asked him what he had been eating to make him rave as he did, and he said if he lived on mere earthly bread he should not have claimed to be a prophet. His preaching was entirely thrown away on worldly men, who only desire to hear news of gold or women, 1 and are annoyed with all who speak to them of the eternal life to come. They cleave to the present life so fast that they hate those who tell them of another. They say, "Ye are telling us old fables and raving idly;" and when they see pious men prospering they envy them, and, like Satan, become more opposed to them. God said, "What thinkest thou of him who holdeth back a servant of God when he prayeth? " 2
 The king then said to him, "What is this inspiration of yours, and what profit do you derive from it?" The man answered, "What profit is there that I do not derive from it? I grant I am not rich in worldly wealth, yet the inspiration God teaches me is surely as precious as that which He taught the bees. 3 God taught them to make wax and honey, and He teaches me nobler things than these. Whoso has his face reddened with celestial wine is a prophet of like disposition with Muhammad, and whoso is unaffected by that spiritual drink is to be accounted an enemy to God and man."
 The Prophet's prayer for the envious people.
 O Thou that givest aliment and power and stability,
 Set free the people from their instability.
 To the soul that is bent double by envy
 Give uprightness in the path of duty,
 Give them self-control, "weigh down their scales," 4
 Release them from the arts of deceivers.
 Redeem them from envying, O gracious One,
 That through envy they be not stoned like Iblis. 5
 Even in their fleeting prosperity, see how the people
 Burn up wealth and men through envy!
 See the kings who lead forth their armies
 To slay their own people from envy!
 Lovers of sweethearts have conceived jealousy,
 And attempted one another's lives,
 Read " Wais and Ramin" and "Khosrau and Shirin"
 To see what these fools have done to one another.
 Lovers and beloved have both perished;
 And not themselves only, but their love as well.
 'Tis God alone who agitates these nonentities
 Making one nonentity fall in love with another.
 In the heart that is no heart envy comes to a head,
 Thus Being troubles nonentity.
 This is followed by an anecdote of a lover who recounted to his mistress all the services he had done, and all the toils he had undergone for her sake, and inquired if there was anything else he could do to testify the sincerity of his love. His mistress replied, "All these things you have done are but the branches of love; you have not yet attained to the root, which is to give up life itself for the sake of your beloved." The lover accordingly gave up his life, and enjoyed eternal fruition of his love, according to the text, "O thou soul which art at rest, return to thy Lord, pleased, and pleasing Him." 6 
 This is followed by a statement of the doctrine of the jurist Abu hanifa, to whose school the poet belonged, that weeping, even aloud, during prayer does not render the prayers void, provided that the weeping be caused by thoughts of the world to come, and not by thoughts of this present world. 7 And, apparently in allusion to the name Abu Hanifa, the poet recalls the text, "They followed the faith of Abraham, the orthodox" (Hanifun). 8
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran iii. 22. 
 2. Koran xcvi. 9. 
 3. Koran xvi. 70. 
 4. Koran ci. 5. 
 5. Koran xv. 17. The sin of Iblis was his envy of Adam. 
 6. Koran lxxxix. 27 
 7. Mishkat ul Masabih, i. p. 209, note. 
 8. Koran iv. 124. 

 STORY VI.
 The Disciple who blindly imitated his Shaikh.
 An ignorant youth entered an assembly of pious persons who were being addressed by a holy Shaikh. He saw the Shaikh weeping copiously, and in mere blind and senseless imitation he copied the Shaikh's behavior, and wept as copiously himself, though he understood not a word of the discourse. In fact, he behaved just like a deaf man who sees those around him laughing, and laughs himself out of compliment to them, though he knows not the subject of their merriment, and is obliged to have it explained to him before he can laugh again with real perception of the joke. After he had wept in this ignorant way for some time he made due obeisance to the Shaikh, and took his departure. But one of the Shaikh's true disciples, being jealous for the honor of his master, followed him, and thus addressed him, "I adjure you by Allah that you go not and say, 'I saw the Shaikh weeping, and I too wept like him.' Your ignorant and mere imitative weeping is totally unlike the weeping of that holy saint. Such weeping as his is only possible to one who has, like him, waged the spiritual war for thirty years. His weeping is not caused by worldly grieves, but by the deep concerns of the spirit. You cannot perceive by reason or sense the spiritual mysteries that are open and plain to his enlightened vision, any more than the darkness can behold the light. His breathings are as those of 'Isa, and not like mere human sighs raised by worldly sorrows. His tears and his smiles and his speeches are not his own, but proceed from Allah. Fools like you are ignorant of the motive and design of saints' actions, and therefore only harm themselves if they try to imitate them, without understanding their meaning." To illustrate this a curious story is told of a foolish lady who copied a trick of her clever slave-girl, without understanding the modus operandi, and by so doing caused her own death. In like manner parrots are taught to speak without understanding the words. The method is to place a mirror between the parrot and the trainer. The trainer, hidden by the mirror, utters the words, and the parrot, seeing his own reflection in the mirror, fancies another parrot is speaking, and imitates all that is said by the trainer behind the mirror. So God uses prophets and saints as mirrors whereby to instruct men, being Himself all the time hidden behind these mirrors, viz., the bodies of these saints and prophets; and men, when they hear the words proceeding from these mirrors, are utterly ignorant that they are really being spoken by "Universal Reason" or the "Word of God" behind the mirrors of the saints.
 The worthlessness of mere blind imitation (taqlid) of religious exercises.
 When a friend tells a joke to his friend,
 The deaf man who listens laughs twice over;
 The first time from imitation and foolishness,
 Because he sees all the party laughing;
 Yet, though he laughs like the others,
 He is then ignorant of the subject of their laughter;
 Then he inquires what the laughter was about,
 And, on hearing it, proceeds to laugh a second time.
 Wherefore the blind imitator is like a deaf man,
 In regard to the joy he feigns to feel.
 The light is the Shaikh's, the fountain the Shaikh's,
 And the outpouring of joy is also the Shaikh's, not his.
 'Tis like water in a vessel, or light through a glass;
 If they think they come from themselves, they are wrong.
 When the vessel leaves the fountain, it sees its error;
 It sees the water in it comes from the fountain.
 The glass also learns, when the moon sets,
 That its light proceeded from the shining of the moon.
 When his eyes are opened by the command, "Arise!" 1
 Then that disciple smiles a second time, like the dawn.
 He laughs also at his own previous laughter,
 Which overtook him out of mere blind imitation.
 When he returns from his long and distant wanderings
 He says, "Lo! this was the truth, this the secret!
 With what blindness and misconception did I pretend.
 To experience joy in that distant valley?
 What a delusion I was under! what a mistake!
 My feeble wit conjured up vain imaginations."
 How can an infant on the road know the thoughts of men?
 How far its fancies are removed from true knowledge!
 The thoughts of infants run on the nurse and milk,
 Or on raisins or nuts, or on crying and wailing.
 The blind imitator is like a feeble infant,
 Even though he possesses fine arguments and proofs.
 His preoccupation with obscure arguments and proofs
 Drags him away from insight into truth.
 His stock of lore, which is the salve of his eyes,
 Bears him off and plunges him in difficult questions.
 Ah! man of imitation, come out of Bokhara! 2
 And humble yourself in order to be exalted.
 Then you will, behold another Bokhara within you,
 Whereof the heroes ignore these questions of law.
 Though a footman may be swift of foot on land,
 Yet on the sea he is as one with ruptured tendons.
 That footman is only "carried by land," 3
 But he who is "carried by sea" is the truly learned one.
 The King of kings showers special favors upon him;
 Know this, O man pledged to vain illusions!
 The mere legal theologian is impotent to behold the light of the Spirit.
 When the day dawns from heaven night flees away;
 What, then, can its darkness know of the nature of light?
 The gnat scuds away before the blast of the winds;
 What, then, knows the gnat of the savor of the winds?
 When the Eternal appears the transitory is annulled;
 What, then, knows he transitory of the Eternal?
 When He sets foot on the transitory He bewilders it;
 When it is become naught He sheds his light upon it, 4
 If you wish, you can adduce hundreds of precedents,
 But I take no heed of them, O man poor in spirit!
 The letters Lam, Mim, and Ha, Mim prefixed to some Suras
 Resemble the staff of Moses, when fully understood. 5
 Ordinary letters resemble these 'to outward view,
 But are far beneath them in signification.
 If an ordinary man 'take a staff and try it,
 Will it prove like the staff of Moses in the test?
 This breath of 'Isa is not like every ordinary breath,
 Which proceeds from mere human joy or sorrow.
 These Alif, Mim, Ha and Mim, O father,
 Proceed from the Lord of mankind.
 If you have sense, regard not in the same way as these
 Every ordinary Alif and Lam which resembles these;
 Although these sacred letters consist of common ones,
 And resemble common ones in their composition.
 Muhammad himself was formed of flesh and skin,
 Although no man is of the same genus as he.
 He had flesh and skin and bones,
 Although no man resembles him in composition;
 Because in his composition were contained divine powers,
 Whereby all human flesh was confounded.
 In like manner the composition of the letters Ha, Mim
 Is far exalted above ordinary compounds of letters;
 Because from these mysterious compositions comes life,
 Even as utter confusion follows the last trump.
 That staff becomes a serpent and divides the Nile,
 Like the staff of Ha, Mim, by the grace of God.
 Its outward form resembles the outward forms of others,
 Yet the disk of a cake differs much from the moon's disk.
 The saint's weeping and laughter and speech
 Are not his own, but proceed from God.
 Whereas fools look only to outward appearances,
 These mysteries are totally hidden from them;
 Of necessity the real meaning is veiled from them,
 For the mystery is lost in the intervening medium.
 Then follows an anecdote of a man who heard whelps barking in their mother's womb. A voice came from heaven and explained that these whelps were like the men who have not emerged into the light of truth, but are still veiled in spiritual darkness, and, though they make pretensions to spiritual sight, their discourses are useless, both to procure spiritual food for themselves, and to warn their hearers of spiritual dangers.
 Next comes an anecdote of a pious man of Zarwan, who made a point of giving to the poor four times the legal amount of alms due from his growing crops. Thus, instead of paying one-tenth on each crop, which is the legal amount enjoined by the Prophet, 6 he was wont to pay one-tenth of the green ears of corn, another tenth of the ripe wheat, a third tenth of the threshed grain, and a fourth of the bread made therefrom, and so on with grapes and other produce of hi garden. In recognition of his piety God blessed his garden and made it bear fruit abundantly. But his sons, who were blind to spiritual matters, saw only his lavish expenditure upon the poor, and could not see the divine blessing upon the garden, called down by his liberality, and rebuked him for his extravagance. There is no limit to the divine bounty, because God's ability to bestow bounties, unlike human ability, is unbounded and infinite.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxxiv. 2. Dawn smiles first as "false dawn," and the second time as "true dawn." 
 2. Alluding to Bokhari, the author of the "Sahih Bokhari," the first and most esteemed collection of traditions. 
 3. Koran xvii. 72. The man of "external knowledge" is "carried only by land," but the mystic is led over sea as well. 
 4. When reason is annihilated, the "Truth" is reflected in the resulting caput mortuum or Not-being, as in a mirror (Gulshan i Raz, I. 125). 
 5. These letters were supposed to have mysterious meanings. See Rodwell, Koran, p. 17, note. 
 6. Miskat ul Masabih, i. 417. 

 STORY VII.
 How Adam was created out of a handful of earth brought by an Angel.
 When the Almighty determined to create mankind to be proved by good and evil, He deputed the angel Gabriel to bring a handful of earth for the purpose of forming Adam's body. Gabriel accordingly girded his loins and proceeded to the Earth to execute the divine commands. But the Earth, being apprehensive that the man so created would rebel against God and draw down God's curse upon her, remonstrated with Gabriel, and besought him to forbear. She represented that Gabriel would at the last day be pre-eminent over all the eight angels who would then support the throne, 1 and that it therefore was only right that he should prefer mercy to judgment. At last Gabriel granted her prayer, and returned to heaven without taking the handful of earth. Then God deputed Michael on the same errand, and the Earth made similar excuses to him, and he also listened to her crying, and returned to heaven without taking a handful. He excused himself to the Almighty by citing the example of the people to whom the prophet Jonah was sent, who were delivered from the threatened penalty in consequence of their lamentation for their sins; 2 and the text, "If He please, He will deliver you from that which ye shall cry to Him to avert." 3 Then God sent the angel Israfil on the same errand, and he also was diverted from the execution of it by a divine intimation. At last God sent 'Izrail, the angel of death, who, being of sterner disposition than the others, resolutely shut his ears to the Earth's entreaties, and brought back the required handful of earth. The Earth pressed him with the argument that God's command to bear away a handful of her substance against her will did not override the other divine command to take pity on suppliants; but 'Izrail would not listen to her, remarking that, according to the canons of theological interpretation, it was not allowable to have recourse to analogical reasoning to evade a plain and categorical injunction. He added, that in executing this injunction, painful though it might be, he was to be regarded only as a spear in the hand of the Almighty. The moral is, that when any of God's creatures do us a harm, we ought to regard them only as instruments of God, who is the Only Real Agent.
 God the Only Real Agent.
 Do not, like fools, crave mercy from the spear,
 But from the King in whose hand the spear is held.
 Wherefore do you cry to spear and sword,
 Seeing they are captives in the hand of that Noble One?
 He is as Azar, maker of idols; I am only the idol;
 Whatever instrument He makes me, that I am.
 If He makes of me a cup, a cup am I;
 If He makes of me a dagger, a dagger am I.
 If He makes me a fountain, I pour forth water;
 If He makes me fire, I give forth heat.
 If He makes me rain, I produce rich crops;
 If He makes me a dart, I pierce bodies.
 If He makes me a snake, I dart forth poison;
 If He makes me a friend, I serve my friends.
 I am as the pen in the fingers of the writer,
 I am not in a position to obey or not at will.
 On the return of 'Izrail to heaven with the handful of earth, God said he would make him the angel of death. 'Izrail represented that this would make him very hateful to men; but God said 'Izrail would operate by disease and sickness, and men would not look for any cause beyond these diseases, according to the text, "He is nearer to you than ye are; yet ye see Him not." 4 Moreover, death is in reality a boon to the spiritual, and it is only fools who cry, "Would that this world might endure for ever, and that there were no such thing as death!"
 Death is gain, for "God will change their evil things into good things." 5
 One said, "The world would be a pleasant place
 If death never set foot within it."
 Another answered, "If there were no death,
 The complicated world would be worth not a jot.
 It would be a crop raised in a desert,
 Left neglected and never threshed out.
 Thou fanciest that to be death, which is life,
 Thou sowest thy seed in salt ground.
 Carnal reason deceives us; do thou contradict it,
 For that fool takes what is really death to be life.
 O God, show us all things in this house of deception,
 Show them all as they really are!" 6
 It is said in the Hadis that on the last day
 The command, "Arise," will come to every single body.
 The blast of the last trump will be God's command
 To every atom to lift its head from the earth.
 The souls, also, of each will return to their bodies,
 Even as sense returns to bodies awaking from sleep.
 On that morn each soul will recognize its own body,
 And return to its own ruin like hidden treasure.
 It will recognize its own body and enter it.
 The soul of the goldsmith will not enter the tailor;
 The soul of the wise will enter the body of the wise,
 The soul of the unjust the body of the unjust.
 In like manner as the souls will fly into their clay,
 So will the books fly into their right hands and left. 7
 God will place in their hands their books of greed and liberality,
 Of sin and piety, and whatever they have practiced.
 When they shall awake from sleep on that morning,
 All the evil and good they have done will recur to them.
 Every thought which has dwelt in them during life
 Will appear as a form visible to all, 8
 Like the thought of an architect realized in a house,
 Or the perfect plant issuing from the seed in the ground.
 From onion and saffron and poppy
 The hand of spring will unfold the secret of winter.
 This one will be verdant and flourish, saying, "We are the pious;"
 That other will hang his head like the violet,
 With tears starting from his eyes through deadly fear;
 Yea, tens of founts of tears through terrible dread;
 With eyes wide opened in deadly apprehension
 Lest his book may be placed in his left hand.
 Then will the evildoer be sent to the fiery prison,
 For thorn can in no wise escape the flame.
 When his guardian angels behind and before,
 Who before were unseen, shall appear like patrols,
 They will hurry him off, pricking him with their spears,
 And saying, "O dog, begone to thy kennel!"
 Then the prisoner will cry, "O Lord, I am a hundred,
 Yea, a hundred times as wicked as Thou sayest.
 But in mercy Thou veilest my sins,
 Otherwise my vileness were known to Thy all-seeing eye.
 But, independently of my own works and warfare,
 Independently of my faith or unfaith, good or evil,
 Independently of my poor devotion to Thee,
 And of my thoughts and the thoughts of hundreds like me,
 I fix my hopes on Thy mercy alone.
 Whether Thou adjudge me upright or rebellious,
 I sue for free pardon from Thy unbought justice.
 O Lord, who art gracious without thought of consequence,
 I set my face towards that free grace of Thine;
 I have no regard to my own acts.
 I set my face towards this hope,
 Seeing that Thou gayest me my being first of all;
 Thou gayest me the garment of being unasked,
 Wherefore I firmly trust in Thy free grace.
 When he thus enumerates his sins and faults,
 God at last will grant him pardon as a free gift,
 Saying, "O angels, bring him back to me,
 Since the eyes of his heart were set on hope,
 Without care for consequences I set him free,
 And draw the pen through the record of his sins!"
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxix. 17. 
 2. Koran x. 98. 
 3. Koran vi 41. 
 4. Koran lvi. 84. 
 5. Koran xxv. 70. The "final restitution" of all by free grace. 
 6. Cp. the Hadis: "Inspiration is a light that shines in the heart, and shows the nature of all things as they really are." 
 7. See Koran lxix. 18. 
 8. See the parallel passage in Guishan i Raz, 1. 690. 

 STORY VIII.
 Mahmud and Ayaz. 1
 Mahmud, the celebrated king of Ghazni, had a favorite named Ayaz, who was greatly envied by the other courtiers. One day they came to the king and informed him that Ayaz was in the habit of retiring to a secret chamber, and locking himself in, and that they suspected he had there concealed coin stolen from the treasury, or else wine and forbidden drink. The fact was, that Ayaz had placed in that chamber his old shoes and the ragged dress which he used to wear before the king had promoted him to honor, and used to retire there every day and wear them for a time, in order to remind himself of his lowly origin, and to prevent himself from being puffed up with pride. This he did in accordance with the text, "Let man reflect out of what he was created." 2 The intoxication of the present life puffs up many with false pride, even as Iblis, who refused to worship Adam, saying, "Who is Adam, that he should be lord over me?" This he said because he was one of the Jinn, who are all created of fire. 3 Adam, on the other hand, confessed his own vileness, saying, "Thou hast formed me out of clay." The king was well assured of the fidelity of Ayaz; but in order to confute those who suspected him, he ordered them to go by night and break open that chamber and bring away all the treasure and other things hidden in it. It is a characteristic of evildoers to think evil of the saints, because they judge of their conduct by the light of their own evil natures, as the crooked foot makes a crooked footprint, and as the spider sees things distorted through the web he has spun himself The hug's conduct in this did not betoken any diminution of his love for Ayaz, because lover and beloved are always as ono soul, though they may be opposed to outward view. Accordingly the courtiers proceeded to the chamber of Ayaz at night, and broke open the door, and searched the floor and the walls, but found only the old shoes and the ragged dress. They then returned to the king discomfited and shamefaced, even as the wicked who have slandered the saints will be on the day of judgment, according to the text, "On the resurrection day thou shalt see those who have lied of God with their faces black." 4 Then they besought the king to pardon their offence, but he refused, saying that their offence had been committed against Ayaz, and that he would leave it to Ayaz to decide whether they should be punished or pardoned. If Ayaz showed mercy it would be well; and if he punished it would be well also, for "the law of retaliation is the security for life." 5 Only he enjoined him to pronounce his sentence without delay, because "Waiting is punishment."
 A description of genuine union with God.
 A loved one said to her lover to try him,
 Early one morning, "O such an one, son of such an one,
 I marvel whether you hold me more dear,
 Or yourself; tell me truly, O ardent suitor!"
 He answered, "I am so entirely absorbed in you,
 That I am full of you from head to foot.
 Of my own existence nothing but the name remains
 In my being is nothing besides you, O Object of desire!
 Therefore am I thus lost in you,
 Just as vinegar is absorbed in honey;
 Or as a stone, which is changed into a pure ruby,
 Is filled with the bright light of the sun.
 In that stone its own properties abide not
 It is filled with the sun's properties altogether;
 So that, if afterwards it holds itself dear
 'Tis the same as holding the sun dear, O beloved!
 And if it hold the sun dear in its heart,
 'Tis clearly the same as holding itself dear.
 Whether that pure ruby hold itself dear,
 Or hold the sun dear,
 There is no difference between the two preterences;
 On either hand is naught but the light of dawn.
 But till that stone becomes a ruby it hates itself
 For till it becomes one 'I,' it is two separate 'I's,'
 For 'tis then darkened and purblind,
 And darkness is the essential enemy of light.
 If it then hold itself dear, it is an infidel;
 Because that self is an opponent of the mighty Sun.
 Wherefore 'tis unlawful for the stone then to say 'I,
 Because it is entirely in darkness and nothingness."
 Pharaoh said, "I am the Truth," and was laid low.
 Mansur Hallaj said, "I am the Truth," and escaped free.' 6
 Pharaoh's "I" was followed by the curse of God;
 Mansur's "I" was followed by the mercy of God, O beloved!
 Because Pharaoh was a stone, Mansur a ruby;
 Pharaoh an enemy of light, Mansur a friend.
 O prattler, Mansur's "I am He" was a deep mystic saying,
 Expressing union with the light, not mere incarnation. 7
 *NOTES:
 1. All the latter part of this story is a parable of the last judgement. 
 2. Koran lxxxvi. 5. 
 3. Koran xviii. 48, and lv. 14. 
 4. Koran xxxix. 61. 
 5. Koran ii. 17. 
 6. See Guishan i Raz, Answer vii. p. 45. Mansur Hallaj (woolcarder), the celebrated Sufi who was put to death at Baghdad in 309 (A.H.) 
 7. See Guishan i Raz, i. 454, and note. The doctrine of the descent of the Deity into man (Halul), or incarnation, is rejected both by Rumi and Shabistari in favor of the doctrine of intimate union (Ittihad or Wahdat). 

 STORY IX.
 The sincere repentance of Nasuh.
 Ayaz, in weighing the pros and cons in regard to pardoning the courtiers, remarks that professions of faith and penitence when contradicted by acts are worthless, according to the text, "If ye ask them who hath created the heavens and the earth, they will say 'God;' yet they devise lies." 1 And in illustration of this he tells a story of a faithless husband who retired to a secret chamber ostensibly to say his prayers, but really to carry on an intrigue with a slave-girl, and the falsity of whose pretences was demonstrated by ocular proof of his condition. In like manner, on the day of resurrection man's hands and eyes and feet will bear witness against him of the evil actions done by him, thus confuting his pretences to piety. The test of a sincere repentance is abhorrence of past sins and utter abandonment of all pleasure in them, the old love for sin being superseded by the new love for holiness. Such a repentance was that of Nasuh. Nasuh in his youth disguised himself in female attire and obtained employment as attendant at the women's baths, where he used to carry on shameful intrigues with some of the women who frequented the bath. At last, however, his eyes were opened to the wickedness of his conduct, and be went to a holy man and besought him to pray for him. The holy man, imitating the long-suffering of the "Veiler of sins" did not so much as name his sin, but prayed, saying, "God give thee repentance of the sin thou knowest!" The prayer of that holy man was accepted, because the prayers of such an one are the same as God's own will, according to the tradition, "My servant draws nigh to me by pious works till I love him; and when I love him I am his ear, his eye, his tongue, his foot, his hand; and by me he hears, sees, talks, walks, and feels. "Nasuh then returned to the bath a truly repentant man; but soon afterwards one of the women frequenting the bath lost a valuable jewel, and the king gave order that all persons connected with the bath should be stripped and searched. When the officers came to the bath to execute this order Nasuh was overwhelmed with fear, for he knew that if his sex were discovered he would certainly be put to death. In his fear he called upon God for deliverance, and swooned with fear and became beside himself, so that his natural self was annihilated, and he became a new creature, even as a corpse rising from the grave. When he came to himself he found that the lost jewel had been found, and those who had suspected him came and begged his pardon. Shortly afterwards the king's daughter sent for him to come and wash her head; but, in spite of her imperative commands, he refused to place himself again in the way of temptation, lest he might fall again, and God might "make easy to him the path to destruction." 2
 Man's members will bear witness against him on the day of judgement, and confute his claims to piety.
 On the resurrection day all secrets will be disclosed;
 Yea, every guilty one will be convicted by himself.
 Hand and foot will bear testimony openly
 Before the Almighty concerning their owner's sins.
 Hand will say, "I stole such and such things;"
 Lip will say, "I asked for such and such things."
 Foot will say, "I went after my own desires;"
 Arm will say, "I embraced the harlot."
 Eye will say, "I looked after forbidden things;"
 Ear will say, "I listened to evil talk."
 Thus the man will be shown to be a liar from head to foot,
 Since his own members will prove him to be a liar.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xxix. 61. 
 2. Koran xcii. 10. 

 STORY X.
 The Lion, the Fox, and the Ass.
 As an instance of false and insincere repentance, a story is next told, which is also found in the fifth chapter of the Anwar i Suhaili. A lion had been wounded in fight with a male elephant, and was unable to hunt game for himself. In this strait he called a fox who was wont to attend upon him, and to live on the meat that was left from his repasts, just as disciples attending on a saint subsist on the heavenly food dropping from his lips. He called this fox, and bade him go and entice some animal to come near his lair, so that he might kill it and make a meal of it. The fox went and searched the neighborhood, and at last found a lean and hungry ass who was grazing in a stony place where there was little or no grass. The fox, after making due salutations, condoled with the ass on his unfortunate condition; but the ass replied that it was his divinely appointed lot, and that it would be impious to complain of the dispensations of Providence. He also instanced the case of the ass of a water-carrier, which, after having starved and worked hard in its master's service, by chance found admittance to the king's stables, where it was struck by the sleek appearance of the horses. But one day the horses were taken out to battle, and returned in a most miserable plight, some grievously wounded, and others dying. After seeing this sight it determined that its own hard life was preferable, and returned to its master. The fox replied that the ass was wrong in carrying passive resignation to such an extent as to refuse to try to better his condition when the opportunity of doing so presented itself, because God says, "Go in quest of the bounties of God." 1 He added, if the ass would come with him, he would take him to a delightful meadow, where he would never lack plenty of grass all the year round. The ass rejoined that the command to strive for sustenance was only issued on account of the weakness of man's faith. The fox replied that this exalted faith was only vouchsafed to a few great saints, because the Prophet describes contentment as a treasure, and treasure is not found by everyone. The ass rejoined that the fox was perverting the Scripture, as no pious man who trusted in God was ever forsaken. In illustration of this he told an anecdote of a devotee who determined to put the matter to the test, and went out into the desert, trusting only to God to supply his wants, and resolved to seek no aid of man, and not to exert himself in any way to gain food. He lay down on a stone and went to sleep; and God sent a caravan of travelers that way, who found him, and forced him to take food in spite of himself. The fox again pressed the ass to try to better his condition, saying that God had given men hands to use and not to do anything with. The ass answered that he knew of no occupation and exertion better than trust in God, as worldly occupations often lead to ruin, according to the text, "Throw not yourselves with your own hands into ruin." 2 But though the ass repeated all these excellent precepts, yet it was only so much cant on his part, because he was not firmly rooted in. the faith. He had all the time a carnal hankering after the pleasant grazing-ground the fox told him of, and the objections he made were only a parrot-like repetition of precepts heard, but not thoroughly understood and taken to heart. To illustrate the worthless nature of mere imitated religion and profession divorced from practice, a story is told of an infamous fellow who used to carry a dagger to protect as he said, his honor, though his every action showed that he had neither honor to protect nor manliness to protect it. The ass, though like Abraham, he had broken his idols, had not a sufficiently rooted faith to leap, like Abraham, into the fire, and thus prove his faith. [Here the poet apologizes for the trivial illustrations he uses by citing the text, "Verily God is not ashamed to set forth as well the instance of a gnat as of any nobler object" 3.] Finally the ass yielded to the fox's enticement, and accompanied him to the lion's lair. The lion, being famished with hunger, sprang upon him the moment he appeared. Being, however, weak with sickness and fasting, he missed his aim, and the ass escaped with a slight wound. Then the fox blamed the lion for his precipitation, and the lion, after excusing himself as best he could, persuaded the fox to try to allure the ass a second time into his lair. The fox consented to try, observing that experience would probably have been thrown away on an ass, and his vows of repentance forgotten. Those who lapse from repentance, in forgetfulness of their former experience, may be compared to the Jews changed into apes and swine by 'Isa. 4 The fox was received by the ass with many reproaches for having deceived him; but he at last managed to persuade the ass that what he had seen was not a real lion, but only a harmless talisman; and the silly ass allowed himself to be again deluded, and forgot his vows of repentance, and again followed the fox to the lion's lair, where he speedily met his doom.
 .
 Men who make professions of holiness merely from blind imitation of others are detected and confuted by the opposition between their words and their deeds.
 A man asked a camel, saying, "Ho! whence comest thou,
 Thou beast of auspicious footstep?"
 He replied, " From the hot bath of thy street."
 The man said, " That is proved false by thy dirty legs!"
 So, when stubborn Pharaoh saw Moses' staff a serpent,
 And begged for a delay (to fetch magicians) 5 and relented,
 Wise men said, "He ought to have become harsher,
 If He really be, as He says, the Lord Supreme. 6
 What could miracles such as these of serpents,
 Or even dragons, matter to the majesty of His divinity?
 If He be really Lord Supreme, seated on His throne,
 What need has He to wheedle a worm like Moses?"
 O babbler, while thy soul is drunk with mere date wine,
 Thy spirit hath not tasted the genuine grapes.
 For the token of thy having seen that divine light
 Is this, to withdraw thyself from the house of pride.
 When a fowl flies to the salt water,
 It has never beheld the blessing of sweet water;
 But its faith is mere imitation of other fowl,
 And its soul has never seen the face of real faith.
 Wherefore the blind imitator encounters great perils,
 Perils of the road, of robbers, of cursed Satans.
 But when he has seen the light of God, he is safe
 From the agitation of doubt, and is firm in the faith.
 Till the foam has landed on the shore and dry land,
 Which is its home, it is ever tossed to and fro.
 'Tis at home on the land, but a stranger on the water.
 While it remains a stranger, it must be tossed about.
 When its eyes are opened, and it sees the vision of land,
 Satan has no longer any domination over it.
 Although the ass repeated verities to the fox,
 He spoke them idly and in the way of cant.
 He praised the water, but was not eager to drink;
 He rent his garments and his hair, but was no real lover.
 The excuse of a hypocrite is rejected, not approved,
 Because it comes only from the lips, not from the heart.
 He has the scent of the apple, but not a piece of it,
 And the scent only for the purpose of misleading others.
 Thus a woman's onset in the midst of a battle array,
 She keeps in line, and forms part of the battle array,
 Yet, though she looks a very lion as she stands in line,
 Her hand begins to tremble as soon as she takes a sword.
 Woe to him whose reason is like a woman
 While his lust is like a resolute man!
 Of a certainty his reason will be worsted in the fight,
 And his imitation of a man will only lead him to ruin.
 Happy is he whose reason is masculine,
 And his ugly lust feminine and under subjection!
 Though the mere imitator quotes a hundred proofs,
 They are all based on opinion, not on conviction.
 He is only scented with musk, he is not himself musk;
 He smells of musk, but is really naught but dung.
 For his dung to become musk, O disciple,
 He must graze year after year in the divine pasture.
 For he who, like the musk-deer, feeds on saffron of Khoten
 Must not eat grass and oats like asses.
 That man of cant has at his tongue's end
 A hundred proofs and precepts, but there is no life in him.
 When the preacher has himself no light or life,
 How can his words yield leaves and fruit?
 He impudently preaches to others to walk aright,
 While himself He is unsteady as a reed shaken by wind.
 Thus, though his preaching is very eloquent,
 It hides within it unsteadiness in the faith.
 In order to gain true wisdom man must shake off worldly illusions.
 The fox said, "In my pure wine there are no dregs;
 These vain suspicions are not becoming.
 All this is only baseless suspicion, O simple one,
 Else you would know I am not plotting against you.
 You repudiate me on account of your own bad fancies;
 Why do you thus suspect your true friends?
 Think well of the 'Brothers of purity,' 7
 Even though they show harshness toward you;
 For when evil suspicion takes hold of you,
 It severs you from hundreds of friends.
 If a tender friend treats you roughly to try you,
 'Tis contrary to reason to distrust him.
 Though I bear a bad name, my nature is not malevolent;
 What you saw was not dangerous, it was only a talisman.
 But even if there were danger in that object of suspicion,
 Friends always pardon an offence."
 This world of illusions, fancies, desires, and fears,
 Is a mighty obstacle in the traveler's path.
 Thus, when these forms of delusive imaginations
 Misled Abraham, who was a very mountain of wisdom,
 He said of the star, " This is my Lord," 8
 Having fallen into the midst of the world of illusion.
 He thus interpreted the meaning of sun and stars, 
 Yea, he, that great man who threaded jewels of interpretation,
 Seeing then that this world of eye-fascinating illusion
 Seduced from the right path such a mountain as Abraham,
 So that he said of the star, "This is my Lord,"
 What will not its illusions effect on a stupid ass?
 Human reason is drowned, like the high mountains,
 in the flood of illusion and vain imaginations.
 The very mountains are overwhelmed by this flood,
 Where is safety to be found save in Noah's ark?
 By illusions that plunder the road of faith
 The faithful have been split into seventy-two sects.
 But the man of conviction escapes illusion;
 He does not mistake his eyelash for the new moon.
 He who is divorced from 'Omar's light
 Is deceived by his own crooked eyelash. 9
 Thousands of ships, in all their majesty and pomp,
 Have gone to pieces in this sea of illusion.
 Then follows an anecdote of Shaikh Muhammad of Ghazni, who was named "Sar i Razi," because he used to take only a vine-leaf to break his fast. He dwelt a long time in the desert, and was there miraculously preserved from death, and directed by divine intimation to proceed to Ghazni, and beg money of the rich and distribute it to the poor. After he had done this some time a second intimation came to him to beg no longer, as the money for his charities would be supplied to him miraculously. He at last attained to such a degree of spiritual insight that he knew the wants of those who came to him for aid before they uttered them. He said the reason of this preternatural discernment was, that he had purified his heart of all but the love of God, and thus, whenever thoughts of anything besides God occurred to his mind, he knew they did not appertain to him, but must have been in some way suggested to him by the person asking aid of him.
 Then follow some reflections on the power of fasting and abstinence to subdue the carnal lusts which lead man to destruction; and two short anecdotes to illustrate the thesis that God never fails to provide sustenance for those who take no thought for the morrow, but place absolute trust in Him.
 The fate of the ass then suggests to the poet another train of reflections. After the lion had slain the ass, he went to the river to quench his thirst, telling the fox to watch the dead body till he returned; but the moment the lion's back was turned the fox ate up the heart and liver, which are the daintiest parts. When the lion returned and inquired for them, the fox assured him that the ass had possessed neither a heart nor a liver, for if he had he would never have shown himself so stupid. Men without understanding are not really men at all, but only simulacra or forms of men. For lack of understanding many will cry in the world to come, "Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been among the dwellers in the flame" 10 Then follows a story of a monk (Diogenes) who took a lantern and searched all through a bazaar crowded with men to find, as he said, a man.
 The monk's search for a man.
 The monk said, "I am searching everywhere for a man
 Who lives by the life of the breath of God."
 The other said, "Here are men; the bazaar is full;
 These are surely men, O enlightened sage!"
 The monk said, "I seek a man who walks straight
 As well in the road of anger as in that of lust.
 Where is one who shows himself a man in anger and lust?
 In search of such a one I run from street to street.
 If there be one who is a true man in these two states,
 I will yield up my life for him this day!"
 The other, who was a fatalist, said, "What you seek is rare.
 But you are ignorant of the force of the divine decree;
 You see the branches, but ignore the root.
 We men are but branches, God's eternal decree the root.
 That decree turns from its course the revolving sky,
 And makes foolish hundreds of planets like Mercury.
 It reduces to helplessness the world of devices;
 It turns steel and stone to water.
 O you who attribute stability to these steps on the road,
 You are one of the raw ones; yea, raw, raw!
 When you have seen the millstone turning round,
 Then, prithee, go and see the stream that turns it.
 When you have seen the dust rising up into the air,
 Go and mark the air in the midst of the dust.
 You see the kettles of thought boiling over,
 Look with intelligence at the fire beneath them.
 God said to Job, 'Out of my clemency
 I have given a grain of patience to every hair of thine.'
 Look not, then, so much at your own patience;
 After seeing patience, look to the Giver of patience.
 How long will you confine your view to the waterwheel?
 Lift up your head and view also the water."
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxii. 10. 
 2. Koran ii. 191. 
 3. Koran ii. 24. 
 4. Koran v. 65. 
 5. Koran xx. 25. 
 6. Koran xxviii. 38. 
 7. A society at Basra, who wrote, about 980 AD., an encyc1opedia of philosophy (trans. by Dieterici). 
 8. Koran vi. 76. 
 9. Alluding to the first anecdote in Book II. 
 10. Koran lxxvii. 10. 

 STORY XI.
 The Mosalman who tried to convert a Magian.
 A Mosalman pressed a Magian to embrace the true faith. The Magian replied, "If God wills it, no doubt I shall do so." 1 The Mosalman replied, "God certainly wills it, that your soul may be saved from hell; but your own evil lusts and the Devil hold you back." The Magian retorted, using the arguments of the Jabriyan or "Compulsionists," that on earth God is sole sovereign, and that Satan and lust exist and act only in furtherance of God's will. To hold that God is pulling men one way and Satan another is to derogate from God's sovereignty. Man cannot help moving in the direction he is most strongly impelled to go; if he is impelled wrongly he is no more to blame than a building designed for a mosque but degraded into a fire-temple, or a piece of cloth designed for a coat but altered into a pair of trousers. The truth is, that whatever occurs is according to God's will, and Satan himself is only one of His agents. Satan resembles the Turkoman's dog who sits at the door of the tent, and is" vehement against aliens, but full of tenderness to friends." 2 The Mosalman then replied with the arguments of the Qadarians and Mutazilites, to prove the freedom of the will and consequent responsibility of man for his actions. He urged that man's free agency and consequent responsibility are recognized in common parlance, as when we order a man to act in a certain way,-that God expressly assumes man to be a free agent by addressing commands and prohibitions to him, and by specially exempting some, such as the blind, 3 from responsibility for certain acts, that our internal consciousness assures us of our power of choice, just as outward sense assures us of properties in material objects, and that it is just as sophistical to disbelieve the declarations of the interior consciousness, as those of the outward senses as to the reality of the material world. He then told an anecdote of a man caught robbing a garden and defending himself with the fatalist plea of irresponsibility, to whom the owner of the garden replied by administering a very severe beating, and assuring him that this beating was also predestined, and that he therefore could not help administering it. He concluded his argument by repeating that the traditions, "Whatever God wills is," and "The pen is dry, and alters not its writing," are not inconsistent with the existence of freewill in man. They are not intended to reduce good action and evil to the same level, but good actions will always entail good consequences, and bad actions the reverse. A devotee admired the splendid apparel of the slaves of the Chief of Herat, and cried to Heaven, "Ah! learn from this Chief how to treat faithful slaves!" Shortly after the Chief was deposed, and his slaves were put to the torture to make them reveal where the Chief had hidden his treasure, but not one would betray the secret. Then a voice from heaven came to the devotee, saying, "Learn from them how to be a faithful slave, and then look for recompense." The Magian, unconvinced by the arguments of the Mosalman, again plied him with "Compulsionist" arguments, and the discussion was protracted, with the usual result of leaving both the disputants of the same opinion as when they began. The poet remarks that the contest of the "Compulsionists" and the advocates of man's free agency will endure till the day of judgment; for nothing can resolve these difficulties 4 but the true love which is "a gift imparted by God to whom He will." 5
 Love puts reason to silence.
 Love is a perfect muzzle of evil suggestions;
 Without love who ever succeeded in stopping them?
 Be a lover, and seek that fair Beauty,
 Hunt for that Waterfowl in every stream!
 How can you get water from that which cuts it off?
 How gain understanding from what destroys understanding?
 Apart from principles of reason are other principles
 Of light and great price to be gained by love of God.
 Besides this reason of yours God has other reasons
 Which will procure for you heavenly nourishment.
 By your carnal reason you may procure earthly food,
 By God-given reason you may mount the heavens.
 When, to win enduring love of God, you sacrifice reason,
 God gives you "a tenfold recompense;" 6 yea, seven hundred fold.
 When those Egyptian women sacrificed their reason, 7
 They penetrated the mansion of Joseph's love;
 The Cup-bearer of life bore away their reason,
 They were filled with wisdom of the world without end.
 Joseph's beauty was only an offshoot of God's beauty;
 Be lost, then, in God's beauty more than those women.
 Love of God cuts short reasoning, O beloved,
 For it is a present refuge from perplexities.
 Through love bewilderment befalls the power of speech,
 It no longer dares to utter what passes;
 For if it sets forth an answer, it fears greatly
 That its secret treasure may escape its lips.
 Therefore it closes lips from saying good or bad,
 So that its treasure may not escape it.
 In like manner the Prophet's companions tell us
 "When the Prophet used to tell us deep sayings,
 That chosen one, while scattering pearls of speech,
 Would bid us preserve perfect quiet and silence."
 So, when the mighty phoenix hovers over your head, 8
 Causing your soul to tremble at the motion of its wings,
 You venture not to stir from your place,
 Lest that bird of good fortune should take wing.
 You hold your breath and repress your coughs,
 So as not to scare that phoenix into flying away.
 And if one say a word to you, whether good or bad,
 You place finger on lip, as much as to say, "Be silent."
 That phoenix is bewilderment, 9 it makes you silent;
 The kettle is silent, though it is boiling all the while.
 *NOTES:
 1. Note the true believer is here represented as using the arguments of the Qadarians or Mutazilites for free will, as against the Jabriyan or fatalist argument put into the mouth of the Magian. 
 2. Koran xlviii. 29. 
 3. Koran xxiv. 60. 
 4. The Prophet said, "Sit not with a disputer about fate, nor converse with him." 
 5. Koran iii. 66. 
 6. Koran vi. 161. 
 7. "And when they saw him they were amazed at him, and cut their hands" (Koran xii. 31). 
 8. It is supposed to bring good fortune. 
 9. Bewilderment is the "truly mystical darkness of ignorance" which falls upon the mystic when the light of absolute Being draws near to him, and "blinds him with excess of light." See Gulshan i Raz, p. 33, and notes. 

 STORY XII.
 The Devotee who broke the noble's wine-jar.
 A certain noble, who lived under the Christian dispensation when wine was allowed, sent his servant to a monastery to fetch some wine. The servant went and bought the wine, and was returning with it, when he passed the house of a very austere and testy devotee. This devotee called out to him, "What have you got there?" The servant said, "Wine, belonging to such a noble." The devotee said, "What! does a follower of God indulge in wine? Followers of God should have naught to do with pleasure and drinking; for wine is a very Satan, and steals men's wits. Your wits are not too bright already, so you have no need to render them still duller by drink." In illustration of this, he told the story of one Ziayi Dalaq, a very tall man, who had a dwarfish brother. This brother one day received him very ungraciously, only half rising from his seat in answer to his salutation, and Ziayi Dalaq said to him, "You seem to think yourself so tall that it is necessary to clip off somewhat of your height." Finally the devotee broke the wine-jar with a stone, and the servant went and told his master. The noble was very wrathful at the presumption of the devotee in taking upon himself to prohibit wine, as condemned by the law of nature, when it had not been prohibited by the Gospel, and he took a thick stick and went to the devotee's house to chastise him. The devotee heard of his approach and hid himself under some wool, which belonged to the ropemakers of the village, He said to himself, "To tell an angry man of his faults one needs to have a face as hard as a mirror, which reflects his ugliness without fear or favor." Just so the Prince of Tirmid was once playing chess with a courtier, and being checkmated, got into a rage and threw the chessboard at his courtier's head. So before playing the next game the courtier protected his head by wrappings of felt. Then the neighbors of the devotee, hearing the noise, came out and interceded for him with the noble, telling him that the devotee was half-witted, and could not be held responsible for his actions; and moreover, that as he was a favorite of God, 1 it was useless to attempt to slay him before his time, for the Prophet and other saints had been miraculously preserved in circumstances fatal to ordinary persons. The noble refused to be pacified; but the neighbors redoubled their entreaties, urging that he had so much pleasure in his sovereignty that he could well dispense with the pleasure of wine. The noble strenuously denied this, saying that no other pleasure of sovereignty, or what not, could compensate him for the loss of wine, which made him sway from side to side like the jessamine. The prophets themselves had rejected all other pleasures for that of spiritual intoxication, and he who has once embraced a living mistress will never put up with a dead one. The moral is, that spiritual pleasures, typified by wine, are not to be bartered away for earthly pleasures. The Prophet said, "The world is carrion, and they who seek it are dogs;" and the Koran says, "The present life is no other than a pastime and a sport; but the future mansion is life indeed." 2
 Description of a devotee who trusted to the light of nature.
 His brain is dried up; and as for his reason,
 It is now less than that of a child.
 Age and abstinence have added infirmity to infirmity,
 And his abstinence has yielded him no rejoicing.
 He has endured toils, but gained no reward from his Friend;
 He has done the work, but has not been paid.
 Either his work has lacked value,
 Or the time of recompense is not decreed as yet.
 Either his works are as the works of the Jews, 3
 Or his reward is held back till the appointed time.
 This grief and sorrow are enough for him,
 That in this valley of pain he is utterly friendless.
 With sad eyes he sits in his corner,
 With frowning face and downcast looks.
 There is no oculist who cares to open his eyes, 4
 Nor has he reason enough to discover the eye-salve.
 He strives earnestly with firm resolve and in hope,
 His work is done on the chance of being right.
 The vision of "The Friend" is far from his course,
 For he loses the kernel in his love for the shell.
 *NOTES:
 1. Half-witted persons are supposed to be divinely protected. 
 2. Koran xxix. 64. 
 3. "But as to the infidels, their works are like the mirage in the desert" (Koran xxiv. 39). 
 4. I.e., he has no director (Murshid i kamil) to instruct him in the right course. 

 STORY VIII.
 (continued).
 Mahmud and Ayaz.
 The poet now returns to the story of Mahmud and Ayaz, which is continued at intervals till the end of the book. The king inquired of Ayaz what made him continually visit his old shoes and garments, as Majnun used to visit his Laila, or as a Christian regularly visits his priest to obtain absolution for his sins. Why should he call to these dead things, like a fond mother calling to her dead infant, were it not that faith and love made them, as it were, living beings to him? The eye sees what it brings with it to see; it can see nothing but what it has gained the faculty of seeing. Thus the face of Laila, which seemed so lovely to the eyes of Majnun, made clairvoyant by love, seemed to strangers to have no claims to beauty. The earthly forms which here surround us are, as it were, vessels fraught with spiritual wine, only visible to those who have learnt to discern the deep things of the Spirit.
 Love and faith are a mighty spell.
 O Ayaz, what is this love of yours for your old shoes,
 Which resembles the love of a lover for his mistress?
 You have made these old shoes your object of devotion,
 Just as Majnun made an idol of his Laila!
 You have bound the affection of your soul to them,
 And hung them up in your secret chamber.
 How long will you say orisons to this old pair of shoes?
 And breathe your oft-told secrets into inanimate ears?
 Like the Arab lover to the house of his dead mistress,
 You address to them long invocations of love.
 Of what great Asaf were your shoes the house?
 Is your old garment, think you, the coat of Yusuf?
 Like a Christian who confesses to a priest
 His past year's sins of fornication, fraud, and deceit;
 In order that the priest may absolve him of those sins;
 He thinks the priest's absolution the same as God's!
 That priest is unable to condemn or to absolve;
 But faith and love are a mighty enchantment!
 God's dealings visible to the spiritual.
 The wine is from that world, the vessels from this;
 The vessels are seen, but the wine is hidden!
 Hidden indeed from the sight of the carnal,
 But open and manifest to the spiritual!
 O God, our eyes are blinded!
 O pardon us, our sins are a heavy burden!
 Thou art hidden from us, though the heavens are filled
 With Thy light, which is brighter than sun and moon!
 Thou art hidden, yet revealest our hidden secrets!
 Thou art the source that causes our rivers to flow.
 Thou art hidden in Thy essence, but seen by Thy bounties.
 Thou art like the water, and we like the millstone.
 Thou art like the wind, and we like the dust;
 The wind is unseen, but the dust is seen by all.
 Thou art the spring, and we the sweet green garden;
 Spring is not seen, though its gifts are seen.
 Thou art as the soul, we as hand and foot;
 Soul instructs hand and foot to hold and take.
 Thou art as reason, we like the tongue;
 'Tis reason that teaches the tongue to speak.
 Thou art as joy, and we are laughing;
 The laughter is the consequence of the joy.
 Our every motion every moment testifies,
 For it proves the presence of the Everlasting God.
 So the revolution of the millstone, so violent,
 Testifies to the existence of a stream of water.
 O Thou who art above our conceptions and descriptions,
 Dust be on our heads, and upon our similitudes of Thee!
 Yet Thy slaves never cease devising images of Thee;
 They cry to Thee always, "My life is Thy footstool!"
 Like that shepherd who cried," O Lord! 1
 Come nigh to thy faithful shepherd,
 That he may cleanse thy garment of vermin,
 And mend thy shoes, and kiss the hem of thy robe!"
 No one equaled that shepherd in love and devotion,
 Though his manner of expressing it was most faulty.
 His love pitched its tent on the heavens,
 He himself was as the dog at the tent-door.
 When the sea of love to God boiled up,
 It touched his heart, but it touches your ears only.
 The thesis that silence may indicate emotions too deep for expression, while eloquent expressions may indicate that the ears only, and not the heart, have been touched, is next illustrated by a ludicrous anecdote of a dwarf who disguised himself as a woman, and presented himself at a sermon addressed to women. This dwarf played a trick on a woman sitting next him, which made her cry out, and the preacher fancied that his sermon had touched her heart; but the dwarf said that if her heart had been touched she would not have betrayed her feelings by publishing them to the whole congregation.
 The king then again pressed Ayaz to explain the mystery of his regard for the old shoes and rags, in order to admonish the courtiers, for he said that the beauty of true holiness is such that it attracts even infidels. To illustrate this he told an anecdote of a Mosalman who tried to convert a Gueber in the time of Bayazid. The Gueber said that he admired and envied the faith of Bayazid, though he had no power to imitate it; but as for the faith of the missionary who was trying to convert him, it only inspired him with aversion, because it was plainly insincere and hypocritical. And he told an anecdote of a harsh-voiced Mu'azzin who went into a heathen country and there uttered the call to prayer. It happened that there was a girl in that place who had long been inclined to embrace Islam, much to the grief of her parents; but when she heard this harsh call she was at once cured of her wish to forsake her own religion. Her father was so delighted at this that he ran out and loaded the Mu'azzin with gifts. The Gueber said the missionary had cured him of the wish to embrace Islam, just as the girl was cured by the Mu'azzin's harsh voice. But he said he still retained his reverence for the faith of Bayazid, though he failed to understand how so much spirituality as was seen in Bayazid could be contained in an earthly body. He gave a curious illustration of his meaning. A man brought home a piece of meat weighing over half a man, to provide a meal for a guest; but his wife, who was very greedy, ate it all up secretly. When the man missed his meat he asked his wife for it, and she said the cat had eaten it. The man took the cat and weighed her, and found she weighed only half a man. Then he said to his wife, "If this half-man is all cat, where is the meat? and if it is meat, where is the cat?" The Gueber said this was exactly the difficulty he felt about the spirit and the body of Bayazid. He concluded by saying, in the words of the Hadis, "The true believer is attached to others, and others are attached to him, but the hypocrite inspires affection in no one.
 Mahmud and Ayaz. (continued).
 Mahmud again presses Ayaz to reveal his secrets, remarking that even if they suggest sad thoughts, they will benefit the hearers. The wise man is as a guest-house, and he admits all the thoughts that occur to him, whether of joy or of sorrow, with the same welcome, knowing that, like Abraham, he may entertain angels unawares. This is illustrated by the story of a woman who drove away a valued guest by a petulant remark, which he was not intended to hear, and afterwards repented her discourtesy so deeply that she put on mourning and turned her house into an inn. Let grief as well as joy lodge in the heart, for grief is sent for our benefit as well as joy. Endure woe patiently, like Joseph and Job, and regard it as a blessing, saying with Solomon, "Stir me up, O Lord, to be thankful for Thy favor which Thou hast showed upon me!" 2 Mahmud then praises Ayaz for being a true man who can control both lust and anger. Those who are carried away by anger or lust, like the girl of whom an anecdote is told, do not deserve the name of men. When anger or lust takes hold of a man reason departs from him. Then comes an anecdote of a cowardly Sufi who boasted of his bravery, but had not courage enough even to slay a captive infidel. Verily, the "greater warfare," viz., that against one's own lusts and passions, demands as much courage as the "lesser warfare" against the infidels. This is illustrated by a story of a saint named Iyazi, who, after having been a great warrior against the infidels, renounced the world and applied himself to wage the "greater warfare" against his own lusts. One day, while sitting in his cell, he heard the noise of the army going out to fight, and his carnal passion urged him to go and join in the fight, but he thus rebuked it:
 Iyazi's rebuke to his passion, whish lusted to join in the "lesser warfare".
 I said, "O foul and faithless passion,
 Whence have you derived this inclination to war?
 Tell me truly, O passion, is this your trickery?
 Or else is it stubbornness shunning obedience to God?
 If you say not truly I will attack you,
 And will afflict you more severely with discipline."
 Passion then heaved a cry from its breast,
 And without mouth vented the following complaints:
 "In this cell you slay me every day;
 You slay my life like the life of a Gueber.
 Not a soul is aware of my condition;
 You drag me along without food or sleep.
 In the fight with one wound I shall quit the body,
 And the people will admire my valor and self-devotion."
 I said, "O bad passion, you live as an infidel,
 And as an infidel you will die; shame be upon you!
 In both worlds you are naught but a hypocrite;
 In the two worlds only an unprofitable servant.
 I have vowed to God never to quit this cell
 While life remains in this body;
 Because whatever the body does in this privacy
 Is not done to make a fair show before men.
 Its movements and its rest in the privacy of this cell
 Are not intended for the sight of any besides God.
 This is the 'greater warfare,' that the 'lesser;'
 Both these warfares have their Rustams and Haidars.
 They are not to be fought by one whose reason and sense
 Flee away as soon as a mouse wags its tail.
 Such persons must shun the array of battle,
 And keep aloof from it even as women do."
 This is followed by an anecdote of another brave warrior who "was among the faithful, and made good what he had promised to God." 3 Then comes a long story of a prince of Egypt who saw the portrait of a damsel belonging to the Chief of Mausil, and conceived an ardent passion for her, and sent an army to take her by force. The army succeeded in capturing her, and set out on the return march; but on the way the captain of the army fell in love with the damsel, and she returned his affection. When they reached Egypt she was made over to the prince, but at once took a dislike to him, as he was not nearly so manly as her beloved captain. The prince discovered her secret, and though he might justly have resented the treachery of the captain, he refrained, and showed true manliness in the "greater warfare" by pardoning his fault and uniting him with the damsel to whom he was so much attached.
 Ideas gained from hearing a thing lead to seeing it.
 A person put this question to a philosopher,
 "O sage, what is true and what is false?"
 The sage touched his ear and said, "This is false,
 But the eye is true and its report is certain."
 The ear is false in relation to the eye,
 And most assertions are related to the ear. 4
 If a bat turn away its eyes from the sun,
 Still it is not veiled from some idea of the sun;
 Its very dread of the sun frames an idea of the sun,
 And that idea scares it away to the darkness.
 That idea of light terrifies it,
 And makes it cling to the murky night.
 Just so 'tis your idea of your terrible foe
 Which makes you cling to your friends and allies.
 O Moses, thy revelations shed glory on the mount,
 But that frightened one endured not thy realities. 5
 Be not too proud, but know that you must first endure
 The idea of the Truth, and thence come to the reality.
 No one is frightened by the mere idea of fighting,
 For "no courage is needed before fighting begins." 6
 In the mere idea of fighting a coward can imagine
 Himself as attacking and retreating like Rustam.
 The pictures of Rustam on the wall of a bath
 Are similar to a coward's ideas of fighting.
 But when these ideas are tested by actual sight,
 What of the coward then? His bravery is gone!
 Strive, then, from mere hearing to press on to seeing; 7
 What ear has told you falsely eye will tell truly.
 Then ear too will acquire the properties of an eye;
 Your ears, now worthless as wool, will become gems;
 Yea, your whole body will become a mirror,
 It will be as an eye or a bright gem in your bosom.
 First the hearing of the ear enables you to form ideas,
 Then these ideas guide you to the Beloved.
 Strive, then, to increase the number of these ideas,
 That they may guide you, like Majnun, to the Beloved.
 Concerning the unbelievers who say, "There is only this our present life; we live and we die, and naught but time destroyeth us." 8
 To return; that prince played the fool,
 And took delight in the society of the damsel.
 O prince, suppose your dominion extend from east to west,
 Yet, as it endures not, esteem it transitory as lightning
 Yea, O sleeping heart, know the kingdom that endures not
 Forever and ever is only a mere dream.
 I marvel how long you will indulge in vain illusion,
 Which has seized you by the throat like a headsman.
 Know that even in this world there is a place of refuge; 9
 Hearken not to the unbeliever who denies it.
 His argument is this: he says again and again,
 "If there were aught beyond this life we should see it."
 But if the child sees not the state of reason,
 Does the man of reason therefore forsake reason?
 And if the man of reason sees not the state of love,
 Is the blessed moon of love thereby eclipsed?
 The beauty of Joseph was not visible to his brethren;
 Was it therefore hidden from the eyes of Jacob?
 The eyes of Moses regarded his staff as a stick,
 But the divine eye saw it to be a deadly serpent.
 The eye of the head was at issue with the divine eye,
 But the latter prevailed and gave convincing proof.
 To the eyes of Moses his hand looked a mere hand,
 But to the divine eye it appeared a flashing light.
 This subject in its entirety is endless,
 But to the unbeliever it is a mere fanciful idea.
 The only realities to him are lust and gluttony;
 Speak not then to him of the mysteries of the Beloved.
 To us believers lust and gluttony are only ideas,
 Therefore we behold always the beauty of the Beloved.
 To all men whose creed is lust and gluttony,
 Applies the text, "To you be your creed, to me mine." 10
 In the face of negations like these cut short speech,
 "O Ahmad, say little to an old Fire-worshipper!"
 "We distribute among them," 11 to some carnal lusts, and to others angelic qualities.
 If the prince lacked the animal manliness of asses,
 Yet he possessed the true manliness of the prophets.
 He renounced lust and anger and concupiscence,
 And showed himself a man of the lineage of the prophets.
 Grant that he lacked the virility of asses,
 Yet God esteemed him a lord of lords.
 Let me be dead, so long as God regards me with favor!
 I am better off than the living who are rejected of God;
 The former is the kernel of manliness, the latter only the rind;
 The former is borne to Paradise, the latter to hell.
 The Prophet says, "Paradise is annexed to tribulation,
 But hell-fire follows indulgence in lust." 12
 O Ayaz, who slayest demons like a male lion,
 Manliness of asses is naught, manliness of mind much.
 What sort of man dost thou think him who sports as a boy,
 But who has no comprehension of these chief matters?
 o thou who hast seen the delight of my connnandments,
 And risked thy life to perform them faithfully,
 Hear a tale of the sweetness of my commandments,
 That the meaning of this sweetness may be made plain.
 The story which follows is one in which Ayaz is himself the chief actor, and hence it may perhaps be inferred that this part of the poem had not received its final revision when the poet died. The king showed to all his courtiers in turn a valuable jewel, and asked them its value. Each declared it to be priceless. He thereupon ordered each of them to break it to pieces, but they refused, one after the other; on which he praised them highly and gave them presents. Finally the jewel came into the hands of Ayaz, and he, not being a mere imitator like the rest, nor being tempted by the rewards given to the rest, decided that the king's command ought to be obeyed at all costs, and therefore broke the jewel to pieces. Blind imitation of current fashions and ruling "public opinion" is the way of the world, but its worthlessness is at once manifested when it is put to the test. True faith is a reasonable faith, not one adopted and held in mechanical and parrot-like fashion. The king then commanded that those courtiers whose faith had been shown to be mere "taqlid" or imitation, and not vital and intelligent, should be put to death; but Ayaz interceded for them, saying, "O Lord, punish them not if they forget or fall into sin;"13 although their plea that they sinned through forgetfulness is of no more weight than the plea of having sinned through drunkenness, seeing that both forgetfulness and drunkenness are willfully incurred. Those who die in amity with God have no cause to fear death, "It cannot harm them, for to their Lord will they return;"14 but those who die at enmity with God are in a very different position, and have therefore a very strong claim for mercy. The Egyptian magicians, when threatened by Pharaoh with death for believing in Moses, recognized the truth that death in such a cause would unite them with God, and that extinction of the phenomenal self, on which Pharaoh prided himself, would bring them to the real Self from whom they had been estranged by life on earth. Like Habib, the carpenter of Antioch, who was martyred for taking the part of 'Isa's two apostles in that city, they said, "O that my people knew how gracious God hath been to me, and that He hath made me one of His honored ones!" 15 A man can only say "I" with truth when he has mortified self and unlearnt to say "I" in the sense in which Pharaoh said it. Fakhru-'d-Din Razi 16 discoursed learnedly on this point, saying much of "incarnation" and "union" as the modes in which the real "I" of the Deity indwells in the human soul; but as he lacked the true mystic unction, his words only serve to darken counsel. 17 But here Ayaz breaks off; saying, "Who am I that I should say to the Almighty, 'Grant pardon to these offenders'?" The Omniscient God needs not to be informed of their case, for He knows all; nor to be reminded of it, for He forgets nothing; nor to be urged to act mercifully, for He created men "for their own benefit, and not to derive benefit from them." Such intercession, therefore, implies ignorance of God, and "such only of His servants as are possessed of knowledge of God truly fear God." 18 God is at once center and circumference of the universe, and the only true wisdom consists in absolute self-surrender to His will, and this surrender of self will bring with it its own exceeding great reward.
 *NOTES:
 1. Alluding to Story vii. Book II. 
 2. Koran xxvii. 19. 
 3. Koran xxxiii. 23. 
 4. i.e., are based on hearsay. 
 5. "When God manifested Himself to the mount He turned it to dust, and Moses fell in a swoon" (Koran vii. 139). As the bat cannot endure the sight of the sun, men cannot at once endure the full blaze of the beatific vision. 
 6. A proverb which is not given by Freytag. 
 7. Ideas and types lead men on to actual sight when they are strong enough to bear it. Job xlii. 5. 
 8. Koran xlv. 23. 
 9. Place of refuge, i.e., heavenly visions; a foretaste of the world to come (Gulshan i Raz, I. 679). 
 10. Koran cix. 6. 
 11. Koran xliii. 31. 
 12. Cp. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, vol ii. p. 165. 
 13. Koran ii. 286. 
 14. Koran xxvi. 50. 
 15. Koran xxxvi. 25. 
 16. A great theologian of Khorasan who lived from A.D. 1150 to 1210. De Slane's Ibn Khallikan, ii. 652. 
 17. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 453, note. 
 18. Koran xxxv. 25. 

    
The Masnavi, by Rumi, tr. by E.H. Whinfield, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

 THE SPIRITUAL COUPLETS
 OF
 MAULANA JALALU-'D-DlN MUHAMMAD RUMI

 Book VI.

 PROLOGUE.

 O LIFE of the heart, Husamu-'d-Din,
 My zeal burnt within me to write this sixth part!
 The Masnavi became a standard through thy influence,
 Thy sword (Husam) has made it an exemplar to the world
 O spiritual one, I now offer it to thee,
 This sixth part of the entire Masnavi.
 Enlighten the world's six sides with its six parts,
 That it may illuminate him who is not illuminated!
 Love has naught to do with five senses or six sides,
 Its only aim is to be attracted to the Beloved!
 But haply leave may be given me hereafter
 To tell those mysteries so far as they can be told,
 In a discourse more closely approximating to the facts
 Than these faint indications of those abstruse matters.
 Mysteries are not communicable, save to those who know;
 Mystery in the ear of infidels is no mystery.
 Nevertheless, this is a call to you from God;
 It matters not to Him whether ye accept or reject it.
 Noah repeated His call for nine hundred years,
 But his people only increased in rebellion.
 Never did he draw back from admonishing them,
 Never did he retire into the cave of silence.
 He said, "At the barking and howling of the dogs
 No caravan ever turned back in its road.
 Nor does the full moon on a bright night cease shining
 Because of the howling of dogs on earth.
 The moon sheds her light, and the dogs howl;
 Every one acts according to his nature.
 To each one his office is allotted by the divine decree,
 And he acts agreeably to his nature."
 Art thou thirsting for the Ocean of spirituality?
 Disport thyself on this island of the Masnavi!
 Disport thyself so long as thou seest every moment
 Spiritual verities revealed in this Masnavi.
 When the wind blows the grass off the water,
 The water then shows forth its own purity.
 Behold the bright and fresh sprays of coral,
 And the princely fruits growing in the water of life!
 So, when the Masnavi is purged of letters and words,
 It drops all these, and appears as the sea of Unity.
 Then speaker and hearer and spoken words
 All three give up the ghost in that consummation.
 Bread-giver and bread-eater and bread itself
 Are purified of their forms and turn to dust.
 But their essences in each of these three grades
 Are distinguished, as in those states, so eternally. 1
 Their form turns to dust, but their essence not;
 If one says it does, tell him it does not.
 In the world of spirits all three await judgment,
 Sometimes wearing their earthly forms, sometimes not.
 The worth of a man depends on the objects of his aspiration.
 One day a student asked a preacher,
 Saying, "O most orthodox ornament of the pulpit,
 I have a question to ask, O lord of learning;
 Tell me the answer to it in this congregation.
 A bird sat on the top of a wall;
 Which was best, its head or its tail?"
 He replied, "If its face was towards the town,
 And its tail to the villages, then its face was best.
 But if its tail was towards the town, and its face
 Towards the villages, then prefer its tail to its face."
 A bird flies with its wings towards its nest,
 The wings of a man are his aspiration and aim.
 If a lover be befouled with good and evil,
 Yet regard not these; regard rather his aspiration.
 Though a falcon be all white and unmatched in form,
 If he hunts mice he is contemptible and worthless.
 And if an owl fixes his affection on the king,
 He is a falcon in reality; regard not his outward form.
 Adam's clay was kneaded in the limits of a trough,
 Yet was he exalted above heaven and stars.
 "We have honored Adam" 2 was not addressed to the sky,
 But to Adam himself full of defects as he was.
 Did one ever propose to earth or heaven to receive
 Beauty, reason, speech and aspiration? 3
 Would you ever offer to the heavens
 Beauty of face and acuteness of thought?
 O son, did you ever present your silver body
 As an offering to the damsels pictured on bath walls?
 Nay, you pass by those pictures though fair as Huris,
 And offer yourself sooner to half-blind old women.
 What is there in the old women which the pictures lack,
 Which draws you from the pictures to the old women?
 Say not, for I will say it in plain words,
 'Tis reason, sense, perception, thought, and life.
 In the old woman life is infused,
 While the pictures of the bath have no life.
 If the pictures of the bath should stir with life (soul),
 They would uproot your love to all the old women.
 What is soul? 'Tis acquainted with good and evil,
 Rejoicing at pleasant things, grieving at His.
 Since, then, the principle of soul is knowledge,
 He who knows most is most full of soul.
 Knowledge is the effect flowing from soul;
 He who has most of it is most godlike.
 Seeing then, beloved, that knowledge is the mark of soul,
 He who knows most has the strongest soul.
 The world of souls is itself entirely knowledge,
 And he who is void of knowledge is void of soul.
 When knowledge is lacking in a man s nature,
 His soul is like a stone on the plain.
 Primal Soul is the theatre of God's court,
 Soul of souls the exhibition of God Himself.
 All the angels were pure reason and soul,
 Yet when the new soul of Adam came, they were as its body.
 When in joy they crowded round that new soul, 4
 They bowed before it as body does before soul.
 Fear of men's censure the greatest obstacle to acceptance of the true faith.
 O Husamu-'d-Din, I might tell some of thy many virtues,
 Were it not for the fear of the evil eyes.
 From evil eyes and malice-empoisoned breaths
 Already have I suffered fatal wounds.
 Therefore I cannot relate thy ecstatic states,
 Save by hints of the ecstatic states of others.
 This manoeuvre is one of the devices of the heart,
 Whereby the heart's feet wend their way to the truth.
 Many hearts and souls would become lovers of God
 Did not evil eyes or evil ears hold them back.
 Of these Abu Talib, the Prophet's uncle, was one;
 The malice of the Arabs scared him from the faith.
 He said, "What will the Arabs say of me?
 That my own nephew has perverted me from my religion!"
 Muhammad said, "O uncle, confess the faith to me,
 That I may strive with God for thee!"
 He said, "Nay; it will be published by them that hear;
 'A secret known to more than two is known to every one.' 5
 As I live in the midst of these Arabs,
 It will cause me to lose caste with them.
 Yet, had the mighty grace of God led the way,
 How could this fear have vied with God's attraction?
 O Granter of aid, lend us aid
 In this dilemma of the feeble will.
 Prayers for right guidance in the use of free will, which gift was refused by heavens and earth, but accepted by man to his own. 6
 This flux and reflux of resolves came to me from Thee,
 Else these tides of will had rested still, O God!
 By the same fiat whereby Thou madest me thus irresolute,
 Of Thy mercy deliver me from this irresolution!
 Thou triest me; O give me aid!
 For men are as women through this trial.
 How long, O Lord, is this trial to last?
 Give me one ruling principle, not ten principles!
 The whole world flees away from its own will and being
 Towards self-abandonment and intoxication.
 In order to escape a while from self-consciousness,
 Men incur the reproach of wine and strong drink;
 For all know well this existence is a snare,
 This thought and memory and will only a hell.
 Therefore they flee from self to being beside themselves,
 Call it intoxication or call it preoccupation, O guided one.
 Ere it is annihilated, no single soul
 Finds admittance to the divine hall of audience.
 What is "ascension" to heaven? Annihilation of self;
 Self-abandonment is the creed and religion of lovers.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xxxvi. 32: "But all gathered together shall be set before us." 
 2. Koran xvii. 72. 
 3. "We proposed to the heavens and to the earth to receive the deposit, but they refused the burden. Man undertook to bear it, but bath proved unjust and senseless" (Koran xxxiii. 72). 
 4. "We said unto the angels, 'Prostrate yourselves before Adam,' and they prostrated themselves, except Iblis" (Koran vi. 10). 
 5. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 222. 
 6. Koran xxxiii. 72, quoted above. "Deposit" is here interpreted of the will, the ability to go right or wrong. 

 STORY I.
 The Hindu Slave who loved his Master's Daughter.
 A certain man had a Hindu slave, whom he had brought up along with his children, one of whom was a daughter. When the time came for giving the girl in marriage many suitors presented themselves, and offered large marriage portions to gain her alliance. At last her father selected one who was by no means the richest or noblest of the number, but pious and well-mannered. The women of the family would have preferred one of the richer youths, but the father insisted on having his own way, and the marriage was settled according to his wishes. As soon as the Hindu slave heard of this he fell sick, and the mistress of the family discovered that he was in love with her daughter, and aspired to the honor of marrying her. She was much discomposed at this unfortunate accident, and consulted her husband as to what was best to be done. He said, "Keep the affair quiet, and I will cure the slave of his presumption, in such a way that, according to the proverb, 'The Shaikh shall not be burnt, yet the meat shall be well roasted.'" He directed his wife to flatter the slave with the hope that his wish would be granted, and the girl given to him in marriage. He then celebrated a mock marriage between the slave and the girl, but at night substituted for the girl a boy dressed in female attire, with the result that the bridegroom passed the night in quarrelling with his supposed bride. Next morning he had an interview with the girl and her mother, and said he would have no more to do with her, as, though her appearance was very seductive at a distance, closer acquaintance with her had altogether destroyed the charm. Just so the pleasures of the world seem sweet till they are tried, and then they are found to be very bitter and repulsive. The Prophet has declared that "Patience is the key of joy;" 1 in other words, that he who controls and restrains himself from grasping at worldly pleasures will find true happiness; but this precept makes no lasting impression on the bulk of mankind. When bitter experience overtakes them, as the pain of burning afflicts children, or moths sporting with fire, or the pain of amputation a thief, they curse the delusive temptations which brought this pain upon them; but no sooner is the pain abated than they run after the same pleasures as eagerly as ever. This is divinely ordained, that "God may bring to naught the craft of the infidels." 2 Their hearts have, as it were, been kindled on the tinder-box of bitter experience, but God has put out the sparks of good resolution, and caused them to forget their experience and vows of abstinence according to the text, "Often as they kindle a beacon-fire for war doth God quench it." 3 This is illustrated by an anecdote of a man who heard a footstep in his house at night, and at once struck a light; but the thief put it out without being observed, and the man remained under the impression that it had gone out of itself. This leads the poet again to dwell on his favorite theme of the sole agency of Allah.
 Then, to supply the necessary corrective of this doctrine, another anecdote is told concerning Mahmud and Ayaz. The courtiers grumbled because Ayaz received the stipend of thirty courtiers, and Mahmud by a practical test convinced them that the talents of Ayaz equalled those of thirty men. The courtiers replied that this was due to God's grace, not to any merit on the part of Ayaz; and the king confuted them by pointing out that man's responsibility and merit, or demerit, for his actions are recognized in the Koran. Iblis was condemned for saying to God, "Thou hast caused me to err," 4 and Adam was commended or saying, "We have blackened ourselves." 5 And elsewhere it is said, "Whosoever shall have wrought an atom's weight of good shall behold it; and whoso shall have wrought an atom's weight of evil shall behold it." 6
 *NOTES:
 1. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, iii. 270. 
 2. Koran viii. 18. 
 3. Koran v. 69. 
 4. Koran vii. 15 and 22. 
 5. Koran vii. 15 and 22. 
 6. Koran xcix. 7. 

 STORY II.
 The Fowler and the Bird.
 A fowler went out to catch birds, and disguised himself by wrapping his head up in leaves and grass, so as to avoid frightening the birds away from his snare. A bird of some sagacity came near him, and suspected something wrong, but foolishly lingered near, and began to question him as to his business. The fowler said he was a hermit who had retired from the world and dressed himself in weeds for the health of his soul. The bird said he was surprised to see a Mosalman doing this in contravention of the Prophet's precept, "There is no monkery in Islam," and his repeated declarations that Islam involves association with the faithful and avoidance of a solitary life. The fowler replied that a solitary life was allowed in heathen countries for the soul's health. 1 The bird then asked what the grains of wheat were that were strewed on the trap. The fowler replied that they were the property of an orphan, which had been deposited with him in consequence of his known probity. The bird then asked permission to eat some, as he was very hungry, and the fowler, with much pretended reluctance, allowed him to do so. The moment he touched the grain the trap closed upon him, and he found himself a prisoner. He then abused the fowler for his trickery, but the fowler said he had only himself to blame for his greediness in eating the food which belonged to an orphan. The moral is, that it is not destiny which leads people into afflictions, but their own errors and vices.
 The bird's cries to God for aid.
 When he had eaten the grain he was caught in the trap,
 And began to recite the chapters "Yasin" and "An'am."
 Then he began to wail and cry loudly,
 So that the very fowler and his trap shook with grief.
 He said, "My back is broken by the conflict of my thoughts;
 O Beloved One, come and stroke my head in mercy!
 The palm of Thy hand on my head gives me rest,
 Thy hand is a sign of Thy bounteous providence.
 Remove not Thy shadow from my head,
 I am afflicted, afflicted, afflicted!
 Sleep has deserted my eyes
 Through my longing for Thee, O Envy of cypresses!
 Though I be unworthy of Thy favor, how were it
 If thou shouldst regard the grieves of unworthy me?
 What claim of right can a non-existent thing make
 To have the doors of Thy bounty opened to it?
 Yet Thy bounty had regard to my senseless dust
 And endued it with the ten jewels of the senses
 Five external senses and five internal senses,
 Whereby inanimate seed became a living man.
 O Light on high! what is repentance without Thy grace
 But a mere mockery of the beard of repentance;
 Thou rootest up the hairs of such repentance,
 Repentance is the shadow, Thou the shining Moon.
 Alas! Thou hast ruined my house and home;
 How can I cease wailing while Thou oppressest me?
 How can I flee away when there is no living away?
 Without Thy sustaining lordship there is no slave.
 O take my life, Thou that art the source of life!
 For apart from Thee I am wearied of my life.
 I am a lover well versed in lovers' madness,
 I am weary of learning and sense.
 Since my bashfulness is destroyed, I will publish secrets;
 How long must I bear this trepidation and anxiety?
 Formerly I was covered by modesty as by a veil,
 Now I will leap from it under Thy coverlet!
 O comrades, our Beloved has closed up all paths;
 We are as lame deer, and He as a raging lion.
 Say what remedy is there but resignation 2
 When one is fallen into the hands of the raging lion?"
 The poet then passes on to the subject of the need for constant watchfulness, in order to avoid the snares of the world, and not to miss the divine blessing whenever it may appear. There is a tradition, "When half the night has passed Allah will descend to earth, and cry, 'Ho, ye that ask, it shall be answered to you; and ye that crave pardon, it shall be pardoned to you; and ye that petition, your petitions shall be granted.'" But all who sleep the sleep of negligence will miss the promised blessing. This is illustrated by the story of a lover who obtained an assignation with his mistress, but when she came, was found asleep, and was accordingly rejected.
 *NOTES:
 1. See Miskkat ul Masabih, ii. 541. 
 2. "To God I commit my case" (Koran xl. 47). 

 STORY III.
 The Drunken Turkish Amir and the Minstrel.
 Then follow exhortations to undergo "the pains of negation," as they are called in the Gulshan i Raz, i.e., even as the great saint and poet Faridu-'d-Din 'Attar cast away his drugs, to cast one's own will, knowledge, power, and ''self" into the unique river of "annihilation," 1 and from that state to rise to the higher state of eternal existence in God. The end and object of all negation is to attain to subsequent affirmation, as the negation in the creed, "There is no God," finds its complement and purpose in the affirmation "but God." Just so the purpose of negation of self is to clear the way for the apprehension of the fact that there is no existence but The One. The intoxication of life and its pleasures and occupations veils the Truth from men's eyes, and they ought to pass on to the spiritual intoxication which makes men beside themselves and lifts them to the beatific vision of eternal Truth. This is the same thing as saying they must pass on from negation to affirmation, from ignorance to the highest knowledge. This is illustrated by the story of the Turkish noble and the minstrel, which is given with an apology for using illustrations derived from drunkenness. A Turkish noble awoke from his drunken sleep, and called his minstrel to enliven him. The minstrel was a spiritual man, and proceeded to improve the occasion by singing a song with a deep spiritual meaning:
 "I know not if thou art a moon or an idol,
 I know not what thou requirest of me.
 I know not what service to pay thee,
 Whether to keep silence or to speak.
 Thou art not apart from me, yet, strange to say,
 I know not where I am, or where thou art.
 I know not wherefore thou art dragging me,
 Now embracing me, and now wounding me!"
 Thus the whole of his song consisted of repetitions of the words, "I know not." At last the noble could endure it no longer, and he took a stick and threatened to beat the minstrel, saying, "O wretch, tell us something you do know, and do not repeat what you do not know. if I ask you whence you come or what you have eaten, and you answer only by negations, your answer is a waste of time. Say what you mean by all these negations." The minstrel replied, "My meaning is a concealed one. I fear to make affirmations in opposition to your negations, so I state negations that you may get a hint of the corresponding affirmations from them. I now hint the truth to you in my song; and when death comes to you, you will learn the mysteries which at present I can only hint."
 Spiritual mysteries set forth in the Masnavi under similes of intoxication.
 That wine of God is gained from that minstrel, 2
 This bodily wine from this minstrel.
 Both of these have one and the same name in speech,
 But the difference between their worth is great.
 Men's bodies are like pitchers with closed mouths;
 Beware, till you see what is inside them.
 The pitcher of this body holds the water of life,
 Whilst that one holds deadly poison.
 If you look at the contents you are wise;
 If you look only at the vessel you are misguided.
 Know words resemble these bodies,
 And the meaning resembles the soul.
 The body's eyes are ever intent on bodies,
 The soul's eyes on the reasonable soul;
 Wherefore, in the figures of the words of the Masnavi,
 The form misleads, but the inner meaning guides.
 In the Koran it is declared that its parables
 "Mislead some and guide some." 3
 O God! when a spiritual man talks of wine,
 How can a fellow spiritual man mistake his meaning?
 Thus that minstrel began his intoxicating song,
 "O give me Thy cup, Thou whom I see not!
 Thou art my face; what wonder if I see it not?
 Extreme nearness acts as an obscuring veil. 4
 Thou art my reason; what wonder if I see Thee not
 Through the multitude of intervening obstacles?
 Thou art 'nearer to me than my neck vein,' 5
 How can I call to Thee, 'Ho,' as if thou wert far off?
 Nay, but I will mislead some by calling in the desert,
 To hide my Beloved from those of whom I am jealous!"
 This is illustrated by an anecdote of the Prophet and Ayisha. Ayisha was once sitting with the Prophet without her veil, when a blind man came in. Ayisha, knowing well the jealous disposition of her husband, at once prepared to retire on which the Prophet said, "The man is blind and cannot see you." Ayisha replied by signs that though the man could not see her she could see him. Just so the spiritual man is jealous of exposing his mysteries to the gaze of the profane, and from excess of caution veils them in signs and hints.
 Then comes a commentary on the tradition, "Die before you die," i.e., mortify your carnal passions and lusts, and deny and annihilate your carnal " self" before the death of the body overtakes you. Men who put off repentance till they are at the point of death are likened to the Shi'as of Aleppo, who every year on the Ashura, or tenth day of Muharram, meet at the Antioch gate to bewail the martyrdom of Hasan and Husain. Once, while they were thus engaged, a Sunni poet arrived at the city, and inquired the reason of this excessive grief and mourning. The Shi'as rebuked him for his ignorance of sacred history, and he said, "This martyrdom happened a long time ago; but it would seem, from your excessive grief, that the news of it has only just reached you. You must have been sleeping all this time not to have heard it before, and now you are mourning for your own sleepiness!" To the truly spiritual, who have drunk of God's wine and bear the "tokens of it on their foreheads," 6 death is an occasion for rejoicing, not for wailing. The man who is engrossed with the trifling pleasures of the world and blind to the ample provision made for the soul is like an ant in a barn of wheat, toiling to carry off a single grain, when ample stores of wheat are already at its disposal. Spiritual men must continue urging the worldly to repent and avail themselves of this heavenly provision for their souls, careless, like Noah, whether their preaching is listened to or not. This is illustrated by an anecdote of a man who knocked at the door of an empty house at midnight, in order to give notice that it was time to prepare the meal taken at dawn in Ramazan.
 Reason for knocking at the empty house.
 You have said your say; now hear my answer,
 So as not to remain in astonishment and bewilderment.
 Though to you this time seems midnight,
 To me the dawn of joyful morn seems nigh.
 To the vulgar all parts of the world seem dead,
 But to God they are instinct with sense and love.
 And as to your saying that "this house is empty,
 Why then should I beat a drum before it?"
 Know that the people of God expend money,
 And build many mosques and holy places,
 And spend health and wealth in distant pilgrimages,
 In ecstatic delight, like intoxicated lovers;
 And none of them ever say, "The Ka'ba is empty;"
 How can one who knows the truth say that?
 These people are ranged in battle array,
 And risk their lives to gain God's favor;
 One plunged in calamities like Job himself,
 Another exhibiting patience like Jacob.
 Thousands of them are thirsty and afflicted,
 Striving in earnest desire to do God's will.
 I likewise, in order to please the merciful God,
 Beat my drum at every door in hope of dawn.
 Seek ye a purchaser who will pay you gold;
 Where will you find one more liberal than God?
 He buys the worthless rubbish which is your wealth,
 He pays you the light that illumines your heart.
 He accepts these frozen and lifeless bodies of yours,
 And gives you a kingdom beyond what you dream of.
 He takes a few drops of your tears,
 And gives you the divine fount sweeter than sugar.
 He takes your sighs fraught with grief and sadness,
 And for each sigh gives rank in heaven as interest.
 In return for the sigh-wind that raised tear-clouds,
 God gave Abraham the title of "Father of the faithful."
 Come! in this incomparable and crowded mart
 Sell your old goods and take a kingdom in payment!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran cxii. 4. 
 2. "A wine cup tempered at the camphor fountain shall the just quaff" (Koran lxxvi. 5). 
 3. Koran ii. 24. 
 4. See couplet 122 of the Guishan i Raz:
 "When the object looked at is very close to the eye,
 The eye is darkened so that it cannot see it."
 I.e., When man is united with God he can no longer behold Him, for he is dwelling in Him. 
 5. Koran l. 15. 
 6. Koran xlviii. 29. 

 STORY IV.
 The Purchase of Bilal.
 To illustrate the rich recompense that is awarded to those who are faithful in tribulation, the story of Bilal is next recounted at length. Bilal was an Abyssinian slave belonging to a Jew of Mecca, and had incurred his master's displeasure in consequence of having embraced Islam. For this offence his master tortured him by exposing him to the heat of the midday sun, and beating him with thorns. But notwithstanding his anguish, Bilal would not recant his faith, and uttered only the cry, "Ahad, Ahad!" "The One, the One God!" At this moment Abu Bakr, the "Faithful witness," happened to pass by, and was so struck by his constancy that he resolved to buy him of the Jew. After much higgling and attempts at cheating on the Jew's part he succeeded in doing so, and at once set him free. When the Prophet heard of this purchase he said to Abu Bakr, "Give me a share in him;" but Abu Bakr told him, somewhat to his annoyance, that he had already set him free. Notwithstanding this Bilal attached himself to the Prophet, and was afterwards promoted to the honourable post of the Prophet's Mu'azzin.
 This is followed by the story of Hilal, another holy man who, like Bilal and Luqman and Joseph, served a noble in the capacity of groom. His affections were set on things above, and he was ever pressing upwards towards the high mark of spiritual exaltation, and saying, like Moses, "I will not stop till I reach the confluence of the two seas, and for years will I journey on." 1 Herein he presented a great contrast to ordinary men, who are ever giving way to their lusts, and so being dragged down into the state of mere animals, or even lower. Hilal's master was a Mosalman, yet one whose eyes were only partially open to the truth. He was in the habit of asking his guests their age; and if they answered doubtfully, saying, "Perhaps eighteen, or seventeen, or sixteen, or even fifteen," he would rebuke them, saying, "As you seem to be putting yourself lower and lower, you had better go back at once to your mother's womb." These guests are a type of men who lower themselves from the rank of humanity to that of animals. This master, however, was blind to Hilal's spiritual excellence, and allowed him to drag on a miserable existence in his stables. At last Hilal fell sick; but no one cared for him, till the Prophet himself, warned by a divine intimation, came to visit him, and commiserated his wretched condition. Hilal proved himself to be faithful through tribulation; for, instead of grumbling at his lot, he replied, "How is that sleep wretched which is broken by the advent of the Sun of prophecy? or how can he be called athirst on whose head is poured the water of life?" In truth, Hilal had by degrees become purified from the stain of earthly existence and earthly qualities, and washed in the fountain of the water of life, i.e., the holy revelations of the Prophet, till he had attained the exalted grade of purity enjoined on those who would study God's Word aright. 2
 Growth in grace is accomplished by slow degrees, and not per saltum.
 Since you have told the story of Hilal (the new moon)
 Now set forth the story of Badr (the full moon).
 That new moon and that full moon are now united,
 Removed from duality and defect and shortcomings.
 That Hilal is now exalted above inward defect;
 His outward defects served as degrees of ascension.
 Night after night that mentor taught him grades of ascent
 And through his patient waiting gave him happiness.
 The mentor says, "O raw hastener, through patient waiting,
 You must climb to the summit step by step.
 Boil your pot by degrees and in a masterly way;
 Food boiled in mad haste is spoiled.
 Doubtless God could have created the universe
 By the fiat 'Be!' in one moment of time;
 Why, then, did He protract His work over six days,
 Each of which equaled a thousand years, O disciple?
 Why does the formation of an infant take nine months?
 Because God's method is to work by slow degrees,
 Why did the formation of Adam take forty days?
 Because his clay was kneaded by slow degrees.
 Not hurrying on like you, O raw one,
 Who claim to be a Shaikh whilst yet only a child!
 You run up like a gourd higher than all plants,
 But where is your power of resistance or combat?
 You have leant on trees or on walls,
 And so mounted up like a gourd, O little dog rose;
 Even though your prop may be a lofty cypress,
 At last you are seen to be dry and hollow.
 O gourd, your bright green hue soon turns yellow.
 For it is not a natural but an artificial color."
 This is illustrated by an anecdote of an ugly old hag who painted her face to make it look pretty, but was detected and exposed to scorn.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xviii. 59. 
 2. Koran lvi. 79. 

 STORY V.
 The Sufi and the Qazi.
 A sick man laboring under an incurable disease went to a physician for advice. The physician felt his pulse, and perceived that no treatment would cure him, and therefore told him to go away and do whatever he had a fancy for. This was the advice given by God to the Israelites when they were seen to be incurable by the admonitions of the prophets. "Do what you will, but God's eye is on all your doings." 1 The sick man blessed the physician for his agreeable prescription, and at once went to a stream, where he saw a Sufi bathing his feet. He was seized with a desire to hit the Sufi on the back, and, calling to mind the physician's advice, at once carried his wish into effect. The Sufi jumped up, and was about to return the blow, but when he saw the weakly and infirm condition of his assailant he restrained himself. He disregarded his present angry impulse, and had regard to the future, so that the non-existent future became to him more really existent than the existing present. Here the poet digresses to point out that when wise men recognize the true relative importance of the present and the future they cease to shrink from death and annihilation, which lifts them to a higher and nobler life. This is illustrated by an anecdote of Mahmud of Ghazni, quoted from Faridu- 'd-Din 'Attar. Mahmud, in one of his campaigns, took prisoner a Hindu boy, who at first regarded him with the greatest dread, in consequence of the stories he had heard of him from his mother, but afterwards experienced Mahmud's kindness and tenderness, and came to know him and love him. So it is with death. According to the Hadis "Those who have passed away do not grieve because of death, but because of wasted opportunities in life." The Masnavi is "a shop of poverty and self-abnegation," and a treasury containing only the doctrines of "Unity;" and if its stories suggest aught else, that is due to the evil promptings of Iblis, who also misled the Prophet himself to attribute undue power to the idols Lat and 'Uzza and Manat, in a verse which was afterwards cancelled. 2 The Sufi, being full of the spirit of self-abnegation, did not retaliate on his weak, assailant but led him before the Qazi. On learning the facts of the case the Qazi said, "This Faqir is sick to death, and you, being a Sufi, are, according to your profession, dead to the world. How, then, can I award a penalty against him in your favor? I am a judge, not of the dead, but of the living." The Sufi was dissatisfied with this view of the case, and again pressed the Qazi to do him justice. On this the Qazi asked the sick Faqir how much money he had, and on his replying, "Six dirhams," took pity on him, and let him off with a fine of three dirhams only. The moment the sentence was pronounced the sick Faqir went up to the Qazi and struck him a blow on the back, and cried out, "Now take the other three dirhams and let me go!" The Sufi then pointed out to the Qazi that by his ill-timed leniency to the Faqir he had brought this blow upon himself, and urged him to apply in his own case those principles of mercy and forgiveness which he had proposed in the case of another. The Qazi said that, for his part, he recognized every blow and misfortune that might befall him as divinely ordained, and sent for his good, according to the text, "Laugh little and weep much," 3 and that his judgment in the matter of the Faqir had not been dictated by impulse, but by inspiration. 4 The Sufi again asked him how evils and misfortunes could proceed from the divine fount of good, and the Qazi replied that what seems good and evil to us has no absolute existence, but is merely as the foam on the surface of the vast ocean. Moreover, every misfortune occurring to the faithful in this life will be amply compensated for in the life to come. The Sufi asked why this world should not be so arranged that only good should be experienced in it, and the Qazi replied by telling him an anecdote of a Turk and a tailor. The Turk, who typifies the careless pleasure-seeker, was so intent on listening to the jokes and amusing stories of the tailor, typifying the seductive world, that he allowed himself to be robbed of the silk which was to furnish him with a vesture for eternity. The Sufi again retorted that he did not see why the world would not get on better without the evil in it, and the Qazi replied with the poet's favorite argument that there would be no possibility of being virtuous if there were no temptations to be vicious. As Bishop Butler says, this life is a state of probation, and such a state necessarily involves trials and difficulties and dangers to be resisted and overcome.
 The dead regret not dying, but having lost opportunities in life.
 Well said that Leader of mankind,
 That whosoever passes away from the world
 Does not grieve and lament over his death,
 But grieves ever over lost opportunities.
 He says, "Why did I not keep death always in view,
 Which is the treasury of wealth and sustenance?
 Why did I blindly all my life set my affections
 On vain shadows which perish at death?
 My regret is not that I have died,
 But that I rested on these vain shadows in life.
 I saw not that my body was a mere shadow or foam,
 Which foam rises out of and lives on the Ocean (God).
 When the Ocean casts its foam-drops to land,
 Go to the graveyard and behold them,
 And ask them, "Where is your motion and activity?
 The Ocean has cast you into a mortal sickness!"
 They will answer by their condition, if not with words,
 "Put this question to the Ocean, not to us!"
 How can mere foam move unless moved by the waves?
 How can dust mount on high unless raised by wind?
 When you see the dust-cloud, see the wind too!
 When you see the foam, see the ocean that heaves it!
 Ah! look till you see your own real final cause,
 The rest of you is only fat and flesh, warp and woof.
 Your fat kindles no light or flame in a lamp;
 Your kneaded flesh is not good for roasting.
 Burn up, then, all this body of yours with discernment;
 Rise to sight, to sight, to sight!
 Virtue cannot exist without temptation and difficulties to be overcome.
 The Sufi said, "The Great Helper is able
 To procure for us profit without loss.
 He who casts into the fire roses and trees
 Can accomplish good without injury to any.
 He who extracts the rose from the thorn
 Can also turn this winter into spring.
 He who exalts the heads of the cypresses
 Is able also out of sadness to bring joy.
 He by whose fiat all non-existent things exist,
 What harm to Him were it if He made them eternal?
 He who gave to the body a soul and made it live,
 What loss to Him were it if He never caused it to die?
 How would it be if That Liberal One were to give
 Their hearts' desire to his slaves without toil,
 And keep away from these feeble ones
 The ambushed snares of lust and temptations of Iblis?"
 The Qazi said, "If there were no bitter things,
 And no opposition of fair and foul, stone and pearl,
 And no lust or Satan or concupiscence,
 And no wounds or war or fraud,
 Pray, O destroyer of virtue, by what name and title
 Could the King of kings address His slaves?
 How could He say, 'O temperate or O meek one!'
 Or, 'O courageous one, or O wise one?'
 How could there be temperate, gentle, or liberal men
 If there were no cursed Satan to tempt them astray?
 Rustam and Hamza would be all the same as cowards;
 Wisdom and knowledge would be useless and vain.
 Wisdom and knowledge serve to guide the wanderers;
 Were there but one road wisdom would be needless.
 To pamper the house of your body fleeting as water,
 Do you think it right to ruin both worlds?
 I know you are pure of guile and ripe,
 And ask this only to edify the ignorant.
 The ills of fortune and all troubles soever
 Are better than exile from God and neglect of Him;
 For the former pass away, but the latter abide;
 He is happy who carries a wary heart before God." 5
 This is illustrated by an anecdote of a woman who complained of the hard life she had to lead with her husband owing to his poverty, and was silenced by being asked whether she would prefer to be divorced. No troubles are so hard to hear as separation from the Beloved. Fasting and holy war bring pains with them, but not so great as those incurred by banishment from God. In the midst of their troubles God is ever caring for His servants, and they must not let their tribulations blot out the memory of God's previous goodness to them.
 To do this shows an entire absence of growth in grace. This is illustrated by an anecdote of a sage and a monk. The sage asked the monk which was the older, his white beard or himself. The monk replied that he himself was older by some years, whereupon the sage rebuked him for his ignorance, saying his beard had grown pure and white, but he was still black with sin, and had progressed not at all in goodness since he was born.
 Each of our members testifies to God's bounties towards us.
 Inquire now, I pray, of each one of your members;
 These dumb members have a thousand tongues.
 Inquire the detail of the bounties of the All-sustainer,
 Which are recorded in the volume of the universe.
 Day and night you are eagerly asking for news,
 Whilst every member of your body is telling you news.
 Since each member of your body issued from Not-being,
 How much pleasure has it seen, and how much pain?
 For no member grows and flourishes without pleasure,
 And each member is weakened by every pain. 6
 The member endures, but that pleasure is forgotten,
 Yet not all forgotten, but hidden from the senses.
 Like summer wherein cotton is produced,
 The cotton remains, but the summer is forgotten.
 Or like ice which is formed in great frost,
 The frost departs, but the ice is still before us.
 The ice is mindful of that extreme cold,
 And even in winter that crop is mindful of the summer.
 In like manner, O son, every member of your body
 Tells you tales of God's bounties to your body.
 Even as a woman who has borne twenty children,
 Each child tells a tale of pleasure felt by her.
 She became not pregnant save after sexual pleasure,
 Can a garden bloom without the spring?
 Pregnant women and their teeming wombs
 Tell tales of love frolics in the spring.
 So every tree which nurtures its fruits
 Has been, like Mary, impregnated by the Unseen King.
 Though fire's heat be hidden in the midst of water,
 Yet a thousand boiling bubbles prove it present.
 Though the heat of the fire be working unseen,
 Yet its bubbles signify its presence plainly.
 In like manner, the members of those enjoying "union"
 Become big with child, viz., with forms of "states" and "words." 7
 Gazing on the beauty of these forms they stand agape,
 And the forms of the world vanish from their sight.
 These spiritual progenies are not born of the elements,
 And are perforce invisible to the sensual eye.
 These progenies are born of divine apparitions,
 And are therefore bidden by veils without color.
 I said "born," but in reality they are not born;
 I used this expression only by way of indication.
 But keep silence till the King bids you speak,
 Offer not your nightingale songs to these roses;
 For they themselves are saying to you in loud tones,
 "O nightingale, hold your peace, and listen to us!"
 Those two kinds of fair forms (ecstatic states and words)
 Are undeniable proofs of a previous "union;"
 Yea, those two kinds of exalted manifestations
 Are the evident fruits of a preceding wedlock.
 The ecstasy is past, but your members recall it;
 Ask them about it, or call it to mind yourself.
 When sorrow seizes you, if you are wise,
 You will question that sorrow-fraught moment,
 Saying to it, "O sorrow, who now deniest
 Thy portion of bounty given thee by the Perfect One,
 Even if each moment be not to thee a glad spring,
 Yet of what is thy body, like a rose-heap, a storehouse?
 Thy body is a heap of roses, thy thought rosewater;
 'Twere strange if rosewater ignored the rose-heap!"
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran xli. 40. 
 2. Koran liii. 19, and Rodwell's note. 
 3. Koran ix. 84. 
 4. Koran liii. 3. 
 5. Koran xxvi. 88. 
 6. Cp. Nicom. Ethics, x., iv. 6. 
 7. Compare Gulshan i Raz, I. 624. Ecstatic words and states are the offspring of communion with God. 

 STORY VI.
 The Faqir and the Hidden Treasure.
 Notwithstanding the clear evidence of God's bounty, engendering these spiritual states in men, philosophers and learned men, wise in their own conceit, obstinately shut their eyes to it, and look afar off for what is really close to them, so that they incur the penalty of "being branded on the nostrils," 1 adjudged against unbelievers. This is illustrated by the story of a poor Faqir who prayed to God that he might be fed without being obliged to work for his food. A divine voice came to him in his sleep and directed him to go to the house of a certain scribe and take a certain writing that he should find there. He did so, and on reading the writing found that it contained directions for finding a hidden treasure. The directions were as follows: "Go outside the city to the dome which covers the tomb of the martyr; turn your back to the tomb and your face towards Mecca, place an arrow in your bow, and where the arrow falls there dig for the treasure." But before the Faqir had time to commence the search the rumor of the writing and its contents had reached the king, who at once sent and took it away from the Faqir, and began to search for the treasure on his own account. After shooting many arrows and digging in all directions the king failed to find the treasure, and got weary of searching, and returned the writing to the Faqir. Then the Faqir tried what he could do, but failed altogether to hit the spot where the treasure was buried. At last, despairing of success by his own unaided efforts, he cast his care upon God, and implored the divine assistance. Then a voice from heaven came to him, saying, "You were directed to fix an arrow on your bow, but not to draw your bow with all your might, as you have been doing. Shoot as gently as possible, that the arrow may fall close to you, for the hidden treasure is indeed 'nearer to you than your neck-vein.' "2 Men overlook the spiritual treasures close to them, and for this reason it is that prophets have no honor in their own countries, as is illustrated by the cases of the saint Abu-'l-Hasan Khirqani and the Prophet Hud or Heber.
 God rules men by alternations of hope and fear.
 This sad Faqir too put up his cries for aid,
 And bore off the ball of acceptance from the field.
 But at times he distrusted the efficacy of his prayers,
 On account of the delay in answering them.
 Again, hope of the mercy of the Lord
 Arose in his heart as an earnest of rejoicing.
 When he was hopeless and ceasing to pray in weariness
 He heard from God the word "Ascend!"
 God is an Abaser and an Exalter
 Without these two processes nothing comes into being.
 Behold the abasement of earth and uplifting of heaven;
 Without these two heaven would not revolve, O man!
 The abasement and exaltation of earth is otherwise,
 Half the year is barren, half green and verdant.
 The abasement and exaltation of weary time
 Is otherwise again, half day and half night.
 The abasement and exaltation of this compound body
 Is now health and now grievous sickness.
 Know all the conditions of the world are in this wise,
 Drought, famine, peace, war, and trials.
 This world flies, as it were, with these two wings;
 Through these all souls are homes of hope and fear;
 So that the world keeps trembling like leaves,
 In the cold and hot winds of death and resurrection.
 Till tbe jar of pure wine of our 'Isa (Unity)
 Shall supersede the jar of many-colored wine (plurality),
 For that world (of unity) is as a saltpan;
 Whatever enters it loses its varied hues.
 On the text, "Verily I am about to place a Khalifa or Vicegerent on earth" 3.
 Whereas the aim and will of the Merciful God
 Inclined to the revelation and manifestation of Himself,
 And one opposite cannot be shown but by its opposite,
 And that Unique King of kings has no opposite or peer, 4
 Therefore that Lord of the heart set up a Khalifa,
 To serve as a mirror to reflect His own sovereignty.
 Therefore He gave him unlimited purity and light,
 And on the other side He set darkness opposing the light. 5
 God set up two standards, a white and a black one,
 The one Adam and the other Iblis;
 And between these two mighty armies
 Ensued war and battle and all we have witnessed.
 Thus, too, in the second generation lived pure Abel;
 Cain was the opposite of his pure light.
 In like manner these two standards of right and wrong
 Were borne aloft till the age of Nimrod.
 Nimrod was the opponent and adversary of Abraham,
 And their opposing camps warred and fought one another.
 When God grew weary of the length of this war,
 His fire was appointed to arbitrate between them.
 He commanded fire and its flaming torment
 To settle the matter in dispute between them.
 Age after age these two parties contended,
 Even till the time of Pharaoh and gentle Moses.
 Between these two the war was waged for years,
 And when it passed all bounds and affliction increased
 God made the water of the Nile a judge between them,
 That the one who deserved preeminence should endure.
 In like manner it went on till the time of Mustafa
 And Abu Jahl, that prince of iniquity.
 Likewise did God ordain a punishment for the Thamud,
 Namely, an earthquake which destroyed their lives.
 Likewise a punishment for the Adites,
 Namely, a swiftly rising and violent wind.
 Likewise God ordained acute punishment for Qarun;
 For the earth concealed wrath under its mildness,
 Till all its mildness was converted into wrath,
 And it swallowed up Qarun and his wealth in its depth.
 So with the mouthful which nourishes your body
 And wards off the darts of hunger like a cuirass,
 When God instils wrath into this mouthful of bread,
 That same bread will choke you like a halter.
 This same garment which protects you from the cold,
 God may give it the quality of intense cold,
 So that this warm vest may become to your body
 Cold as ice and biting as frost;
 So that you will cast off these furs and silks,
 And seek for a refuge from cold with cold itself.
 You have only one eye, not two (for these two possibilities).
 You have forgotten the story of the "shadowing cloud." 6
 God's command came to city and village,
 And to house and wall, saying, "Afford no shade!
 Ward not off the pouring rain and the sun's heat;"
 Till those men hasted to listen to the prophet Shu'aib,
 Saying, 'O king, have pity; most of us are dead!'
 But read the rest of the tale in the commentaries.
 When that Omnipotent hand made the staff a serpent,
 If you have reason, that portent should suffice.
 You have sight indeed, but fail to mark carefully;
 Your eyes are dimmed and closed with fat.
 The heavenly treasure lies "nearer to us than our neck-vein".
 The Faqir was in this state when a divine voice came,
 And God thus solved his difficulties,
 Saying, "The voice told you to place an arrow on the bow,
 It did not bid you draw the bowstring to the utmost;
 It did not bid you draw the bow with all your might;
 It said, 'Adjust an arrow,' not 'Draw the bow fully.'
 You elevated the bow to excess,
 You magnified unduly the bowman's art,
 Go! abandon this strong bowmanship,
 Fix an arrow on the string, but make it not fly far.
 When it falls, dig in that spot and search,
 Abandon force and seek the treasure with humility."
 God is "what is nearer to you than your neck-vein,"
 You have cast the arrow of speculation afar off.
 O you, who have made ready your bow and arrows,
 The game is close to you, and you shoot too far off.
 The further a man shoots, the further off he is,
 And the more removed from the treasure he seeks.
 The philosopher kills himself with thinking,
 Tell him that his back is turned to that treasure;
 Tell him that the more he runs to and fro,
 The Almighty says, "Make efforts in our ways," 7
 Not "Make efforts away from us," O restless one.
 Like Canaan, who went away, from shame to follow Noah,
 Up to the top of that lofty mountain,
 The more he sought safety on that mountain,
 The further was he removed from the safe asylum.
 So this Faqir, in search of that hidden treasure,
 Day after day drew his bow stronger and stronger;
 And the harder he drew his bow,
 The further was he from the seat of that treasure.
 This parable applies to all times,
 For the soul of the ignorant is pledged to misfortune.
 Because the ignorant man is ashamed of a master,
 Perforce he goes and opens a new school for himself.
 That school is higher than your true master, O beloved,
 And hard of access, and full of scorpions and snakes.
 Straightway overthrow it, and turn back again
 To the green garden and sweet watered meadows.
 Not like Canaan, who, through pride and ignorance,
 Sought his ark of safety on a protecting mountain.
 His far-shooting learning veiled his eyes,
 While his heart's desire was all the while in his grasp.
 Ah! oftentimes have learning and genius and wit
 Proved to the traveler to be Ghouls and highwaymen!
 "The majority of those in Paradise are the simple," 8
 Who have escaped the snares of philosophy.
 Strip yourself bare of overweening intellect,
 That grace may ever be shed upon you from above.
 Cleverness is the opposite of humility and submission,
 Quit cleverness, and consort with simple-mindedness!
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxviii. 16. 
 2. Koran l. 15. 
 3. Koran ii. 28. 
 4. Because, as Sir T. Browne says, "God is all things." 
 5. See Gulshan i Raz, I. 265, and note. 
 6. Koran xxvi. 189. The cloud emitted heat instead of rain, to punish those who disregarded Shu'aib, or Jethro. 
 7. Koran xxix. 69. 
 8. A Hadis. Cp. 1 Cor. i. 25, 26. 

 STORY VII.
 The Three Travelers.
 A Mosalman was traveling with two unbelievers, a Jew and a Christian. Like wisdom linked with the flesh and the devil. God was "nigh unto His faithful servant," 1 and when the first stage was completed He caused a present of sweetmeats to be laid before the travelers. As the Jew and the Christian had already eaten their evening meal when the sweetmeats arrived, they proposed to lay them aside till the morrow; but the Mosalman, who was keeping fast, and therefore could not eat before nightfall, proposed to eat them that night. To this the other two refused to consent, alleging that the Mosalman wanted to eat the whole of the sweetmeats himself. Then the Mosalman proposed to divide them into three portions, so that each might eat his own portion when he pleased; but this also was objected to by the others, who quoted the proverb, "The divider is in hell" The Mosalman explained to them that this proverb meant the man who divides his allegiance between God and lust; but they still refused to give way, and the Mosalman therefore submitted, and lay down to sleep in the endurance of the pangs of hunger. Next morning, when they awoke, it was agreed between them that each should relate his dreams, and that the sweetmeats should be awarded to him whose dream was the best. The Jew said that he had dreamed that Moses had carried him to the top of Mount Sinai, and shown him marvelous visions of the glory of heaven and the angels. The Christian said he had dreamed that 'Isa had carried him up to the fourth heaven and shown him all the glories of the heavens. Finally the Mosalman said that the Prophet Muhammad had appeared to him in person, and after commending him for his piety in saying his prayers and keeping fast so strictly on the previous night, had commanded him to eat up those divinely provided sweetmeats as a reward, and he had accordingly done so. The Jew and the Christian were at first annoyed with him for thus stealing a march upon them; but on his pointing out that he had no option but to obey the Prophet's commands, they admitted that he had done right, and that his dream was the best, as he had been awake, while they were asleep. The moral is, that the divine treasure is revealed as an immediate intuition to those who seek it with prayer and humble obedience, and not to those who seek to infer and deduce its nature and quality from the lofty abstractions of philosophy.
 Lofty philosophical speculation does not lead to the knowledge of God.
 The Mosalman said, "O my friends,
 My lord, the Prophet Muhammad, appeared to me
 And said, 'The Jew has hurried to the top of Sinai,
 And plays a game of love with God's interlocutor;
 The Christian has been carried by 'Isa, Lord of bliss
 Up to the summit of the fourth heaven
 Thou who art left behind and hast endured anguish,
 Arise quickly and eat the sweetmeats and confections!
 Those two clever and learned men have ascended,
 And read their titles of dignity and exaltation;
 Those two exalted ones have found exalted science,
 And rivaled the very angels in intellect;
 O humble and simple and despised one,
 Arise and eat of the banquet of the divine sweets!"
 They said to him, "Then you have been gluttonous;
 Well indeed! you have eaten all the sweets!"
 He answered, "When my sovereign lord commanded me,
 Who am I that I should abstain from obeying?
 Would you, O Jew, resist the commands of Moses
 If he bade you do something, either pleasant or not?
 Would you, O Christian, rebel against 'Isa's commands,
 Whether those commands were agreeable or the reverse?
 How could I rebel against the 'Glory of the prophets'?
 Nay, I ate the sweets, and am now happy."
 They replied, "By Allah, you have seen a true vision;
 Your vision is better than a hundred like ours.
 Your dream was seen by you when awake, O happy one,
 For it was seen to be real by your being awake."
 Quit excessive speculation and inordinate science,
 'Tis service of God and good conduct that gains its end.
 'Tis for this that God created us,
 "We created not mankind save to worship us" 2
 What profit did his science bring to Samiri? 3
 His science excluded him from God's portals.
 Consider what Qarun gained by his alchemy;
 He was swallowed up in the depths of the earth.
 Abu-l Jahl, again, what gained he from his wit
 Save to be hurled head-foremost into hell for infidelity?
 Know real science is seeing the fire directly,
 Not mere talk, inferring the fire from the smoke.
 Your scientific proofs are more offensive to the wise
 Than the urine and breath whence a physician infers.
 If these be your only proofs, O son,
 Smell foul breath and inspect urine like physicians.
 Such proofs are as the staff of a blind man,
 Which prove only the blindness of the holder.
 All your outcry and pompous claims and bustle
 Only say, "I cannot see, hold me excused!"
 This is illustrated be an anecdote of a peasant who, hearing a proclamation issued by the Prince of Tirmid, to the effect that a large reward would be given to him who should take a message to Samarcaud in the space of four days, hurried to Tirmid by relays of post-horses in the utmost haste, and threw the whole city into alarm, as the people thought that his extreme haste and bustle must portend the approach of an enemy or some other calamity. But when he was admitted to the presence of the prince, all he had to say was, that he had hurried to inform him that he could not go to Samarcand so quickly. The prince was very angry with him for making all this disturbance about nothing, and threatened to punish him.
 The uses of chastisements.
 He said, "Alms of mercy repel calamity, 4
 Alms cure thy sickness, O son
 'Tis not charitable to burn up the poor,
 Or to put out the eyes of the meek."
 The prince replied, "Kindness is good in its place,
 Provided you do kindness in its proper place.
 If at chess you put the king in the rook's place
 That is wrong; and so if you put the knight in the king's,
 The law prescribes both rewards and chastisements.
 The king's place is the throne, the horse's the gate.
 What is justice but putting each in his place?
 What injustice but putting each in what is not his place?
 Nothing is vain of all that God has created,
 Whether vengeance or mercy, or plain dealing or snares.
 Not one of all these is good absolutely,
 Nor is any one of them absolutely bad.
 Each is harmful or beneficial according to its place,
 Wherefore knowledge of these points is proper and useful.
 Ah! many are the chastisements sent to the poor
 Which are more beneficial to him than bread and sweets;
 Because sweets out of season excite biliousness,
 While blows make him pure from impurity.
 Strike the poor man timely blows,
 Which may save him from being beheaded later."
 The peasant, in reply, urged the prince not to be over hasty in punishing him, but to take counsel with suitable advisers, as enjoined in various texts, 5 and in the Hadis prohibiting monkery, and warned him that if he shunned the advice and society of his equals he would assuredly be led astray by wretched companions. 6 In illustration of this a story is told of a mouse who conceived a great affection for a frog living in a neighboring pond. 7 That he might be able to communicate with his friend at all times, he fastened a string to the frog's leg, and the other end of it to his own. The proverb says, "Occasional intermission of visits augments love," 8 but ardent lovers desire to be in communication with the object of their love without intermission. The frog was at first unwilling to enter into such close relations with an animal of another species, but at last allowed himself to be persuaded to do so, against his better judgment. Shortly afterwards a raven swooped down on the mouse and carried him off, and the frog, being fastened to the mouse, was dragged off and destroyed along with it. The raven's friends said to him, "How is it you managed to catch an animal that lives in the water?" and he replied, "Because it was so silly as to consort with one of another species that lived on dry land."
 Comparison of the body to the mouse, and the soul to the frog.
 The two friends discussed the matter long,
 And after discussion this plan was settled,
 That they should fetch a long string,
 By means of which to communicate with one another.
 The mouse said, "One end must be tied to your leg,
 And the other end to the leg of me, your double,
 That by this contrivance we two may be united,
 And be mingled together like soul and body."
 Body is like a string tied to sod's foot,
 That string drags soul down to earth.
 The soul is the frog in the water of ecstatic bliss;
 Escaping from the mouse of the body, it is in bliss.
 The mouse of the body drags it back with that string;
 Ah! what sorrow it tastes through being dragged back
 If it were not dragged down by that insolent mouse,
 The frog would remain at peace in its water.
 On the last day, when you shall awake from sleep,
 You will learn the rest of this from the Sun of truth!
 In illustration of the thesis that the sense which perceives the unseen and spiritual world is superior to the other senses, and is exempt from death and decay, the poet tells an anecdote of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni and some robbers. One night, when walking about the city alone, he fell in with a band of robbers. He told them he was one of them, and proposed that each should tell his own special talent. Accordingly one said he could hear what the dogs said when they barked; another that his sight was so good that when he saw a man at night he could recognize him without fail next day; another said his talent lay in the strength of his arms, whereby he dug holes through the walls of houses another said he could divine by his sense of smell where gold was hidden; another said his wrist was so strong that he could throw a rope farther than any one. At last it came to the turn of the king, and he told them that his talent lay in his beard, for when he wagged it he could deliver criminals from the executioner. The robbers then went to the king's palace, and, each of them co-operating by the exercise of his peculiar talent, they broke into it, and plundered a large sum of money. The king, after witnessing the burglary, withdrew from them secretly, and, having summoned his Vazir, gave orders for their apprehension. No sooner were the robbers brought before the king than the one whose talent lay in recognizing by day those whom he had seen in the darkness of night at once knew him, and said to the others, "This is the man who said his talent lay in his beard!" Thus the only one whose talent profited him at the time of need was he who could recognize by day what he had previously seen by night; for he appealed to the king to exercise his talent of deliverance, and the king listened to his entreaty, and delivered him from the executioner.
 He whose eyes discern God in the world is safe from destruction.
 He who, when he had once seen a person at night,
 Recognized him without fail when he saw him by day,
 Saw the king upon the throne, and straightway cried,
 "This was he who accompanied us on our nightly walk;
 This is he whose beard possessed such rare talent;
 Our arrest is due to his sagacity."
 He added, "'Yea, he was with you,' 9 this great king;
 He beheld our actions and heard our secrets.
 My eyes guided me to recognize that king at night,
 And dwelt lovingly on his face, like the moon at night.
 Now, therefore, I will implore his grace for myself,
 For he will never avert his face from him that knew him."
 Know the eye of the ' Knower is a safeguard in both worlds,
 For therein ye will find a very Bahram to aid you.
 For this cause Muhammad was the intercessor for faults,
 Because his eye 'did not wander' 10 from the King of kings.
 In the night of this world, when the sun is hidden,
 He beheld God, and placed his hopes on Him.
 His eyes were anointed with the words, ' We opened thy heart,' 11
 He beheld what Gabriel himself had not power to see." 12
 The story of the frog is concluded by the lamentations of the frog over his folly in consorting with an animal of a different genus to his own, on which Reason warns him that homogeneity lies in spirit, not in outward form; and this is illustrated by an anecdote of a man named 'Abdu'l Ghaus, who was the son of a fairy mother, and consequently homogeneous with the fairies, though only an ordinary man to outward appearance.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran ii. 182. 
 2. Koran ii. 56. 
 3. Samiri, the maker of the golden calf. Qarun Korah. 
 4. Freytag Arabum Proverbia, iii. 277. 
 5. Koran lxvii. 22, iii. 155, xlii. 36. 
 6. Koran xliii. 37. 
 7. Anvari Suhaili, Chap. vii. Story III. 
 8. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, i. 287. 
 9. Koran lvii. 4. 
 10. Koran liii. 17. 
 11. Koran xciv. 1. 
 12. Gulshan i Raz, I. 120. 

 STORY VIII.
 The Man who received a Pension from the Prefect of Tabriz.
 These reflections on the nothingness of outward form compared to spirit lead the poet to the corollary that often men whose outward forms are buried in the grave are greater benefactors to the poor and helpless than men still living in the body. This is illustrated by the story of the man who was maintained by the Prefect of Tabriz. This man incurred heavy debts on the credit of his pension, even as the Imam Ja'far Sadiq was able to capture a strong fort single-handed through the power of God assisting him. When the creditors became pressing the man journeyed to Tabriz to seek further aid; but on arriving there he found the Prefect was dead. On learning this he was much cast down, but eventually recognized that he had erred in looking to a creature instead of his Creator for aid, according to the text, "The infidels equalize others with their Lord." 1 This obliquity of spiritual sight, causing him to see a mere human benefactor, where the real benefactor was God alone, is illustrated by anecdotes of a man buying bread at Kashan, of Sultan Khwarazm Shah deluded into disliking a fine horse by the interested advice of his Vazir, and of Joseph, who when imprisoned by Pharaoh was induced to trust for deliverance to the intercession of the chief butler rather than to God alone, for which cause "he remained several years in prison." 2 A charitable person of Tabriz endeavoured to raise funds for the poor man, and appealed to the citizens to aid him, but only succeeded in collecting a very small sum. He then visited the Prefect's tomb, and implored assistance from him; and the same night the Prefect appeared to him in a dream, and gave him directions where to find a great treasure, and directed him to make over this treasure to the poor man. Thus the dead Prefect proved a more liberal benefactor than the citizens of Tabriz who were still living.
 The poor man's regrets for having placed his trust in man and not in God.
 When he recovered himself he said, "O God,
 I have sinned in looking for aid to a creature!
 Although the Prefect showed great liberality,
 It was in no wise equal to Thy bounty.
 He gave me a cap, but Thou my head full of sense;
 He gave me a garment, but Thou my tall form.
 He gave me gold, but Thou my hand which counts it;
 He gave me a horse, but Thou my reason to guide it;
 He gave me a lamp, but Thou my lucid eyes;
 He gave me sweetmeats, but Thou my appetite for them;
 He gave me a pension, but Thou my life and being;
 His gift was gold, but Thine true blessings;
 He gave me a house, but Thou heaven and earth;
 In Thy house he and a hundred like him are nourished.
 The gold was of Thy providing, he did not create it;
 The bread of Thy providing, and furnished to him by Thee.
 Thou also didst give him his liberality,
 For thereby Thou didst augment his happiness.
 I made him my Qibla, and directed my prayers to him;
 I turned away my eyes from Thee, the Qibla-maker!
 Where was he when the Supreme Dispenser of faith
 Sowed reason in the water and clay of man,
 And drew forth from Not-being this heavenly dome,
 And spread out the carpet of the earth?
 Of the stars He made torches to illumine the sky,
 And of the four elements locks with keys (of reason).
 Ah! many are the buildings visible and invisible
 Which God has made between heaven's dome and earth.
 Man is the astrolabe of those exalted attributes,
 The attribute of man is to manifest God's signs.
 Whatever is seen in man is the reflection of God,
 Even as the reflection of the moon in water."
 Say not two, know not two, call not on two!
 Know the slave is obliterated in his lord!
 So the lord is obliterated in God that created him
 Yea, lost and dead and buried in his Creator!
 When you regard this lord as separate from God,
 You annihilate at once text and paraphrase.
 With eyes and heart look beyond mere water and clay,
 God alone is the Qibla; regard not two Qiblas!
 If you regard two you lose the benefit of both;
 A spark falls on the tinder and the tinder vanishes!
 Joseph kept in prison a long time for having placed his hopes of release in man and not in God.
 In like manner Joseph, in the prison,
 With humble and earnest supplications
 Begged aid, saying, "When you are released,
 And are occupied with your ministrations to the king,
 Remember me, and entreat the king
 To release rue too from this prison."
 How can one prisoner fettered in the snare
 Procure release for a fellow prisoner?
 The people of the world are all prisoners,
 Awaiting death on the stake of annihilation;
 Except one or two rare exceptions,
 Whose bodies are in prison but their souls in heaven.
 Afterwards, because Joseph had looked to man for aid,
 He remained in prison for many years.
 The Devil caused the man to forget Joseph,
 And blotted Joseph's words from his remembrance;
 And on account of this fault of that holy man
 God left him in the prison for many years.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran vi. 1. 
 2. Koran xii. 42. 
 3. Koran xii. 42. 

 STORY IX.
 The King and his Three Sons.
 A certain king had three sons, who were the light of his eyes, and, as it were, a fountain whence the palm tree of his heart drank the water of bliss. One day he called his sons before him and commanded them to travel through his realm, and to inspect the behavior of the governors and the state of the administration; and he strictly charged them not to go near a particular fort which he named. But, according to the saying, "Man hankers after what is forbidden," the three princes disobeyed their father, and, before going anywhere else, proceeded to visit this fort. The result was, that they fell into calamities, and had occasion to repeat the text, "Had we but hearkened or understood, we had not been among the dwellers in the flame." 1 The fort was full of pictures, images and forms, and amongst them was a portrait of a beautiful damsel, the daughter of the King of China, which made such a deep impression on the three princes that they all became distracted with love and determined to journey to the court of the King of China and sue for the hand of his daughter.
 The significance of forms. 2
 Be not intoxicated with these goblets of forms,
 Lest you become a maker and worshipper of idols.
 Pass by these cups full of forms, linger not;
 There is wine in the cups, but it proceeds not from them.
 Look to the Giver of the wine with open mouth;
 When His wine comes, is not cup too small to hold it?
 O Adam, seek the reality of my love,
 Quit the mere husk and form of the wheat.
 When sand was made meal for "The Friend of God," 3
 Know, O master, the form of wheat was dispensed with.
 Form proceeds from the world that is without form,
 Even as smoke arises from fire.
 The Divine art without form designs forms (ideals), 4
 Those forms fashion bodies with senses and instruments.
 Whatever the form, it fashions in its own likeness
 Those bodies either to good or to evil.
 If the form be blessing, the man is thankful;
 If it be suffering, he is patient;
 If it be cherishing, he is cheerful;
 If it be bruising, he is full of lamentation!
 Since all these forms are slaves of Him without form,
 Why do they deny their Lord and Master?
 They exist only through Him that is without form;
 What, then, means their disavowal of their Sustainer?
 This very denial of Him proceeds from Him,
 This act is naught but a reflection from Himself!
 The forms of the walls and roofs of houses
 Know to be shadows of the architect's thought;
 Although stones and planks and bricks
 Find no entrance into the sanctuary of thought,
 Verily the Absolute Agent is without form,
 Form is only a tool in His hands.
 Sometimes that Formless One of His mercy
 Shows His face to His forms from behind the veil of Not-being,
 That every form may derive aid therefrom,
 From its perfect beauty and power.
 Again, when that Formless One hides His face,
 Those forms set forth their needs.
 If one form sought perfection from another form,
 That would be the height of error.
 Why then, O simpleton, do you set forth your needs
 To one who is as needy as yourself?
 Since forms are slaves, apply them not to God,
 Seek not to use a form as a similitude of God. 5
 Seek Him with humbleness and self-abasement,
 For thought yields naught but forms of thought.
 Still, if you are unable to dispense with forms,
 Those occurring independently of your thought are best. 6
 The "Truth," which is our real self, lies hidden within our phenomenal and visible self, and the Prophets reveal it to us.
 "Now have we seen what the king saw at the first,
 When that Incomparable One adjured us."
 The prophets have many claims to our gratitude,
 Because they forewarn us of our ultimate lot,
 Saying, "What ye sow will yield only thorns;
 If ye fly that way, ye will fly astray.
 Take seed of us to yield you a good harvest,
 Fly with our wings to hit the mark with your arrow.
 Now ye know not the truth and nature of the 'Truth,' 7
 But at the last ye will cry, 'That was the "Truth."'
 The Truth is yourself, but not your mere bodily self,
 Your real self is higher than 'you' and 'me.'
 This visible 'you' which you fancy to be yourself
 Is limited in place, the real 'you' is not limited.
 Why, O pearl, linger you trembling in your shell?
 Esteem not yourself mere sugar-cane, but real sugar.
 This outward 'you' is foreign to your real ' you;'
 Cling to your real self, quit this dual self.
 Your last self attains to your first (real) self
 Only through your attending earnestly to that union.
 Your real self lies hid beneath your outward self,
 For 'I am the servant of him who looks into himself.' " 8
 "What a youth sees only when reflected in a glass,
 Our wise old fathers saw long ago though hid in stones.
 But we disobeyed the advice of our father,
 And rebelled against his affectionate counsels.
 We made light of the king's exhortations,
 And slighted his matchless intimations.
 Now we have all fallen into the ditch,
 Wounded and crushed in this fatal struggle.
 We relied on our own reason and discernment,
 And for that cause have fallen into this calamity.
 We fancied ourselves free from defects of sight,
 Even as those affected by color-blindness.
 Now at last our hidden disease has been revealed,
 After we have been involved in these calamities."
 "The shadow of a guide is better than directions to God,
 To be satisfied is better than a hundred nice dishes.
 A seeing eye is better than a hundred walking-sticks,
 Eye discerns jewels from mere pebbles."
 The princes ascertained the name of the lady depicted in the fort from an old Shaikh, who warned them of the perils they would encounter on their journey to China, and told them that the King of China would not bestow his favor on those who tried to gain it by tricks and clever stratagems, but solely on those who were prepared to yield up their lives to him, according to the saying, "Die before you die." This is illustrated by an anecdote of a Chief of Bokhara, who made it a rule never to bestow his bounty on beggars who asked for it, but only on those who awaited his pleasure in silence. A certain Faqir tried many stratagems to evade this rule, but his craft was at once seen through by the Chief, and turned to his own confusion. The thesis that the unbought free grace of God is superior to any blessing obtainable by human exertion and contrivance is further illustrated by an absurd anecdote of two youths, one of whom trusted for protection to his own contrivance, and found it a broken reed. The Prophet said, "Two there are who are never satisfied the lover of the world and the lover of knowledge;" and he who loves knowledge will continue to trust in his knowledge, in spite of all exhortations and experience. But the eldest prince advised his brothers to risk the perils and persevere in the journey, reminding them that "Patience is the key of joy." Accordingly they abandoned their country and their parents, like Ibrahim Adham, who renounced the throne of Balkh, and like the old Arabian king Amru'l Qais, who fled from the pursuit of his female adorers to seek the Spiritual Beloved in a far country.
 How the princes discoursed with one another in figurative language concerning their beloved mistress.
 They told their secrets to one another in dark sayings,
 Speaking beneath their breath in fear and trembling.
 None but God was privy to their secrets,
 None but Heaven was partner in their sighs.
 Yea, they used technical expressions one to another,
 And possessed intelligence to extract the sense.
 The vulgar learn the words of this "language of birds," 9
 And make boast of their mastery thereof;
 But these words are only the outward form of the language,
 The "raw" man is ignorant of the birds' meaning.
 He is the true Solomon who knows the birds' language,
 A demon, though he usurp his kingdom, is quite another.
 The demon has taken upon him the form of Solomon,
 His knowledge is fraud, not "what we have been taught."
 When Solomon was blessed with inspiration from God,
 He learned birds' language from "what we were taught."
 But thou art only a bird of the air; understand then
 That thou hast never seen the true spiritual birds!
 The nest of the Simurgh is beyond Mount Qaf, 10
 Not every thought can attain thereto;
 Save thoughts which catch a glimpse thereof,
 And after the vision are again shut off.
 Yet not all shut off, rather intermitted for a wise end,
 For the blessing abides, though shut off and hidden!
 In order to preserve that body which is as a soul,
 The Sun is veiled for a while behind a cloud;
 In order not to melt that soul-like body,
 The Sun withdraws itself as from ice.
 For thy soul's sake seek counsel of these inspired ones. 11
 Ah! rob not their words of their technical meanings!
 Zulaikha applied to Yusuf the names of all things,
 Beginning with wild rue and ending with frankincense.
 She veiled his name under all other names,
 And imparted her secret meaning to her confidants.
 When she said, "The wax is melted by the fire,"
 She meant, "My lover is wroth with me."
 So when she said, "See, the moon is risen!"
 Or, "Lo! the willow-bough is putting forth leaves;"
 Or if she said, "The leaves quiver in the wind,"
 Or, "The wild rue yields perfume as it burns;"
 Or if she said, "The rose tells her tale to the Bulbul,"
 Or, "The king sings his love-strain;"
 Or if she said, "Ah! what a blessed lot!"
 Or, "Who hath disturbed my heart's repose?"
 Or if she said, "The water-carrier hath brought water,"
 Or, "Lo! the sun emerges from the clouds;"
 Or if she said, "Last night the victuals were boiled,"
 Or, "The food was perfectly cooked;"
 Or if she said, "My bread is without savor"
 Or, "The heavens are revolving the wrong way;
 Or if she said, "My head aches with pain,"
 Or, "My headache is now relieved;"
 If she gave thanks, 'twas for being united to Yusuf;
 If she wailed, 'twas that she was separated from him.
 Though she gave vent to thousands of names,
 Her meaning and purport was only Yusuf;
 Was she an hungred, when she pronounced his name,
 She became filled and cheered by his nourishment.
 Her thirst was quenched by Yusuf's name,
 His name was spiritual water to her soul.
 Was she in pain, by pronouncing his mighty name
 At once her pain was turned into joy.
 In the cold it was a warm garment;
 Her lover's name accomplished all this through love.
 Strangers may pronounce the "pure name" of God,
 Yet it effects no such marvels, for they lack love.
 All that 'Isa accomplished by the name of Jehovah,
 Zulaikha attained through the name "Yusuf."
 When the soul is intimately united with God,
 To name the one is the same as naming the other.
 Zulaikha was empty of self and filled with love of Yusuf,
 And there flowed out of her jar what it contained.
 The scent of the saffron of union made her smile,
 The stench of the onion of separation made her weep.
 Each to have in his heart a hundred meanings,
 Such is not the creed of true love and devotion.
 "The Friend" is to the lover as day to the sun,
 The material sun is a veil over the face of the real day.
 Whoso distinguishes not the veil from "The Friend's" face
 Is a worshipper of the sun; of such a one beware!
 "The Friend" is the real day, and daily food of lovers,
 The heart and the heart's torment of His lovers.
 After enduring many toils and misfortunes the three princes at last arrived in the metropolis of China, and thereupon the eldest prince expressed his intention of presenting himself before the king, as he could wait no longer. His brothers tried to dissuade him from risking his life, pointing out that if he acted on blind impulse and vain conceit he would surely go astray, for "a conceit hath naught of truth;" 12 and they further urged him to listen to the counsels of the Pir, or Spiritual Director. But the eldest brother refused to be dissuaded from his purpose, saying he would no longer hide his passion for his beloved, like one who beats a drum under a blanket, but would proclaim it openly, and take the risk of whatever might ensue. He added that he was convinced that he should obtain his desire in some way or other, if not in the way that he expected; according to the text, "Whoso feareth God, to him will he grant a prosperous issue, and will provide for him in a way he reckoned not." 13 Seekers after God fancy that He is far from them, and that they must travel far to reach Him; but these are both erroneous suppositions; and just as arithmeticians work out true answers to their problems by the "Method of Errors," 14 so must the seekers of God from these errors work out the conviction that God is very nigh to them that call upon Him faithfully. To illustrate this an anecdote is told of a man of Baghdad who was in great distress, and who, after calling on God for aid, dreamt that a great treasure lay hid in a certain spot in Egypt. He accordingly journeyed to Egypt, and there fell into the hands of the patrol, who arrested him, and beat him severely on suspicion of being a thief. Calling to mind the proverb that "falsehood is a mischief but truth a remedy," 15 he determined to confess the true reason of his coming to Egypt, and accordingly told them all the particulars of his dream. On hearing them they believed him, and one of them said, "You must be a fool to journey all this distance merely on the faith of a dream. I myself have many times dreamt of a treasure lying hid in a certain spot in Baghdad, but was never foolish enough to go there." Now the spot in Baghdad named by this person was none other than the house of the poor man of Baghdad, and he straightway returned home, and there found the treasure. And he gave thanks, and recognized how "God causes ease to follow troubles," 16 and how "Men hate what is good for them," 17 and how God delays the answer to prayer, and allows men to remain poor and hungry for a season, in order to make them call upon Him, even as the Prophet said, "My servant is a lute which sounds best when it is empty."
 Why the answer to prayer is delayed.
 Ah! many earnest suppliants wail forth prayers,
 Till the smoke of their wailing rises to heaven;
 Yea, the perfume of the incense of sinners' groans
 Mounts up above the lofty roof of heaven.
 Then the angels supplicate God, saying,
 "O Thou that hearest prayer and relievest pain,
 Thy faithful slave is bowing down before Thee.
 He knows of none on whom to rely save Thee;
 Thou bestowest favors on the helpless.
 Every suppliant obtains his desire from Thee."
 God makes answer, "The delay in granting his prayer
 Is intended to benefit him, not to harm him.
 His pressing need draws him from his negligence to me;
 Yea, drags him by the hair into my courts.
 If I at once remove his need he will go away,
 And will be destroyed in his idle sports.
 Though he is wailing with heartfelt cry of 'O Aider!'
 Bid him wail on with broken heart and contrite breast.
 His voice sounds sweet in my ears,
 And his wailing and cries of' O God!'
 In this way by supplication and lamentation
 He prevails with me altogether."
 It is on account of their sweet voices
 That choice parrots and nightingales are jailed in cages.
 Ugly owls and crows 18 are never jailed in cages;
 Such a thing was never heard of in history.
 The disappointments of the pious, be sure,
 Are appointed for this wise purpose.
 The eldest brother then delayed no longer, but rushed into the presence of the King and kissed his feet. The King, like a good shepherd, was well aware of the troubles and cravings of his sheep. He knew that the prince had abjured earthly rank and dignity through love for his daughter, even as a Sufi casts away his robe when overpowered by ecstatic rapture. The only reason why the prince had lagged behind in the race and not presented himself to the King before was that hitherto he had lacked the "inner eye" or spiritual sense which discerns spiritual verities, and had been consequently blind to the King's perfections. They who lack this inner spiritual sense can no more appreciate spiritual pleasures than a man lacking the sense of smell can enjoy the perfume of flowers, or a eunuch the society of fair women. But his eyes had now been opened by the King's grace, and he had escaped from the bondage of worldly lusts and illusions, and, taught by experience, had resolved never again to be led captive by them.
 This is illustrated by the anecdote of the Qazi who was beguiled by the wife of a dwarf. The dwarf and his wife were very poor, and one day the dwarf said to his wife, "God has given you arched brows and arrowy glances and all manner of witchery; go and ensnare some rich man, so that we may extract money from him!" So the woman went to the court of the Qazi, pretending to have a grievance; and when she saw the Qazi she beguiled him, and induced him to pay her a visit at night. While the Qazi was sitting with her the dwarf returned home and knocked violently at the door, and the Qazi, in a great fright, hid himself in a large chest. The dwarf at once fetched a porter, and told him to take the chest to the bazar and sell it. On the way to the bazar the Qazi cried out to the porter to fetch the Deputy; and when the Deputy came he redeemed the chest for one hundred Dinars, and thus the Qazi escaped. Next year the woman went to the court and tried to seduce the Qazi a second time; but he said, "Begone; I have escaped from your toils once, and will not fall into them again. The action of the Deputy in freeing the Qazi reminds the poet of the saying of the Prophet, "Of him, of whom I am the master, 'Ali also is master," and is therefore able to free him from slavery.
 The eldest prince at last fell sick of hope deferred, and gave up the ghost. But though he failed to obtain the King's daughter, the object of his earthly attachment, he obtained union with the King, the real spiritual object of his love, and the eternal fruition of dwelling in Him.
 The joys of union with the Spiritual Beloved are inexpressible in speech.
 In short, the King cherished him lovingly,
 And he like a moon waned in that sun.
 That waning of lovers makes them wax stronger,
 Just as the moon waxes brighter after waning.
 Ordinary sick persons crave a remedy for sickness
 But the lovesick one cries, "Increase my waning!
 I have never tasted wine sweeter than this poison,
 No health can be sweeter than this sickness!
 No devotion is better than this sin (of love),
 Years are as a moment compared to this moment!"
 Long time he dwelt with the King in this manner,
 With burning heart, as a lively sacrifice.
 Thus his life passed, yet he gained not the union He wished.
 Patient waiting consumed him, his soul could not bear it;
 He dragged on life with pain and gnashing of teeth.
 At last life ended before he had attained his desire.
 The form of his earthly Beloved was hidden from him;
 He departed, and found union with his Spiritual Beloved.
 Then he said, "Though she lacks clothes of silk and wool,
 'Tis sweeter to embrace her without those veils.
 I have become naked of the body and its illusions,
 I am admitted into the most intimate union."
 The story admits of being told up to this point,
 Bat what follows is hidden and inexpressible in words.
 If you should speak and try a hundred ways to express it,
 'Tis useless; the mystery becomes no clearer.
 You can ride on saddle and horse up to the sea-coast,
 But then you must use a horse of wood (i.e., a boat).
 A horse of wood is useless on dry land,
 It is the special conveyance of voyagers by sea.
 Silence is this horse of wood,
 Silence is the guide and support of men at sea.
 This Silence which causes you annoyance
 Is uttering cries of love audible to the spiritual.
 You say, "How strange the spiritual man is silent!"
 He answers, "How strange you have no ears!
 Though I utter cries, you hear them not;
 Sensual ears, however sharp, are deaf to my cries."
 The spiritual man, as it were, cries in his sleep,
 Uttering thousands of words of comfort;
 While the carnal man at his side hears nothing at all,
 For he is asleep, and deaf to the other's voice.
 But the perfect spiritualist who has broken his boat
 Plunges into the sea as a fish of the sea (of Truth).
 He is then neither silent nor speaking, but a mystery.
 No words are available to express his condition.
 That marvelous one is in neither of these states
 'Twould be irreverent to explain his state more fully.
 These illustrations are weak and inappropriate,
 But no fitter ones are obtainable from sensible objects.
 When the eldest prince died, the youngest was sick and could not come; but the second brother came to the court to attend his funeral. There the King observed him, and took pity on him and entreated him kindly. He instilled into him spiritual knowledge of the verities hidden beneath phenomenal objects, and conveyed to him as deep a perception of spiritual truths as is not gained by a Sufi after years of fasting and retirement from the world. It is a fact, that when the pure spirit escapes from the bonds of the body, God gives it sight to behold the things of the spirit. The logician denies the possibility of this divine illumination of the heart, but he is confuted by the Prophet, who swore "by the star" that the Koran was revealed to him by divine illumination. 19 Those who cleave to their heresy (Bid'at) and obstinate unbelief are like to incur the punishment inflected on the tribe of 'Ad for disbelieving the Prophet Hud. 20 Earthly forms are only shadows of the Sun of the Truth, a cradle for babes, but too small to hold those who have grown to spiritual manhood. When the prince was thus nourished by the spiritual food given him by the King, which was such as the angels of heaven subsist upon, not the unspiritual food of Christians and those who give partners to God, he began to be puffed up with self-conceit, and forgot what he owed to the King, and rebelled against him. The King was cut to the heart by his ingratitude, which exactly resembled that of Nimrod. When Nimrod was an infant he was taken by his mother to sea, and the ship being wrecked, all that were in it perished, save only the infant Nimrod who was saved through the pity of Izrail, the Angel of Death. God spared him, and nurtured him without the aid of mother or nurse; but when he grew up he proved ungrateful, and was puffed up with self-conceit and egotism, and showed enmity against God and Abraham His servant. When the prince found himself cast off by the King he came to himself, and repented and humbled himself with deep contrition. The King then pardoned him; but his doom had already been decreed by God, and he was slain by the King he had injured, acknowledging the King's goodness to him with his latest breath.
 The death of the second prince.
 In short, the vengeance of That Jealous One (God)
 After one year bore him to the grave.
 When the King awoke out of his trance to consciousness,
 His Mars-like eyes shed tears of blood.
 When that incomparable one looked into his quiver,
 He saw that one of his arrow-shafts was missing.
 He cried to God, "What has become of my arrow?"
 God answered, "Thy arrow is fixed in his throat!"
 That King, bountiful as the sea, had pardoned him;
 Nevertheless his arrow had dealt him a mortal wound.
 He was slain, and cried out with his last breath,
 "The King is all in all, my slayer and my savior.
 If he is not both these, he is not all in all;
 Nay, he is both my slayer and my mourner!"
 That expiring martyr also gave thanks,
 That the King had smitten his body, not his spirit;
 For the visible body must perforce perish,
 Ere the spirit can live in happiness for evermore.
 Though he incurred chastisement, it affected his body only,
 And as a friend he now goes, free of pain, to his Friend.
 Thus at first he clung to the King's stirrup,
 But at last went his way guided by perfect sight.
 Finally, the youngest brother, who was the weakest of all, succeeded where his brothers had failed, and obtained his earthly mistress, the king's daughter, as his bride, and the Spiritual Beloved as well.
 Here the Masnavi breaks off; but, according to the Bulaq edition, the following conclusion was supplied by Jalalu-'d-Din's son, Bahau-'d-Din Sultan Valad:
 Part of the story remains untold; it was retained
 In his mind and was not disclosed.
 The story of the princes remains unfinished,
 The pearl of the third brother remains unstrung.
 Here speech, like a camel, breaks down on its road;
 I will say no more, but guard my tongue from speech.
 The rest is told without aid of tongue
 To the heart of him whose spirit is alive.
 *NOTES:
 1. Koran lxvii. 10. 
 2. Surat, or "form," means picture, image, outward appearance as opposed to reality, conception or "form of thought," the "architypes" or "ideas" in the Divine mind, "the Substantial forms" of the Realist philosophy. Here the poet runs through nearly all these meanings. 
 3. Sale's Koran, p. 75, note. 
 4. i.e., the architypes in the "Intellectual Presence" or "world of command," which are afterwards set forth in the "world of creation or sensible objects. 
 5. See Koran xlii. 9. 
 6. i.e., the similitudes used in the Koran. 
 7. "The Truth," Al Haqq, the Divine Noumenon. 
 8. See Gulshan i Raz, Answer III., and the Hadis, "Whoso knows himself knows his Lord." 
 9. Koran xxvii. 16. 
 10. Simurgh, "Oiseau extraordinaire qui reside au Caucase," as M. Garcin de Tassy calls it, means "thirty birds" (Si murgh), and is used as a type of the Divine Unity which embraces all plurality. 
 11. i.e., the prophets and saints. 
 12. Koran x. 37. 
 13. Koran lxv. 2. 
 14. i.e., "The Rule of Position."Khulasat ul Hisab, Book iv. 
 15. Freytag, Arabum Proverbia, ii. 379. 
 16. Koran ii. 213. 
 17. Koran lxv. 7. 
 18. i.e., hardened sinners like Pharaoh. 
 19. Koran liii. 1. 
 20. Koran xlvi. 20. 

 Note on Apocryphal Supplements to the Masnavi.
 In the Lucknow edition there follows an epilogue written by Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, giving a continuation of the story of the third brother, but nothing of the kind is found in any of the other editions.
 The Bulaq edition adds a so-called Book VII., but this is known to be a comparatively recent forgery. Haji Khalfa says: "It is notorious that the Masnavi is contained in six books, but a seventh book has made its appearance, put forth by Ismail Dadah, the commentator. He also wrote a commentary on it, and therein replied with eloquence and strenuousness to those who denied its genuineness. He says in his commentary that when he came to write out his fifth volume in the year 1035 A.H., he met with Book VII. in a copy of the Masnavi dated 814 A.H. He bought it and read it through, and was satisfied that it was undoubtedly a composition of the author of the Masnavi. But the other Darveshes of the Maulavi order denied the genuineness of the Seventh Book." 1
 The contents of this Seventh Book consist of comments on various texts and traditions, illustrated by stories of no interest. They have nothing in common with the Epilogue of Muhammad Ilahi Bakhsh, found in the Lucknow edition.
 *NOTES:
 1. Haji Khalfa, v. 377. Ismai1 was a Darvesh of the Maulavi order, surnamed Anguravi, from his native place Anguri, in Anatolia. 

   


===== BOOK: mt.txt =====


    
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



  

THE TAO TEH KING

  

A SHORT STUDY IN
 COMPARATIVE
 RELIGION

  

By

  

C. SPURGEON MEDHURST

  

For Twenty Years a Missionary in China



  

CHICAGO

  

THEOSOPHICAL BOOK CONCERN

  

[1905]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.


Click to enlarge
Title Page



Click to enlarge
Verso



     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



  

INDEX

[The figures refer to the sections of the Tao-teh-king, not to the pages.]

Abstraction, [*16].

Abysmal, The, or Abyss, [*1], [*6], [*10].

Ancients, The, [*15], [*57].

Capital Punishment, [*74].

Caution, [*64], [*73].

Contentment, [*9], [*44], [*46], [*72].

Compassion, [*67], [*69].

Death, [*16], [*50], [*52], [*76].

Desirelessness, [*37], [*38], [*39], [*64], [*66].

Detachment, [*2], [*3], [*7], [*9], [*10], [*26], [*51], [*64], [*72], [*75], [*77].

Energy, [*10], [*28], [*38], [*41], [*51], [*54], [*55], [*60], [*63], [*65], [*79].

Government, [*16], [*29], [*30], [*36], [*57], [*58], [*59], [*60], [*65], [*66], [*74], [*75], [*80].

Greatness, [*67].

Heaven-Earth, The, [*1], [*5], [*6], [*7], [*23], [*25].

Humility, [*7], [*8], [*22], [*24], [*27], [*28], [*39], [*61], [*64], [*66], [*67], [*70], [*72], [*76].

Immortality, [*16], [*33], [*44], [*50], [*52].

Impartiality, [*49].

Militarism, [*30], [*31], [*57], [*68], [*69], [*76].

Mother aspect of Deity, [*1], [*6], [*20], [*25], [*52].

Non-action, [*3], [*37], [*38], [*43], [*47], [*48], [*57], [*63].

Noumenal, The, [*1], [*2], [*11], [*14], [*32], [*34], [*37], [*40], [*43], [*62], [*65].

One, The, [*39], [*42].

Paradoxes, [*36], [*41], [*45], [*47], [*68], [*69], [*81].

Quotations, [*22], [*57], [*67], [*69], [*78].

Sages, The, [*2], [*3], [*5], [*7], [*12], [*22], [*26], [*27], [*28], [*29], [*47], [*49], [*58], [*60], [*63], [*64], [*66], [*70], [*72], [*73], [*77], [*79], [*81].

Self, The, [*67].

Simplicity, [*3], [*19], [*20], [*28], [*32], [*37], [*57], [*65], [*80].

Spontaneity, [*17], [*25], [*32], [*37], [*57], [*73].

State, The, [*29], [*30], [*46].

Tao, The, [*1], [*8], [*14], [*16], [*21], [*25], [*32], [*34], [*35], [*37], [*40], [*41], [*42], [*46], [*47], [*51], [*53], [*59], [*60], [*62], [*65], [*77], [*79], [*81].

Treasures, The, [*67], [*69].

Trinity, The, [*14], [*42].

Unity, [*22], [*27], [*39], [*56].

Unchanging, The, [*16], [*52], [*55].

Valley-god, The, [*6].

Vegetable Kingdom, The, [*16], [*76].

Virtue, see Energy.

War, [*30], [*31], [*46].

Water, [*8], [*78].

Weakness, [*36], [*43], [*76], [*78].

Wisdom, [*70], [*71].

Yoga, [*10], [*16], [*20], [*21], [*22], [*23].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. vii]

  

FOREWORD

"In every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to him." The Spirit of God is confined to no sect, religion, race nor creed. Wherever hearts are still and aspirations pure the vision may dawn, the voice of inspiration be heard. God has spoken to man in many languages, and the translator of the present work was supported throughout what was often an arduous task by the belief that the Tao-teh-king is a message from above. Like all ancient writings, it may have suffered at the hands of time, but as I have endeavored to show in my notes and comments on the text, the teaching is one which the inner consciousness of all ages has recognized as THE TRUTH. Though Lao-tzu's accent is his own, it is easily seen to be but a dialect of the universal tongue. "And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and the west, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven."

Many are the editions of the Tao-teh-king (vid. the list at the end of this book), but has Lao-tzu ever really been translated? If I have in any measure succeeded where others have failed it is because I have built on their labors. The Chinese is difficult, and mistakes are perhaps inevitable, but I have taken pains to reduce these to a minimum, and with the utmost care have consulted in detail the works of Legge, Balfour, Giles, Carus, Kingsmill, Maclagan, Old and von Strauss during the whole of my preliminary labors. Although unable to agree with any of these gentlemen in their interpretations, to all I am indebted for guidance and suggestions while working my way through the terse obscurity of the Chinese. In the course of my researches I have consulted nearly an equal number of native commentaries, but my chief claim to having come nearer to Lao-tzu's meaning than my predecessors is the fact that it requires a mystic to understand a mystic, and although I dare not venture to number myself with the mystics, I may confess that long before I dreamed of being presumptuous enough to endeavor to translate Lao-tzu into my own tongue, I was accustomed to carry his writing with me on my itineraries as a sort of spiritual vade mecum. My present rendering of the ancient

[p. viii]

philosopher is not so much a specimen of scholarship as the humble offering of a disciple. The difficulties which lie across the pathway of anyone attempting such a work may be illustrated by a quotation from Dr. Legge's preface to the Yi King (Sacred Books of the East), Vol. xvi: "The written characters of the Chinese," writes this eminent scholar, "are not representations of words, but symbols of ideas, ... the combination of them in composition is not a representation of what the writer would say, but of what he thinks. It is vain, therefore, for a translator to attempt a literal version.... In the study of a Chinese classical book there is not so much an interpretation of the characters employed by the writer as a participation of his thoughts--there is a seeing of mind to mind." In this last sentence the Doctor has unconsciously explained why he so signally failed in his efforts to render Lao-tzu into English. Prof. Legge, one of the foremost Chinese scholars of his day, was wholly Confucianist in his sympathies, and it is a pity that so faulty a translation as is his version of the Tao-teh-king should have obtained the prominence and importance which it derives from its inclusion in that monumental series, "The Sacred Books of the East."

It only remains for me to add in this connection that I have made no attempt to accomplish the impossible and reproduce the measured rhythm of the original, but have contented myself with rendering the whole into as clear and concise English as I could command, without reference to the regulated cadences in which a large part of the Chinese has been written. Neither have I considered it worth while entering into any technical defense of my renderings. Such would only have been of interest to sinologues, and sinologues will have no use for such a work as the present little book.

In his "Remains of Lao-tzu," Prof. Giles has endeavored to prove that there is very little of the real Lao-tzu in the essay which goes under his name. Though perhaps few scholars would follow Mr. Giles in all his slashing criticisms--the learned doctor lacks all the qualities necessary for the understanding of a mystical work--it may be admitted that the shadowy and broken progression in the development of the basic ideas of the Tao-teh-king, together with the seemingly needless repetitions, suggest that what we have are but the higher peaks of a submerged continent, not the entire

[p. xi]

map of the old Mystic's scheme. The thought of the book is a buried thought, the connections of its sentences spiritual rather than grammatical. Divided into two parts, Part I may be described as "metaphysical," Part II as "moral," but the division is rough and not accurate. Were such a liberty allowable, it would be comparatively easy to rearrange the sections into a more orderly sequence than that which they now occupy. Perhaps the index in front may do something to remedy the existing irregularities of the text, while the bibliography, the most complete that has been published, will inform the student where he can find whatever is known of ancient Taoism, unless indeed he is able to search for himself the enormous mass of Chinese literature dealing with the topic.

  

CONFUCIANISM AND TAOISM.

In dealing with the Tao-teh-king, it is hardly possible to avoid some reference to the sister religion, Confucianism, as it sprang from the same soil and from among the same people. Both Lao-tzu and Confucius appeal to pre-existing authorities. Before their day the two systems probably formed one ideal plan for life; since then, however, there has been a growing tendency to separate the practical ethics of the one from the metaphysical mysticism of the other. Yet many devout Confucianists study Lao-tzu's classic with deep interest, but privately, and as those who read heretical works.

Lao-tzu, like Buddha, would extirpate desire; Confucius, like the Stoics, would ignore it. The asceticism of Lao-tzu is matched by the self-sufficiency of Confucius, and each agrees that the desire which ends in self is an evil. As regards cosmogony, it is interesting to note that while the practical Confucianist has a metaphysical explanation for the origin of the universe, the metaphysical Lao-tzu is content to put forward his TAO as an explanation of the whole, without attempting to say how anything came to be.

  

TAO.

As for Lao-tzu's Tao, which is as untranslatable as the algebraic x, and which von Strauss, in the thirty-third section of his introduction to the Tao-teh-king, compares to the Sanskrit Buddhi, it may be said that it has much in common

[p. x]

with the Primeval Fire or Aether of Heracleitus. The properties of mind and matter may be attributed to both; both become transformed into the elements; and in both the elements vanish into the primordial All, though Lao-tzu, of course, gives us nothing like the theologic-cosmogonical system of the Greek.

Lao-tzu presents us with the Tao under two aspects--the undifferentiated Nameless, and the differentiated Universal Life, in this agreeing with the  Gita, in which we read: "There are two Purushas in this world, the destructible and the indestructible; the destructible (is) all beings, the unchanging (is) called the indestructible." (xv-16.) Again, as in the Confucian cosmogony, THE Absolute or The Unlimited is always behind The Great Extreme from whose vibrations everything sprang, so there lies behind the Tao, which is nameable, the Tao which cannot be named.

  

THE SAGES.

Notwithstanding Lao-tzu's reverence for the mysterious, he never sacrifices Man to the Divine. On the contrary, throughout the Tao-teh-king, the  of the True Man is emphasized in every possible way. The goal of humanity is only possible by complete union with the Tao--the Ultimate Unity of the Universe. If the Tao-teh-king teaches anything it certainly teaches this. Thus, like all religions in all ages, Lao-tzu points to Yoga or union, as the summum bonum of existence. The Perfected Men, or The Sages, are those who have attained to this great good. "As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine, so neither can ye; except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches."

  

GOVERNMENT.

The weakest part of Lao-tzu's teachings may perhaps be thought to be his utopian conceptions of a model State. Like Plato, he seems to have thought that "until kings are philosophers, or philosophers are kings, cities will never cease from ill," and not only like Plato does he appear to consider the study of economics, law, or finance as unnecessary qualifications for a legislator, but he requires no education for the citizens of his ideal republic. Spirituality rather

[p. xi]

than political economy is to be the basis of this strange kingdom. Its appeals are not made to men's hopes and fears, but to the calm passionlessness of their higher natures. Its controlling force is not militarism, but spiritual culture. Both rulers and people obtain all they require by the abstract contemplation of an abstract good. Everything is reduced to the purest simplicity. In many respects Lao-tzu's completed society corresponds to the "natural and spiritual theocracy" which Saint Martin of Tours describes in his "Lettre a un ami sur La Revolution Francaise."

Lao-tzu loves paradox, and his sayings are frequently as paradoxical as the Sayings in the Gospels. In his extreme assertions as to what constitutes a perfect State he is endeavoring to show that righteousness alone exalteth a nation, and that whatever clouds the nation's conceptions of this is worse than valueless. The student must never forget that Lao-tzu, being a mystic, is no more susceptible to literal interpretation when he deals with the concrete than is the word of Jesus, "Cast not your pearls before swine." No absolute rule of conduct is conveyed by this expression, yet who does not perfectly understand its meaning? So with Lao-tzu's politics; they are physical illustrations of spiritual truths. Lao-tzu's only concern is that the government shall give free development to the individual spiritual life of each citizen in the State; this secured, an autocracy might equal a democracy. A passage in Epictetus illustrates Lao-tzu's position: "Do this, do not this, or I will cast thee into prison--this is not a rule for reasoning beings. But--'As Zeus has ordered so do thou act; but if thou dost not thou shalt suffer loss and hurt.' What hurt? None other than this--not to have done what it behooved thee to do. Thou shalt lose faith, piety, decency--look for no greater injury than these." So Lao-tzu reduces life to the utmost simplicity, that nothing may interfere with the contemplation of the Tao. The never absent presence of this Perfect Ideal in the mind will be enough to keep the people from trespassing either in thought, speech or action. Such an accomplishment is better than all that the finest civilizations offer.

Here again we may observe the difference between Lao-tzu and his contemporary, Confucius. Both were politicians, but while Confucius would regulate the State by extra rules of conduct, multiplied until they covered every department

[p. xii]

of life, Lao-tzu sought the same end by the purification of the inner being. Little wonder that when Confucius, whose field of vision was almost entirely objective, visited Lao-tzu, who was almost as much concerned with the subjective, he returned bewildered, and said to his disciples--I quote Dr. Carus's translation of the Chinese historian's record: "I know that the birds can fly; I know that the fishes can swim; I know that the wild animals can run. For the running, one could make nooses; for the swimming, one could make nets; for the flying, one could make arrows. As to the dragon, I cannot know how he can bestride wind and clouds when he heavenwards rises. To-day I saw Lao-Tze. Is he perhaps like the dragon?" Others, like Confucius, may be inclined to ask the same question, but "he that hath ears to hear, let him hear."

  

ETHICS.

It must not, however, be supposed that Lao-tzu's system is non-ethical and impractical. On the contrary, in his doctrine of non-attachment, or non-action, the old mystic supplies us with the very essence of all morality. He holds that nature provides a perfect example in her inactive activity. The vegetable kingdom is Lao-tzu's ideal, and though it is not a point made in the Tao-teh-king, I may perhaps be pardoned a digression in order to show the appropriateness of sitting at the feet of Dame Nature, and learning from her as she works in her vast garden. Unless man's fussiness interferes with her plans, Nature mingles her plants and her shrubs in the wildest and most inextricable manner. Left to follow her own devices, as in the jungle, Nature so arranges her plantation that nothing is separate; each plant lives in the close embrace of its neighbor--a holy fraternity, a fitting symbol of the oneness in diversity which characterizes mankind when viewed from the highest planes. Only as the presence of man drives God further from his universe does this sacred fellowship between all sorts of plants and herbage come to an end. In the cultivated garden everything is in order, everything is separate. It is not this, however, which so much interests Lao-tzu as the quiet detachment of vegetable life. It plants without seeking the fruit; it never mars by its effort to accomplish; everything is left to develop according to its own nature. Here Lao-tzu has an echo in Emerson. In his essay

[p. xiii]

on "Spiritual Laws," the philosopher of Concord writes: "Action and inaction are alike. One piece of the tree is cut for the weathercock, and one for the sleeper of a bridge; the virtue of the wood is apparent in both." Well will it be for this restless, weary, discontented age if it comprehend this message of action in non-action and non-action in action which comes to it out of the dim past, from the great Loess plains of Northwest China.

Said a greater than Lao-tzu: "So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed upon the earth; and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, he knoweth not how." "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field; which indeed is less than all seeds; but when it is grown it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the heaven come and lodge in the branches thereof." "The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened." There is a striking similarity between these sayings of Jesus and the teaching of the Tao-teh-king. Lao-tzu's doctrine of non-attachment, or non-action, found its loftiest expression on the cross on Calvary.

  

SUMMARY.

This, then, is the word which this ancient writing has for the world--a life of sensation is a life of instability, a life of non-accomplishment. Until the "final facts of consciousness" are understood, true peace is impossible, but when these are known, detachment from action for the sake of action will be the result. "If any man love the world (is attached to the sensuous) the love of the Father is not in him." So says the Christian mystic, John. He who has not attained to non-attachment or non-action is a stranger to the power of the Tao; this is the cry of the Chinese mystic, Lao-tzu.

Victor von Strauss summarizes Lao-tzu's teaching thus: "Man's moral worth consists of what he has, not of what he does; it has respect not only to what he is in himself, but to his influence on others. It is what a man is which makes his acts good, and not the deeds which make the man. The higher the moral worth of the man the less he values his own acts, and the less likely is he to seek justification through his works. In this way he influences his fellows, not so much

[p. xiv]

through what he does as through what he is; not so much through his speech as through his conduct"--(Wandel.) "But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness." Confucius represents the James, Lao-tzu the Paul. of Christian theology.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. xv]

  

CONCLUSION

Carlyle somewhere compares religion to an "everlasting lode-star, that beams the brighter in the heavens the darker here on earth grows the night around him," and it is doubtful whether but for the degeneracy of his time we should ever have received this most precious fragment from antiquity, known as the Tao-teh-king. Lao-tzu, alias Lao-chun, alias Lao-tan (born B. C. 604), was one of those God-instructed souls who, having mastered "the fortuitous in life," stepped out from the shadow of the temporal into the clear, serene atmosphere of the Divine.

A keeper of the records in the capital of the state of Chou, he retired from office and from the ken of mankind because he saw how corrupt society had become, rendering all real spirituality impossible. Rather than become tainted by what he felt unable to change, he put aside earthly ambition and retired from the world. The historian says of him: "No one knows where he died." Before leaving the haunts of men, however, he wrote the Tao-teh-king, at the request of his friend, the Custom House Officer at the frontier. This man's name was Yin-hsi, a name which deserves to be recorded.

I have already referred to Confucius's opinion of his famous contemporary. There is no proof that they met more than once, the interviews between the two which embellish the works of Chuang-tzu, Lao-tzu's chief disciple, being the inventions of the active brain of that clever writer, and intended to bring the system of Confucianism into ridicule. It is the beginning of a breach which should never have been made.

The Tao-teh-king, or, "A Scripture of the Eternal and Its Characteristics," was first adopted as a "canon" A. D. 666, at which date the Emperor Kao Tsung of the T'ang dynasty gave Lao-tzu the posthumous title, "The Supreme Monarch of the Profoundest Mystery." Later rulers added to his honors, and legend relates wonderful tales concerning him. His mother is said to have given birth to him B. C. 1321, bringing him forth from her left side as she sat under a plum tree (the name of the family was Li, or Plum). He is said to have been then an old man, having remained for eighty years in his mother's womb. Hence his designation, Lao-tzu,

[p. xvi]

or "Old Boy." By others he is called Lao-chun, or "Ancient Sire," or Lao-tan, "the venerable Long Lobed," big lobes being considered a mark of virtue. Later Taoist writings have been ascribed to him, the compositions commencing "The Most Supreme Master saith," or "The Supreme One saith," but there is no proof that Lao-tzu wrote anything besides the Tao-teh-king. The other scriptures of the same school all bear its impress written largely across their pages.

In the "Trinity of Tranquillity" of modern Taoism, which bears no more relation to the Taoism of Lao-tzu than do the rigid Institutes of Calvin to the teachings of Jesus as recorded in the Gospels, Lao-tzu occupies the first place. Modern Taoism is a system of alchemy and polytheism which regards the soul and the body as identical in substance, and maintains that by physical discipline their dissolution may be prevented. Lao-tzu, indeed, hinted at the possibility of obtaining an ascendancy over matter, and to such hints in the Tao-teh-king, and to the Confucian Yi-king, the science of alchemy, which may be described as the germ of the modern evolutionary theory, probably owes its birth. Born in China, alchemy traveled to Europe via Arabia. [**] The vocabularies of the older Eastern and the later Western schools are in many instances similar, and the ends and methods of both appear the same. Lao-tzu, however, was no alchemist, and for this he is satirized by the famous Chinese poet, Pei-chu-yi (A. D. 772-846). He is ever speaking of the Tao and its energies, says the poet; throughout his five thousand words (the Tao-teh-king contains 5,320 characters) he says naught of transmutations or genii, but only prates about reaching heaven. The old mystic was indeed incapable of conceiving anything but the purest spirituality, whereas his more materialistic successors have made his slight hints at the powers of occultism the foundations of a scheme for mastering the protean powers of transmutation, which, whatever may be said of their European confreres, would, as far as it is possible to form an opinion, seem to have objects which can only be described as selfish.

The other two members of the Trinity of which Lao-tzu is now the chief are the mythical P'an-ku, the First Being brought into existence by cosmogonical evolution, whose



[p. xvii]

breath became the wind; whose voice is the thunder; whose left eye is the sun; whose right eye is the moon, etc.; and Yu Huang Shang-ti, a magician named Chang, who raced another magician, named Lu, up to heaven. Both rode dragons, and Chang won. Some Western scholars think that Lao-tzu also is a myth, a mere creation of the imagination. The materials for an exhaustive examination of the matter are not at hand, but no Chinaman has ever doubted that the Tao-teh-king was the genuine production of a genuine sage named Lao-tan or Lao-tzu, and written just before he left China forever, through the Han-ku Pass.

It may be added that the Tao-teh-king is the only Taoist book which the Chinese Buddhists esteem. They relate a legend to the effect that one of the Buddhist Emperors of China, in order to test the relative divinity of the two religions, ordered each sect to pile their books on an altar and burn them. The Buddhist scriptures would not burn, but the Taoist writings quickly flamed up at the application of the torch. Much alarmed, the Taoist priests in attendance tried to snatch their precious manuscripts from the fire, but they only pulled out one, the Tao-teh-king.

Elsewhere I have written [**] that "at about the time when Lao-tzu lived a wave of spiritual enlightenment appears to have swept over the world. Especially in Asia was there a general movement towards higher and clearer thought. In Hindostan and in Persia, as well as in China, religious revolutions were in progress. The exact date of Lao's birth, like most of the facts of his life, is shrouded in obscurity, but most generally received opinion is that he first saw the light during the early part of the sixth century before Christ. Dr. Ernest Faber alone gives an earlier date. Confucius was born 550 B. C., Pythagoras forty or fifty years earlier. Thales, the first of the seven wise men of Greece, was born in 639 or 636 B. C., and two or three years later, Solon. The reformation in Iran, or ancient Persia, connected with the name of Zoroaster or Zerduscht, was probably contemporaneous. Buddha arose in India a little later, and the Hebrew prophets of the captivity enriched the same age."

This brief introduction, which might easily have been expanded into a volume, may well be closed with a few appreciations of Lao-tzu from some of the many Oriental scholars who have studied his pages.



[p. xviii]

Victor von Strauss says of Lao-tzu's work that it Contains "a grasp of thought, a height of contemplation, a purity of conception in the things of God, such as we seek in vain anywhere in pre-Christian time, except in the Jewish Scriptures."

Says Dr. Paul Carus: "Lao Tsze was one of the greatest men that ever trod our earth." "One of the most remarkable thinkers of mankind." "The Tao-Teh-King is an indispensable book, and no one who is interested in religion can afford to leave it unread."

"The plan of the Tao Teh King," says Dr. Edkins, "is to begin with the absolute and to unfold in obscure language, so as to do something to teach in broad outlines and with a few touches the mystery of the universe." "He is," says the doctor, "the greatest of Chinese philosophers." (Vide "Ancient Symbolism," by J. Edkins, D.D.)

Rev. John Chalmers, A.M., D.D., shows in his introduction to his translation of Lao-tzu's work that the philosopher "penetrated about as deeply into the mystery of the universe as the famous German metaphysician" Schelling, while M. Abel-Remusat contends that the doctrines commonly attributed to Pythagoras, Plato, and their disciples, are to be found in Lao-tzu.

Georg von der Gabelentz, of Leipzig, describes the Tao-teh-king as "one of the most eminent masterpieces of Chinese literature, one of the profoundest philosophical books the world has ever produced, and one the authenticity of which has been least contested in his fatherland and even in the circle of European sinologues."

Mr. Samuel Johnson, in his Oriental Religions (pp. 862-865), writes of the Tao-teh-king in the following strain: "It is a book of wonderful ethical and spiritual simplicity, and deals neither in speculative cosmogony nor in popular superstitions.... It is in practical earnest, and speaks from the heart and to the heart. Its religion resembles that of Fenelon or Thomas a Kempis, combined with a perceptive rationality of which they were not masters."

The above opinion of Mr. Johnson's is quoted in Dr. William's Middle Kingdom (Vol. ii, p. 211). Dr. Williams, who has himself a less high opinion of Lao-tzu's worth, says, nevertheless, that Lao-tzu is "no more responsible for the subsequent organization and vagaries of the sects of Taoism down to the present time than the New Testament is for the legends of monkery or the absurdities of mystics."

[p. xix]

Dr. James Legge agrees. "The Taoism of the present day," writes this eminent scholar, "is a system of the wildest polytheism. The science and religion of the West will meet from it a most determined opposition. The 'Venerable Philosopher' himself would not have welcomed them. The shrieking of our steam engines, the bustle of our commerce, and the onward march of our various enterprises would have nearly driven him mad; but he ought not to bear the obloquy of being the founder of the Taoist religion."

With this I take farewell of our ancient teacher, China's grandest Old Man, of whom his countrymen have never shown themselves worthy. Nevertheless, as Mr. Ball says in Things Chinese (p. 671): "In this Lao-tsz, the founder of Taoism, we have one of those men whose writings, life, and reputed actions have exerted an untold influence on the course of human life in this world, but of whom the world, during his lifetime, took so little account that all that is authentically known about him may be summed up in a few lines."

May this renewed effort to increase the range of the Old Chinese Mystic's influence, distribute to others some of the quiet peace which the study of his work has brought to the translator.

Peace be to all Beings.

C. SPURGEON MEDHURST.



Footnotes

^xvi:* Vid. The China Review, Vol. vii, p. 242, "Alchemy in China." Also S. D. ii, 807. The Chinese doubtless brought the tradition from Atlantis.

^xvii:* The Chinese Recorder, vol. xxx, p. 542.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



"Let not him that seeketh cease from his search until he find, and when he finds he shall wonder; wondering he shall reach the kingdom, and when he reaches the kingdom he shall have rest."--A logion of Jesus, recently discovered.

"Read not to contradict and refute, nor to believe and take for granted, nor to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider."--Lord Bacon.

[p. 1]

[ch_01]

  

CHAPTER I.

The Tao which can be expressed is not the unchanging Tao [*1]; the name which can be named is not the unchanging name.

The nameless is the beginning of the Heaven Earth; [*2] the mother of all things [*3] is the nameable.

Thus, while the eternal not-being [*4] leads towards the fathomless, the eternal being conducts to the boundary. Although these two [*5] have been differently named they come from the same. [*6]

As the same they may be described as the abysmal. The abyss of the abysmal [*7] is the gate of all mystery.

That aspect of God which is hidden in eternity, without bounds, without limits, without beginning, must be distinguished from that side of God which is expressed in nature and in man. The one, apparently subjective, certainly unknowable; the other, a self-manifestation, or a going forth, the commencement of our knowledge, as of our being. "No















[p. 2]

man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." Whether "the only begotten Son" be identified with an historical person or not, the conception is necessary to any thought of God. Without a self-revelation, the Eternal Presence remains unknown. Hence the Indian has his avatars, the Christian his incarnation.

Lao Tzu is strictly logical when he ascribes the origin of all phenomena to the manifesting Deity, rather than to the Undifferentiated One, which being changeless could not create.

Says Herbert Spencer: "The antithesis of subject and object, never to be transcended while consciousness lasts, renders impossible all knowledge of the Ultimate Reality in which subject and object are united." (Principles of Psychology, i., 272.)



Footnotes

^1:1 Hsu-hui-hi sagely observes that as names always leave the essence unnamed it is certain that no name can express the TAO.

^1:2 The noumenal or arupa world--the world of causes.

^1:3 The phenomenal or rupa world--the world of effects.

^1:4 Yet, as Hsu-hui-hi says, the very term "Not-Being" is misleading, for the Tao is absolutely inexpressible.

^1:5 The Tao in its two-fold aspect.

^1:6 i.e. "That which is above Being and Not-Being."--Native Commentator.

^1:7 Whence both Being and Not-Being emerge.

N. B. Seek not for a name for God; for you will not find any: For everything that is named is named by its letter so that the latter gives the name and the former gives ear. Who then is he who hath given God a name, "God" is not a "name," but an "opinion about God."--Sextus.

"There was when naught was; nay even that 'naught' was not aught of things that are For that 'naught' is not simply the so-called ineffable; it is beyond that, For that which is really ineffable is not named ineffable, but is superior to every name that is used."--Basilides. (vid. "Fragments of a Faith Forgotten" by G. R. S. Mead, p. 256.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 3]

[ch_02]

  

CHAPTER II.

When every one in the world became conscious of the beauty of the beautiful it turned to evil; they became conscious of the goodness of the good and ceased to be good. [*1] Thus not-being and being arise the one from the other. So also do the difficult and the easy; the long and the short; the high and the low; sounds and voices; the preceding and the following.

Therefore [*2] the Holy man abides by non-attachment in his affairs, and practices a doctrine which cannot be imparted by speech. He attends to everything in its turn and declines nothing; produces without claiming; acts without dwelling thereon; completes his purposes without resting in them. Inasmuch as he does this he loses nothing. [*3]

A lotus pond will serve as an illustration of the difference between the holy sages and the younger members of the race. Covered with broad green leaves and brilliant blooms, it irresistibly attracts child-souls. They wade into the water, sink in the slime, and desperately struggle for the fragile petals; but the sages, their elder brethren, remain quietly on the bank,







[p. 4]

always alert to aid any who require assistance, content to admire, content to enjoy, without desiring to possess; yet actually owning the flowers more truly than the struggling crowd in the slimy pond. We are feeblest when we are grasping.

"The Master said, 'Those who are without virtue, cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or in a condition of enjoyment.'"--Confucian Analects.

"To dwell in the wide house of the world, to stand in the correct seat of the world, and to walk in the great path of the world; when he obtains his desire for office, to practice his principles for the good of the people; and when that desire is disappointed, to practice them alone; to be above the power of riches and honors to make dissipated, of poverty and mean condition to make swerve from principle, and of power and force to make bend--these characteristics constitute the great man."--Mencius.



Footnotes

^3:1 Cf. chap. [*18] in loc.

^3:2 Because the antimonies in the text are in the outer world of consciousness only, having no existence in the inner world of spirit, the Sage makes no distinction. All things are alike to him (cp. chap. [*63]). Says The Bhagavad Gita--''Thy business is with action only, never with its fruits; so let not the fruit of thy action be thy motive, nor be thou to inaction attached."

^3:3 "A pure, single, and stable spirit is not distracted though it be employed in many works; for that it doeth all to the honor of God, and being at rest within, seeketh not itself in anything it doth."--Of the Imitation of Christ bk. 1, ch. 3.

"Balanced in pleasure and pain, self-reliant, to whom a lump of earth, a rock and gold are alike; the same to loved and unloved, firm, the same in censure and in praise, the same in honor and ignominy, the same to friend and fee, abandoning all undertakings--he is said to have crossed over the Gunas." Bhagavad Gita--xiv. 24, 25.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 5]

[ch_03]

  

CHAPTER III.

When worth is not honored the people may be kept from strife.

When rare articles are not valued the people are kept from theft.

When the desirable is left unnoticed the heart is not confused.

Therefore, the method of government by the Holy Man is to empty the heart, while strengthening the purpose; to make the will pliant, and the character strong. [*1] He ever keeps the people simple-minded and passionless, so that the world-wise do not dare to plan.

Practice non-action and everything will be regulated. [*2]

Jesus, the chief of transcendentalists, summed up the law of life in the command to love God with the whole being, and demanded of his disciples that they bless their enemies, and cherish the same feelings towards their neighbors as they felt for themselves. They were to have no treasures on earth, nor were they to occupy their thoughts with providing for the physical--an ideal which will only be reached as men rise higher than the sense life of hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, feeling. All outer goods are forgotten when man's inner being is filled with the lustre of God. So long as the driving force of man's life is desire, so long will he fall short of the teachings of the Savior. When, however, he rises above the bondage of the senses, when he perceives the human soul in all its glory, as the temple of the Holy God, his motives will be as the motives of the Godhead, the standard set up by Christ will be attained. Neither rewards nor punishments will longer appeal to him. The subtle selfishness which the one addresses,



[p. 6]

and the base fear which the other influences, will alike be alien to his character.

In this ideal republic, the commonwealth of days to come, socialism will realize its noblest ambitions. Each will help his brother forward, and find his joy in seeing the prosperity of his neighbor. Theft will be unheard of, for "rare articles" will be no more prized. The very fact that they are rare, and therefore not within the reach of all, will deprive them of their worth.

How it will be possible for this to become un fait accompli we may perhaps realize by reference to the law of vibrations. As the vibrations which produce the phenomenon of telepathy would, if completely under control, make man independent of the lower vibrations which make speech possible, so when the higher vibrations of the spiritual alone vibrate, the lower vibrations of the earthly will be sought no more. The pure spiritualism of Jesus will be universal among men. They will see God. By ceasing from desire, everything that is desirable will be obtained. Desire stifles; only the desireless breathe God's atmosphere. "Christian prayer itself is a moderation of desire. It is a refusal any longer to say of everything, 'It is mine.' It is the refusal to ask that which will lift me above other people. It is the cry to have my garments parted among the multitude."



Footnotes

^5:1 Lit.--"To make their minds vacant, their stomachs comfortable, their wills weak, and their bones strong." Cf. Isa. 11.

^5:2 Cp. chaps. [*63], [*65].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 7]

[ch_04]

  

CHAPTER IV.

The Tao is as emptiness, so are its operations. It resembles non-fullness. [*1]

Fathomless! It seems to be the ancestor of all form.

It removes sharpness, unravels confusion, harmonizes brightness, and becomes one with everything.

Pellucid! [*2] It bears the appearance of permanence.

I know not whose son it is. Its Noumenon (eidulon) was before the Lord. [*3]

No matter what road we take, we find "No thoroughfare"







[p. 8]

conspicuously displayed at the end. Hence Lao-tzu describes his never absent Presence, intangible yet omnipresent, formless yet the Father of form, as "Emptiness"--apprehensible but not comprehensible. The thought of man can only proceed in certain limited directions, and therefore This, the Ubiquitous, "containing everything, yet contained in all," cannot be explained. Whoever would perceive It must leave the beaten track of routine, and in a solitary by-way go forward by the single aid of the higher intuitive powers. Furthermore, It, the one comprehensive Unit, "resembles non-fulness," for we only know the perceptions It excites in our consciousness, never adequate to represent that which is the Consciousness of all consciousness.



Footnotes

^7:1 He who understands it desires nothing. "What is king-do to us, O Govinda, what enjoyment or even life?"--Bhagavad Gita (The Despondency of Arjuna).

^7:2 Rev. iv, 6. Undefiled by contact.

^7:3 "God was not the Lord--in the creature only hath he become the Lord, I ask to be rid of the Lord; that is, that the Lord by his grace would bring me into the Essence, which is before the Lord, and above distinction. I would enter into that Eternal Unity which was mine before all time, above all addition and diminution--into that immobility whereby all is moved."--Master Eckhart.

"Eternity is unborn and eternal. God is born into the Godhead when he begins to create. The Creator creates himself. He is the Creator because he calls the creation into being. The word rests in God until it begins to be uttered, even as the thought rests in man until it has been conceived."--Dr. Hartmann (Leipzig).

"There are two forms of Brahman, time and non-time. That which was before the sun is non-time and bas no parts. That which had its beginning from the sun is time and has parts."

"Two Brahmans have to be meditated on, the word and the non-word. By the word alone is the non-word revealed."

"Two Brahmans are to be known, the word-Brahman and the highest Brahman; he who is perfect in the word-Brahman attains the highest Brahman."--Upanishads. (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, pp. 317 and 321.)

''Perfect personality is to be found only in God, while in all finite spirits there exists only a weak imitation of personality; the finiteness of the finite is not a productive condition of personality, but rather a limiting barrier to its perfect development."--Lotze.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 9]

[ch_05]

  

CHAPTER V.

Nature is non-benevolent. It regards all things as straw dogs. [*1]

The Holy Man is non-benevolent. [*2] He regards the masses as straw dogs.

The space between the Heaven and the earth is like a bellows; though unsupported, it does not warp; when in motion the more it expels. [*3]

Though words could exhaust this theme, they would not be so profitable as the preservation of its inner essence. [*4]

Nature cares as little for the divisions among men as the ancient Chinese worshippers for the straw dogs which had served their sacrificial functions. The Law of cause and effect, order and sequence (karma), is as exact, universal and scientific in the realm of mind and spirit as in the domain of physics and mathematics. Every language bears in its proverbs deep traces of its workings. Solomon's adage, "He that soweth iniquity shall reap calamity ... he that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed," has its counterpart in the sayings of all peoples. Say the Chinese, "Sow beans and









[p. 10]

you will reap beans; plant melons and you will reap melons. One cannot plant bitter gourds and reap sweet tasting fruit." "Heaven is bountiful to all according to their deserts; on the good it showers felicities, on the not good it inflicts calamity." But though man may not escape the Law, man can deprive it of evil by his attitude towards its results. Hence worshipful humility is more fitting than argument. "Stand in awe and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed and be still." "The Lord is in his holy temple: be silent before him all the earth." The solemn mysteries of life are not to be profaned.



Footnotes

^9:1 "Before the grass-dogs are set forth (at the sacrifice) they are deposited in a box or basket and wrapped up with elegantly embroidered cloths, while the representative of the dead and the officer of prayer prepare themselves by fasting to present them. After they have been set forth, however, passersby trample on their heads and backs, and the grass-cutters take and burn them in cooking. This is all they are good for." Chuang Tzu.

Says the Yin-fu-king: "Heaven's greatest mercy is that it is without mercy." See I. Pet. 1-17. Cp. , ch. [*49].

^9:2 Comp. Mr. Sinnett's description of the Adept or Mahatma--"He has attained that love of humanity as a whole which transcends the love of the Maya or illusion;" i.e., he regards all with equal impartiality.--Esoteric Buddhism.

^9:3 The Chinese explanation is that the seasons follow each other with unvarying regularity, ever pouring forth new forms of life from its bellows like a mouth providing the wicked and the good alike with all that they require. Cp. Matt. v. 45.

The esotericist will probably be reminded here of Bhuvarloka. See Secret Doctrine, vol. 3, p. 568, et seq.

^9:4 "To thee silence is praise, O God."--Delitzsch's translation of Psalm lxv. 1.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 11]

[ch_06]

  

CHAPTER VI.

The Valley-God never dies. She may be styled the Mother of the Abyss. The Abysmal Mother's orifice may be called the Root of the Heaven-Earth.

Continuous she is as though ever abiding, and may be employed without weariness. [*1]

The word ku, here and elsewhere translated "valley," is one of Lao-tzu's difficult key-words. All authorities agree that the word as used in the Tao-teh-king does not refer to the visible vale in which vegetation grows, but to the empty (?) space enclosed by the hills--a characteristic example of our author's fine power of compression.

It is significant that Lao-tzu's concept of space is never an endless extension without limitation, but always something that is bounded--the space confined between two hills, a valley. Two ideas are here suggested: 1. That cosmic-space is a portion only of the illimitable field, marked off or set apart by the Eternal, within which his activities operate. This is bounded by two eternities--a manvantara between pralayas. 2. That creation is a valley, a self-limitation or humiliation of the All-Consciousness.

Hence in the text the "Valley-God" (or Spirit, the original is incapable of exact definition) corresponds to Aditi, "The Boundless" (Akasha), otherwise known as the Deva Matri or the Mother of the Gods (Cosmic Space). We have still another aspect of Her in the Rig Veda, where she is described as Vach, "Mystic Speech"--the root whence Occult Wisdom proceeds. We meet her again in the teaching of the Kabalists as the Female Logos, or Sephira, the mother of the Sephiroth. In the Old Testament we find her personified as Wisdom, the Chokmah, or male Sephira of the Zohar, for, as Philo



[p. 12]

points out, THIS is both male and female--perfect wholeness.

The commentator Su Cheh says: "The epithet 'valley' here applied to God (or spirit) expresses existence in the midst of non-existence, and as THAT is unborn, it is undying. It is called God (or spirit) to express its perfections, and 'Mother of the Abyss' because of its achievements. All Nature springs from The Mother, who is called abysmal, because, while we can perceive what She produces, her methods of production remain inscrutable."

The word ku recurs in chaps. [*15], [*28], [*32], [*39], [*41] and [*66], but not again in this connection.



Footnotes

^11:1 Dr. Edkins interprets this passage as referring to "the ultimate principle of nature," which is without definite form or feature."--China Review, vol. xiii, p. 11.

See Frederic Henry Balfour's translation of the ''T'ai-Hsi" King; or The Respiration of the Embryo." China Review, vol. ix, p. 224.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 13]

[ch_07]

  

CHAPTER VII.

Nature [*1] continues long. What is the reason that Nature continues long? Because it produces nothing for itself it is able to constantly produce.

It is for this reason that the Holy Man puts himself in the background; yet he comes to the front. He is indifferent to himself; yet he is preserved.

Is it not because he has no interests of his own that he is able to secure his interests?

The myth of Psyche and Eros is an exquisite illustration of the tragedy and mystery of life. Through seeking to gratify selfish curiosity Psyche lost all she cared for, and not until she had been purified by unmeasured suffering did she meet her beloved again. The Prodigal in Christ's parable only found his father when he lost all desire for a separated will.

Those who seek least enjoy most. Lao-tzu's allegory is one with the paradox of Jesus, that life is best found when lost, and most lost when found, for only the all-loving know life, and only the disinterested love all.





Footnotes

^13:1 "Nature" here and in chap. 5 is "Heaven-Earth." See index.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 14]

[ch_08]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

The highest goodness resembles water. Water greatly benefits all things, but does not assert itself.

He approximates to the Tao, who abides by that which men despise.

He revolutionizes the place in which he dwells; his depth is immeasurable; he strengthens moral qualities by what he bestows; he augments sincerity by what he says; he evokes peace by his administration; his transactions manifest ability; he is opportune in all his movements.

Forasmuch as he does not assert himself he is free from blame. [*1]

Water adapts itself to every mold and flows into any vessel, making no difference between the clean and the foul, the fine and the coarse. In the words of Ruskin. "Of all inorganic substances, acting in their own proper nature, and without assistance or combination, water is the most wonderful." Hence it is the fittest type of the highest goodness, which by its self-abandon and eagerness to serve, has always been the  chief puzzle. "Then said I, lo! I am come: in the roll of the Book it is written of Me, I delight to do Thy Will, O my God; yea, Thy law is within my heart." (Ps. xl, 7.) It is



[p. 15]

the universal solvent of man's ills. "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall become in him a well of water springing up into eternal life." (John. iv, 14.) The most wretched and the most outcast may here find satisfaction for their needs. "And both the Pharisees and the Scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." (Luke xv, 2.)



Footnotes

^14:1 There is a correspondence between early Chinese thought and the beginning of Greek philosophy. Thales, born only some thirty odd years before Lao-tzu, and who, like him, was a seeker after Wisdom, is said to have "maintained water to be the ground of all things," but while Thales appears to have confined his philosophy to the conclusions that as it is water or moisture which keeps the world alive, so there is in man and in all things a living power which prevents them becoming mere heaps of dead atoms. Lao-tzu goes further and draws from the non-assertion of water the inference that the highest goodness, that which alone can transform the world, must, like water, be born of that Power which is the child of Purity--the purity of selflessness.

Lao-tzu's teaching is expanded with great force and beauty in a later Taoist treatise--"History of the Great Light." (v. Taoist Texts, by Balfour, pp. 84-85.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 16]

[ch_09]

  

CHAPTER IX.

It is better to leave alone, than to grasp at fullness.

Sharpness, which results from filing, cannot be preserved.

None can protect the hall that is filled with gold and jade.

Opulence, honors, pride, necessarily bequeath calamity.

Merit established, a name made, then retirement--this is the way of Heaven. [*1]

"A man is rich in proportion to the number of things he can afford to let alone," says Thoreau.

"In praying, use not vain repetitions as the Gentiles do." "When ye fast, be not as the hypocrites of a sad countenance; for they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen of men to fast." Such "grasping at fulness" had better be left alone.

"Meat will not commend us to God: neither, if we eat not, do we lack." Asceticism which begins and which ends in the outer leaves the heart without permanent trace; it is a sharpness which is filed; it leads to self-assertion, to pride and to disputations. "Each one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ." Minds full of names and parties are as vulnerable as a "hall filled with gold and jade."

Honors are shadowed by calamities; therefore "I thank God that I baptized none of you.... We are fools for Christ's sake.... While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seer: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal."

"Merit established, a name made, then retirement--this is the way of heaven."





Footnotes

^16:1 Literally--"Heaven's Tao."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 17]

[ch_10]

  

CHAPTER X.

By steadily disciplining the animal nature, until it becomes one pointed. It is possible to establish the Indivisible. [*1]

By undivided attention to the soul, rendering it passive, [*2] it is possible to become as an infant child. [*3]

By purifying the mind of phantasms, [*4] it is possible to become without fault. [*5]

By perfecting the people, and pacifying the empire, it is possible to prove non-attachment. [*6]

By functioning on the supra-physical planes, [*7] it is possible to be independent of the lower mind. [*8]

















[p. 18]

By making intuition omniscient, [*8a] it is impossible to discard knowledge. [*9]

Producing! Nourishing! Developing, without self-consciousness! Acting, without seeking the fruit! Progressing, without thinking of growth! This is the abyss of energy. [*10]

Long and steep the road man has to travel; infinite the distance between the animalness of the savage, knowing no motive but the gratification of desire, and the purity of the Saint, whose senses center in the One. Well might Chuang Tzu say, "The whole of life is a round of incessant solicitude, its duties are never finished." Moreover, the arena where effort will be most successful lies in those dim and formless regions of our wondrous selves, where a formative process is ever going on controlling the character of the thoughts we put into words. No language can express it. Lao-tzu has stated the problem as clearly as it can be framed in speech.

If, however, the ascent be difficult, the summit is glorious. In the beginning, a discontented, wayward, wilful child; in the end, a God, performing all duties, yet never leaving the eternal home, where calm peace and joy unspeakable reign evermore. Such the destiny, such the reward of him who fathoms perfection's abyss. "He that overcometh, I will give to him to sit down with me in my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father in his throne." (Rev. iii, 21.)









Footnotes

^17:1 i.e.: The Ego, becoming permanently self-conscious on its own plane. Very little is said in the Confucian classics on this line. The Confucian is scarcely conscious of the distinction between soul and body.

^17:2 The danger is that the separated essence will set up a separated will. Conversely the way to perfection is submission to the simplicity of the eternal purity.

^17:3 An infant has always been the symbol of the Initiate, or one who has been re-born. Comp. the conversation of Jesus with Nicodemus. (John iii, 1-5.)

^17:4 Viz.: Living a life of abstract thought; ever regarding the thought as more important than the act, or, as Jacob Bohme would say, "forsaking all to become like All."

^17:5 "It is necessary in attending to the affairs of life to be very careful of those thoughts which appear insignificant and trifling, lest they find a permanent lodging in the mind. If they are retained in the heart there is a disease in the vitals, which no medicine can cure."--Kuan Yin Tzu.

^17:6 Anyone practicing the Yoga of the three first sentences could only accept the office of Ruler as a sacrifice to duty, and the acceptance would prove the reality of his non-attachment.

^17:7 Literally--"opening and shutting heaven's gates."

"There not infrequently occur individuals so constituted that the spirit can perceive independently of the corporal organs, or can, perhaps, wholly or partially quit the body for a time and return to it again."--Alfred Wallace, F.R.S.

^17:8 Literally--"The Female Bird." The bird Karshipta, in Hindoo mythology, represents the human Mind-Soul.

^18:8a Possible only by steady and prolonged concentration on the inner world.

^18:9 i.e.: Information acquired by the ordinary processes of study and research. The individual being separated from the universal only by differentiation, his limitations grow less in proportion to his approximation to and union with the divine. The idea is again and again expressed by the old Greek philosophers, the Indian Yogins, Neo-Platonists, as well as by Jacob Bohme and Swedenborg. Su Cheh gives the following illustration: "A mirror reflects whatever fronts it, and does so unconsciously; the beginning of error is the putting of self to the fore."

^18:10 The three first sentences deal with the purity of the inner; the three next with the purity of the outer, while the seventh describes the purity of the whole--the invisibility or interiorness of godliness.

"If, therefore, thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light." (Matt. vi, 22.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 19]

[ch_11]

  

CHAPTER XI.

Thirty spokes meet in one hub, but the need for the cart existed when as yet it was not. Clay is fashioned into vessels, but the need for the vessel existed when as yet it was not. Doors and windows are cut to make a house, but the need for the house existed when as yet it was not. Hence there is a profitableness in that which is and a need in that which is not. [*1]

The advantage does not lie in the nature of the thing itself, but in that which the user brings to it. A book may prove the salvation of one, the damnation of another. "Cast not



[p. 20]

your pearls before swine." "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs." "For you therefore which believe is the preciousness: but for such as disbelieve ... a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense."



Footnotes

^19:1 This chapter teaches that the real usefulness of everything lies in the original noumenal conception.

Hsueh-kun-ts'ai says--"Although substance and the accidental are ever changing places, the intention is to make that which is the visible (accident) express that which is invisible (substance). Everyone knows the advantage of the visible, but who searches for the usefulness of the invisible, and hence Lao Tzu illustrates the matter as in the text."

Says Tung-tei-ning--"This chapter shows that while substance has form its usefulness lies in its essence; the noumenal and the phenomenal (lit. the empty and the real) continually revolve around each other, but while the latter has the advantage of being existent, its root lies in that which is (apparently) non-existence, and it is that which constitutes its usefulness." Cf. Notes to ch. [*1].

Su Cheh has the following--"The ends of matter have been reached when it has been fashioned into form, but the usefulness of the form lies both in the phenomenal and in the noumenal. When it is not on the phenomenal plane it is on the noumenal, and its usefulness lies in its noumenon. When it is not on the noumenal plane it is on the phenomenal, and its profitableness is manifested by phenomena."

This teaching concerning the relations between concealed and revealed nature was also enunciated by Paracelsus; it is elaborated in the Sankhya philosophy of India; and was taught by the Hermetic philosophers of Greece.

Compare also the following explanation by Leibnitz--"The primitive element of every material body being force, which has none of the characteristics of matter--it can be conceived but can never be the object of any imaginative representation."

vid. "The Secret Doctrine," vol. i, p. 303; also chap. [*49] of the Tao Teh King, where the reality of the phenomenal universe is described as unite meeting in unity--immaterial.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 21]

[ch_12]

  

CHAPTER XII.

The five colors blind men's eyes. [*1]

The five tones deafen men's ears. [*2]

The five flavors blunt men's appetites. [*3]

Galloping and hunting derange men's minds. [*4]

Articles which are rare limit the freedom of men's actions. [*5]

On this account the holy man regards the stomach and not the eye. [*6]

He puts aside the one, that he may take the other in hand. [*7]

What is born of the senses stupefies more than it stimulates. Man realizes himself only as he polarizes his sense organs in the spiritual, even as his spiritual faculties are polarized in the material; in other words, as he overcomes "the terrible spirit of duality within," described in Rom. vii, and prayed against in the invocation, "Lead us not into temptation," for the rainbow hues of earth blind the eyes to the translucent glories of heaven, its harmonies drown heaven's melodies, its















[p. 22]

viands spoil the taste for the flavor of the "Bread of Life," and hence, the Sage, who, in the language of Paul, is "dead unto sin, but alive unto God," turns from the sensuous to the supersensuous, passes from the narrow boundaries of the material to the limitless expanse of the spiritual.

"Look not thou on beauty's charming,--
 Sit thou still when kings are arming,--
 Taste not when the wine cup glistens,--
 Speak not when the people listens,--
 Stop thine ear against the singer,--
 Prom the red gold keep thy finger,
 Vacant heart, and hand, and eye,
 Easy life and quiet die."
                     --Walter Scott.

Said Thomas a Kempis in his "The Imitation of Christ": "Fly the tumult of the world as much as thou canst, for we are quickly defiled and enthralled by vanity." The five colors blind men's eyes.



Footnotes

^21:1 viz.: Blue, yellow, white, black, red. Tung-tei-ning notes that the more the eyes see the more they desire. Cf. Eccles. i, 8.

^21:2 "Straus says that the five sounds in old Chinese were, C, D, E, G, A, and that they were the same with the five notes of old Scotch airs. The notes F and B are avoided."--China Review, vol. xiii, p. 12.

^21:3) viz.: Sour, salt, sweet, tart, bitter. Cf. Eccles. vi, 7.

^21:4 "Desire is limitless and the cause of all trouble," says Tung-tei-ning. (Cp. ch. 64.)

^21:5 "Because," says Wang-pi, "they lead men away from the straight path into byways full of obstacles."

^21:6 "The stomach serves, the eye demands service; therefore, the Sage discards the eye," is Wang-pi's explanation.

Wu-ch'eng says that when the spirit becomes dyed with the colors of the physical world, and feels impelled to investigate it, even to its frontiers, it loses its balance. It is because it is the eye that is chiefly the cause of this deflection that the chapter begins and ends with a condemnation of that organ.

Su-cheh aptly remarks that while the eye covets more than it retains, the stomach desires no more than it requires.

^21:7 Lit.--He withdraws from this and accepts that. Wang-pi sums up the teaching of this seven-fold chapter thus--"When the [p. 22] ears, eyes, mouth and mind are subservient to the soul, all is well; but when it is otherwise, the spontaneity of man's nature is disturbed."

Chuang-tzu says: "A man who plays for counters will play well. If he stake his girdle (in which he keeps his loose cash), he will be nervous; if yellow gold, he will lose his wits. His skill is the same in each case, but he is distracted by the value of his stake. And everyone who attaches importance to the external becomes internally without resource." Chuang Tzu, by H. A. Giles, p. 234.

"The teaching of Lau-tsze comes here, and in the 13th chapter very near to that of Buddha."--J. Edkins, D. D., China Review, vol. xiii, 12,


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 23]

[ch_13]

  

CHAPTER XIII.

Equally fear favor and disgrace.

Regard a great calamity as you do your own body.

What is meant by 'Equally fear favor and disgrace?' Favor should be disparaged. Gained or lost it arouses apprehension. Hence it is said 'Equally fear favor and disgrace.'

What is meant by 'Regard a great calamity as you do your own body? Why have I any sense of misfortune? Because I am conscious of myself. Were I not conscious of my body, what distresses should I have?

Therefore, it is only they who value their persons because of their obligations, who may be entrusted with the empire. It is only they who love themselves on account of their responsibilities, who may be charged with the care of the state. [*1]

"Wherefore if any man be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things are passed away; behold, they are become new." (II Cor. v, 16.) when the consciousness is identified no longer with the self, but with the Christ, the whole world is changed; even the conceptions of fear and favor disappear--these arise with "the conception of the I." When freed by the Truth (John viii, 31, 32) man is no more attached to form, because living in faith, "the faith which is in the Son of God" (Gal. ii, 20), then his untrammeled spirit rises above the illusions of pain, sorrow and disaster. He "lives neither in the present nor the future, but in the eternal." He "recognizes this individuality as not himself, but that thing which he has with pain created for his own use, and by means of which he purposes, as his growth slowly develops his intelligence, to reach to the life beyond individuality." (Light on the Path.)





Footnotes

^23:1 Text and comment have evidently become mixed here. Probably the two first sentences alone are Lao-tzu's, and the rest the later addition of a commentator.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 24]

[ch_14]

  

CHAPTER XIV.

Looked for but invisible--it may be named 'colorless.' [*1]

Listened for, but inaudible--it may be named 'elusive.' [*2]

Clutched at but unattainable--it may be named 'subtile.' [*3]

These three cannot be unraveled by questioning, for they blend into one. [*4]

Neither brighter above, nor darker below.

Its line, though continuous, is nameless, and in that it reverts to vacuity.

It may be styled 'The form of the formless;' 'The image of the imageless;' in a word--'The indefinite. [*5]

Go in front of it and you will discover no beginning; follow after and you will perceive no ending.' [*6]









Students may consult The Chinese Recorder for 1886, which contains an article by Rev. J. Edkins, D. D., entitled, "On the Words I, Hi, Wei, in the Tau Teh King." Also an essay by the same writer in The China Review, vol. xiii. Also Victor von Straus' Tau-te-King in loc.





[p. 25]

Lay hold of this ancient doctrine; apply it in controlling the things of the present day, [*7] you will then understand how from the first it has been the origin of everything. [*8]

Here, indeed, is the clue to the Tao. [*9]

Every name of God and each attribute are but shadows of the Reality, limited manifestations of the Limitless, as time is an attribute of Eternity, mind an attribute of Consciousness, flame an attribute of Fire. "Dwelling in light unapproachable" is Paul's description. (I Tim. vi, 16.)









Footnotes

^24:1 Because in It all colors are equalized.

^24:2 Because in It all sounds are harmonized.

^24:3 Within It is all Form, yet It is formless.

^24:4 Three metaphysical hypostases, but one in essence, the unit of all consciousnesses, personified by the Hindus as Ishvara. The passage bears a close resemblance to Mesopotamian thought. The idea of a trinity in unity is a conception common to all religions, ancient or modern. Without the concrete ideas of substance, life and motion even an abstract concept of the Divine is impossible.



^24:5 Cf. the Akhmin Codex, translated in "Fragments of a Faith Forgotten," by , p. 585.

^24:6 Cf. the Hindu Shloka quoted by Mrs. Besant in "Four Great Religions," p. 19--"When there is no darkness, neither day nor night, neither being nor non-being, there is Shiva alone. He is indestructible. He is to be adored by Savitri, from him alone comes forth the ancient wisdom. Not above, nor below, nor in the midst can he be comprehended, nor is there any similitude for him whose name is infinite glory. Not by the sight is established [p. 25] his form; none beholds him by the eye. Those who know him by the heart and the mind, dwelling in the heart, become immortal."

^25:7 "Employ the ancient doctrine of non-attachment to action, to govern the present period of continuous action."--Tung-tei-ning.

^25:8 Of the evil as well as of the good. Cf. Isa. xlv, 7. Amos. iii, 6.

^25:9 viz. Building the invisible into the visible. Said a Christian writer in the Middle Ages, "Praying will either make a man leave off sinning, or sinning will make a man leave off praying."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 26]

[ch_15]

  

CHAPTER XV.

Profound indeed were the most excellent among the ancients, penetrating, fathomless; inasmuch as they were fathomless it becomes necessary to employ far fetched symbols when speaking of them.

Irresolute--as if fording a stream in winter.

Timid--as though fearful of their neighbors.

Grave--as if they were guests. [*1]

Elusive--like ice about to melt.

Simple--like raw material. [*2]

Expansive--like the space between hills.

Turbid--like muddy water. [*3]

Who can still the turbid and make it gradually clear; or quiet the active so that by degrees it shall become productive? Only he who keeps this Tao, without desiring fullness. If one is not full it is possible to be antiquated and not newly fashioned. [*4]

The innerness of no faith can be reached unless there is a profound sympathy with its devotees, the public statements









[p. 27]

often being but veils, hiding more than they reveal. This was so in Egypt, Greece, Rome, India and Persia; even "the aborigines of Central Australia to-day have their secret rites and doctrines revealed only to the males of the tribe after passing the manhood tests, and rigidly concealed, not only from the outside world, but from their own women and children." Jesus talked in parables to the crowd, explanations were reserved for His disciples. In the early Christian centuries truths unspoken in the public pulpits were revealed to a disciplina arcani. So also Lao-tzu is more impressed with the reticence of the ancients than with their eloquence. Only that self-restrained silence, born of "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding," and which seeks no earthly "fullness," can clear turbidity and make outward activity wholly productive without any destructive element. For such a storm is as a calm, or the echo of distant music.



Footnotes

^26:1 Chinese etiquette requires that a guest shall preserve due gravity in the presence of his host, to express his consciousness that he is where he is not himself a master, and must therefore guard himself.

^26:2 "Simplicity is the highest quality of expression. It is that quality to which art comes in its supreme moments. It marks the final stage of growth. It is the rarest, as it is the most precious, result which men secure in their self-training."

^26:3 This seven-fold illustration marks a certain progression-1. There is uncertainty of purpose. 2. The naturally resultant timidity of expression. 3. Yet a consciousness of a certain kind of standing. 4. But the position allows of no self assertion. 5. Nevertheless there is an inner center round which the whole man focuses his strength. 6. And from this inner center of self-consciousness there springs an all-embracing comprehensiveness. 7. This comprehensiveness because including All is as No-Thing (Turbid, like mudded water.)

^26:4 All external conditions alike. Old age as serviceable as youth; youth as fruitful as old age.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 28]

[ch_16]

  

CHAPTER XVI.

Abstraction complete, quiescence maintained unalloyed, [*1] the various forms arise with one accord, and I observe that each returns again. [*2] All things thrive and increase, then each returns again to the root. [*3] This return to the root is called 'stillness,' [*4] or it may be described as a return to report that they have fulfilled their destiny. This report is called 'the unchanging rule.' [*5]

Knowledge of this unchanging rule is called 'illumination.' Those who are ignorant of it give way to abandon and to recklessness.

Knowledge of this unchanging rule leads to toleration.

Toleration leads to comprehension. [*6]













[p. 29]

Comprehension leads to sovereignty. [*7]

Sovereignty leads to heaven-likeness.

Heaven-likeness leads to the Tao.

The Tao leads to continuity.

Though the body be no more, there is then no danger. [*8]

Plato says: "When a man is always occupied with the cravings of desire and ambition, and is eagerly striving to satisfy them, all his thoughts must be mortal, and, as far as it is possible altogether to become such, he must be mortal every whit, because he has cherished his mortal part. But he who has been earnest in the love of knowledge and of true wisdom, and has exercised his intellect more than any other part of him, must have thoughts immortal and divine, if he attain truth, and in so far as human nature is capable of sharing in immortality, he must be altogether immortal; and since he is ever cherishing the divine power, and has the divinity within him in perfect order, he will be perfectly happy." [**] "Knowledge of the Unchanging Rule," says Lao-tzu, is the first step, viz., detachment from the external, even as Nature sacrifices its objective existence to retire whence it came and announce the purport of its forthcoming fulfilled. In the language of one of the Upanishads, "When all the bonds of the heart are broken, then the man becomes immortal. Though the body be no more, there is then no danger."









Footnotes

^28:1 Su Cheh observes that neither abstraction nor quiescence are complete unless unconscious. So long as they are maintained with effort there can be neither absolute abstraction nor perfect stillness.

^28:2 "I think that what struck Lao Tzu was the fact that vegetable life seemed to be controlled by the quiet and invisible root: from it everything comes forth as having received a commission: to it there is a return, as if reporting the fulfillment of the commission."--J. P. Maclagan.

^28:3

"That each, who seems a separate whole,
  Should move his rounds, and fusing all
  The skirts of self again, should fall
  Remerging in the general soul."--Tennyson.



^28:4 The word here translated, "stillness," is the same as that rendered "quiescence" in the first sentence, suggesting a similitude between the ideal rest of the soul and the rest or pralaya of the vegetable kingdom.

^28:5 "As thousands of sparks rise from the fire, and then again merge into the fire; as clouds of dust rise in the air, and then rest again in the dust; as thousands of bubbles rise in tie rivers, and melt into water again in the same way from non-being come forth beings, and merge in Him again."--Central Hindu College Magazine, May, 1902.

^28:6 The submergence of the personal I into the impersonal All.

^29:7 Complete sway over desire.

^29:8 Because no longer bound to earth, "which time is wont to prey upon."

See II. Cor. v. 1. Also Secret Doctrine (3d ed.) iii. 454.

^29:* Timaeus. Jowett's translation, vol. iii., p. 513.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 30]

[ch_17]

  

CHAPTER XVII.

First the supreme. Then a sense of separateness. Next preferences and eulogies. Lastly, fear. Then scorn. [*1]

Hence it is plain that lack of sincerity has its origin in superficial faith.

Cautious! They valued their words, [*2] accomplished their purposes, settled their affairs, and the people all said: 'We are spontaneous.' [*3]

In Eden, man at first had no consciousness of himself. He was untempted because without personal desire. It was the contemplation of the fruit as of something which had the power of pleasing, which gave birth to the idea of caring and striving for that phenomenal self whose reflection finds its center in our emotions and judgments. It is the separation of our personalities from our true individuality which arouses within us the sense of conflict. First the Supreme; then a sense of separateness. Preferences, eulogies, fear, scorn, are inevitable results. At this stage man loses his power over nature. "Thorns and thistles" grow apace. Duty becomes labor. The curse is pronounced--"In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread."

How shall the status quo ante be attained? By retracing the false steps. Contemplation of the True and Eternal must revive and nourish the lost faith. The emotions must be brought under control, so that no excess of feeling shall cause the mouth to exaggerate or distort truth. Words must be weighed, so that there shall ever be a proper relation between the spoken speech and the person to whom it is addressed. By sympathetic insight, which looks at everything from the view-point







[p. 31]

of the other, and speaks accordingly, one's purposes will be accomplished, and those affected by us helped and not hindered. Without understanding why, the whole neighborhood will be benefited. And the people all said, "We are natural."

"Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. If any man seemeth to be religious, while he bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his heart, this man's religion is vain. For in many things we all stumble. If any stumble not in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also."



Footnotes

^30:1 The various stages of descent into matter. Students will recall the well-known Gnostic phrase, "the falling down of the Aeons."

^30:2 "The ancients were slow of speech, lest in their acts they should not come up to what they said. The wise man is slow of utterance, but diligent in action."--Confucius.

^30:3 Chuang-tzu aptly describes the mass of mankind as babes who receive "the benefits of a mother's care without troubling themselves to think to whom they are indebted for them."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 32]

[ch_18]

  

CHAPTER XVIII.

The great Tao faded and there was benevolence and righteousness. Worldly wisdom and shrewdness appeared and there was much dissembling. [*1]

The family relationships no longer harmonious, there was filial piety and paternal love. The state and the clans in anarchy, there was loyalty and faithfulness. [*2]

The so-called monotheistic races are as idolatrous as the most polytheistic. The former love their idols, the latter fear them. The graven images of the one often consecrate their sin; the worshiped virtues of the other consolidate their vice. Virtues and duties are separative, subtle forms of self-assertion, something lower than that Ideal of ideals which identifies itself with the All, and in the joy of service annihilates self. Benevolence, righteousness, filiality, paternalism, loyalty, devotion, is each in its own way a degenerate, when The Tao, the Great Ideal, The One Life, recedes from view. Woe to that captain who, when navigating his vessel into port, allows the various lights and sounds of the harbor to turn his attention from the flashing signals of the lighthouse. To





[p. 33]

know true monotheism, meditate on lives such as Buddha and Jesus--from these consciousnesses The Great Tao never faded.

"For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that one died for all, therefore all died; and He died for all, that they which live should no longer live unto themselves, but unto Him who for their sakes died and rose again." (II Cor. v, 14-15.)



Footnotes

^32:1 The spiritual intuition of the primitive ages--"the Golden Age" described by Plato in the fourth book of his Laws--having vanished, ethical science in which the phantasms of righteousness, benevolence, etc., loomed large became the vogue. The omnipresent Unity, the great Tao, having disappeared, the veil of Maya showed multiple minor reflections, and these shadows being mistaken for substance the evils mentioned in the text arose, because, to borrow the explanation of the commentator, Kuan-yin-tzu, "Although in themselves true, these moral qualities, when substitutes for the Tao, become false."

^32:2 Given a normal condition of affairs and obedience and love in the family, loyalty and faithfulness in the State, may be taken for granted, as the ceaseless heating of the heart, or the continual flow of blood through the healthy body. The special mention therefore of loyalty and love indicate disease.

Cf. The review of "Life and Labor of the People of London; Religious Influences," by Charles Booth in The Athenaeum for May, 16, 1903, and the article thereon in The Theosophical Review, vol. xxxii. 515.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 34]

[ch_19]

  

CHAPTER XIX.

Abandon knowledge, discard wisdom--the people will gain a hundred fold.

Abandon the humanities, discard righteousness--the people will return to filial love.

Abandon cleverness, discard gain--robbers and thieves will be no more. [*1]

These three, [*2] being considered not sufficiently aesthetic, therefore many other devices [*3] were added. Better observe simplicity, [*4] encourage primitiveness, lessen the number of private projects, and moderate desire. [*5]

Whether on the physical or spiritual planes, disintegration











[p. 35]

is essential to progression. However good the ritual, it should be cast aside once the life has outgrown the form. In passing from infancy to old age, mankind proceeds from multiplicity to simplicity, from activity to quiescence, and this natural physical law is also the path for the soul. The desires fade, or are perhaps absorbed, as the orb of Truth rises.

"The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God," says Paul.

"Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in no wise find the kingdom of God," is one of the forgotten sayings of the Christ.



Footnotes

^34:1 Virtues which are exotics and not habitats are dangerous freaks, diverting the mind from inner realities. The teaching is eloquently set forth by J. B. of "The Christian World." "What a remove," ... he writes, "from the thing we call 'cleverness,' the element which made Jesus supreme in the hearts of his followers! Was it by 'cleverness' that, in Ullmann's striking words, 'His mere presence passed a silent but irresistible sentence upon those by whom he was surrounded,' Was it a mere trick of the intellect that his look could break a strong man's hearts In this highest example we have demonstration of the fact that the crowning endowment of humanity is beyond and behind intellect, using that only as a tool. ... We are in an age of culture and of general knowledge grinding. More than ever necessary is that for every teacher, but it is only a beginning. Our qualification for any grade of spiritual office is in the incessant cultivation of our central innermost. It is when we find our Higher Self, our greater Ego, the infinite Ground of our being, to be more and more filling us and making our life, that we can speak of progress."

^34:2 viz.: The three duplicates, knowledge, wisdom; benevolence, righteousness; cleverness, gain. Standing alone they are painted fruits which arouse expectations but fail to satisfy hunger. Cf. Matt. xxi. 17-19.

^34:3 Once let the outer usurp the inner, and, like uncontrolled competition in business, it will end in bankruptcy.

^34:4 Tsaio-ju-ho observes that primitive simplicity embraces the very essence of knowledge, wisdom, benevolence and righteousness.

^34:5 The way of the Christ, as of all great religious leaders, is to discourage monopoly and practice spiritual socialism.

See notes to chap. [*38].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 36]

[ch_20]

  

CHAPTER XX.

Scholarship abandoned, sorrow vanishes. [*1]

Yes and yea,--are they not almost alike? Goodness and evil,--are they not akin? [*2]

Untrammeled and without limits--yet that may not be lightly esteemed which all men reverence. [*3]

The multitude are joyful and merry--as though feasting on a day of sacrifice, or ascending a high tower in spring. [*4] I alone am anchored without giving any sign [*5]--like an infant, undeveloped.

My homeless heart wanders among the things of sense, as if it had nowhere to stay.

The multitude have enough and to spare [*6]--I alone am as one who has lost something.













[p. 37]

Have I then the mind of a fool? Am I so very confused?

Ordinary men are bright enough. I alone am dull.

Ordinary men are full of excitement. I alone am heavy-hearted.

Boundless as the sea, drifting to and fro, as if without a place to rest. [*7]

All men have some purpose. I alone am thickheaded as a boor. [*8]

I am alone--differing from others, in that I reverence and seek the Nursing Mother. [*9]

Says the Theologia Germanica: "He who is without the sense of sin must be either Christ or the evil spirit." It is questionable, perhaps, if such an affirmation would bear a. thorough philosophical sifting, but it is certain that the consciousness of insufficiency and failure is the first step towards the noble and worthy, as distinct from what is simply innocent and pure, and that life is a failure which, drifting with the crowd, knows nothing of aloneness, because it lacks stamina to resist absorption.

Though, therefore, we find Lao-tzu in advance of his fellows, bewailing that he is alone among men, we may be sure that he was not always so, and that if he at the last stood







[p. 38]

apart from his fellows, it was because he had exhausted the pleasures the world was able to afford. Experience had made him wise, but how had he attained this wisdom? By contemplation of the Tao, which for him took the place of the Christ, who had not then come. He saw the promise, greeted it from afar, and confessed himself a stranger and a pilgrim on the earth. (See Heb. xi, 13.)

Is not the Christ "that side of the nature of God which has expressed itself in creation?" (See Col. i, 16-17.) Even so for Lao-tzu the "Nursing Mother," whom he reverenced, was the Tao manifested, the Eternal revealed in his works. It is the contemplation of this sacred mystery, the cross in the heart of God, that leads penitents to the Father's feet. It was the contemplation of this same mystery, the oneness of the divine with all human joys and sorrows, that condemned Lao-tzu to the noble loneliness of which the present chapter is an echo.

If our reasoning be sound we see how the atonement occupies a natural place in the scheme of things; and that all great souls, of all faiths, have come to God by one road, viz., by perceiving the oneness of God with men in their triumphs and failures. It was this insight into the union of the finite with the infinite that made Lao Tzu alone in his generation--"I am alone, differing from others, in that I reverence and seek the Nursing Mother." It was this which enabled him to see below the surface, to discover that in time, in earth, and in self there is neither satisfaction, joy nor peace. And like all who have traveled this road he paid the penalty of aloneness, lived on high planes of thought, unexplored by his less advanced contemporaries. Such loneliness is, however, its own reward. The electric wire derives its usefulness from its insulation. An adulterated message would result from too close a fellowship with men.



Footnotes

^36:1 Was not "the desire to know" the very beginning of tears?

"A humble knowledge of thyself is a surer way to God than a deep search after learning."--Imitation of Christ, bk. i. ch. 3.

^36:2 What use is there in further talk of my way and your way, of this view and that? The right and the wrong way are things which concern the minds only of those who are groping in the dark. To the Sage sitting in the full light of heaven, the difference between No and Yes is not much after all. These are distinctions and things of prejudice, and he is not concerned with them."--W. R. Old in The Theosophic Review, vol. xxxi., p. 68.

"Demon est Deus inversus." See Secret Doctrine, vol. i. section xi.

^36:3 Su Cheh explains this passage to mean that though the Sage (Holy Man) has escaped from Maya, or the illusion of Egoism, he does not on that account overlook the distinctions of society, but gives honor to whom honor is due, acknowledges authority, yet comes under the power of none. (Comp. John viii, 37.)

^36:4 "Spring is the time of the union of the male and female principles; all things are thus moved. He who ascends a tower to gaze has his will as it were depraved."--P. J. Macglagan.

^36:5 Literally--"without omens"--i.e., without indications from the sensuous world.

^36:6 "Superabundance, i.e., as if they had ability and wisdom more than enough for themselves, on the strength of which they there rush out in various lines of activity."--P. J. Macglagan.

^37:7 Contrasting himself with the recluses of his day Confucius said: "I am different from these. I have no course for which I am predetermined and no course against which I am predetermined." (Conf. Ana. xviii. ch. 8:5)

^37:8 See I. Cor. iv, 9-13.

^37:9

"I have not so far left the coasts of life
  To travel inland, that I cannot hear
  That murmur of the outer Infinite
  Which unweaned babies smile at in their sleep
  When wondered at for smiling."
                      E. B. Browning in Aurora Leigh.

The saddened tone of this chapter, so different from the general character of the work, recalls one of the Logia discovered in Egypt by Grenfell and Hunt in 1896--"Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all men drunken and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over the sons of men, because they are blind in their heart." ... Sayings of our Lord.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 39]

[ch_21]

  

CHAPTER XXI.

The comprehensiveness of supreme energy is its conformity to the Tao. [*1]

The Tao considered as an entity is impalpable, indefinite. Indefinite, impalpable, within are conceptions. Impalpable, indefinite, within are shapes. [*2] Profound, obscure, within is the essence. This essence being supremely real, within is sincerity.

From the beginning until now it has not changed, [*3] and thus it has watched all the essentials. How do I know it has been thus with all principles? By what has just been said.

As the gospels, filled with the presence of the Master, preserve no notes of the disciples' sermons, so the true mystic sees God alone in the universe. Is not the spiritual the home of the physical? Is not conformity to the Tao the comprehensiveness of the Energy which is supreme? "In Him we live and move and have our being." "It is His fullness that filleth all in all." "And by Him all things consist." "But the Lord is in his holy temple: be silent before him all the earth."









Footnotes

^39:1 See ch. 38.

^39:2 "The cosmos is all-formed--not having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within itself. Since, then, cosmos is made to be all-formed, what may its maker bet For that, on the one hand, He should not be void of all form; and, on the other hand, if He's all-formed, He will be like the cosmos. Whereas, again, has He a single form, He will thereby be less than cosmos. What, then, say we He is?--that we may not bring our sermon into doubt; for naught that mind conceives of God is doubtful. He, then, hath one idea, which is His own alone, which doth not fall beneath the sight, being bodiless, and (yet) by means of bodies manifesteth all (ideas). And marvel not that there's a bodiless idea." The mind to Hermes, by G. R. S. Mead, in The Theosophical Review, vol. xxxiii., p. 52.

^39:3 Lit.--"Its Name has not departed." Noumenally the Tao is eternal and unchanging; phenomenally It has a beginning and consequently an end.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 40]

[ch_22]

  

CHAPTER XXII.

To be crooked is to be perfected; to be bent is to be straightened; to be lowly [*1] is to be filled; to be senile is to be renewed; to be diminished is to be able to receive; to be increased is to be deluded. [*2]

Therefore the Holy Man embraces unity, [*3] and becomes the world's model. [*4]

He is not self-regarding, therefore he is cognizant. [*5]

He is not egotistic, therefore he is distinguished.

He is not boastful, therefore he has merit. He is not conceited, therefore he is superior. Inasmuch as he strives with none, there are none in the world able to strive with him. [*6]













[p. 41]

That ancient maxim--'To be crooked is to become perfected'--was it an idle word? Verily, it includes the whole. [*7]

"Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain shall be made low; and the crooked shall be made a straight place, and the rough places plain." "Everyone that exalteth himself shall be humbled; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." These familiar Bible Texts voice the teaching of Religion in all ages, whether she appear in the garb of the Brahman, the Buddhist, the Jew, or the Christian.

Those who have done most for their fellows have been those who have walked most humbly before their Maker. Selflessness has been their chief characteristic. A child is egotistic. A MAN is unconscious. Abraham, regarded by the Jew, the Mohammedan and the Christian, as a saint, bowed in continual humility before Jehovah--ordering his life according to the directions of the Invisible. Sakyamuni left a palace to wear the beggar's robe. Socrates followed the guidance of his daemon. It is to the humility of Confucius that the Chinese point with the most satisfaction. Jesus came not to be ministered unto but to minister, according to his own saying, "Whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth? Is not he that sitteth at meat? I am in the midst of you as he that serveth." To be lowly is to be filled.





Footnotes

^40:1 The word rendered here "lowly" means--The footsteps of an ox in which water collects; a hollow; a puddle; a swamp.

^40:2 "Self-sufficiency invites damage; humility receives benefits."--Shu-kung.

^40:3 Lit.--"The One," which Wang-pi explains as "diminished to the uttermost." In Esoteric Buddhism we read that the "supreme controlling cause" "is the same for one man as for every man, the same for humanity as for the animal kingdom, the same for the physical as for the astral or devachanic planes of existence."--8th ed. Amer., p. 307.

"The more a man is one within himself and becometh of single heart, so much the more and higher things doth he understand without labor; for that he receiveth the light of wisdom from above."--Of the Imitation of Christ.

^40:4 Having yielded himself to the Tao, as Paul to the cross, "the law in his members." (Rom. vii. 23), or the passion elements of his nature, obey the "law in his mind;" hence he is the "world's model."

^40:5 "The eye does not look at itself, therefore it sees everything; the mirror never reflects itself, thus it is able to reflect images. What time has any who is ever attending to himself to give to anything else?"--Su-cheh.

^40:6 See ch. [*66].

"The unassuming are honorable and illustrious; the humble cannot be surpassed."--Yi-king. (The Book of Changes.)

^41:7 Perfection is impossible without a recognition of THE LAW that every cause produces its own effects, and that no effects occur without adequate cause. To this majestic and immutable law Nature offers unceasing sacrifice. It is Nature's implicit submission to a Will higher than herself that secures the accuracy of scientific investigation. In like manner individual perfection is attainable only as there is absolute obedience to Nature's instructions on all planes. Hence the assertion of the text that to be crooked, or to be willing to bow the neck to the yoke imposed by the might of superior Wisdom, includes the whole. Cp. Isa. i, 16.20.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 42]

[ch_23]

  

CHAPTER XXIII.

Few words are natural.

A whirlwind does not outlast the morning; a deluge does not outlast the day. Who produces these?--The Heaven-Earth. If the Heaven-Earth cannot produce lasting phenomena, how much less can man?

Wherefore settling everything in accordance with the Tao, embodying the Tao they become identified with the Tao. Embodying its virtue, they become identified with virtue. Embodying loss, they become identified with loss.

Identified with the Tao, they joyfully accept the Tao; identified with virtue, they joyfully accept virtue; identified with loss, they joyfully accept loss.

If sincerity is lacking it is because of superficial faith.

Nothing reveals man's slight hold on himself like his unending torrential flow of speech. According to the Apostle James unbridled tongues are signs of irreligious hearts (i. 26). An orderly, calm progression--not sudden spurts of spasmodic eloquence--is the example set by Nature for man's imitation. The whirlwind and the deluge do not last. Man's noisy insincerity is the result of his superficiality. This leads him to ofttimes content himself with less than the best, to identify himself with what is positive loss, or with what is a mere reflection of the real. God only speaks in the heart of him who, independent of outward circumstance, dwells "in the secret place of the Most High," "under the shadow of the Almighty." (Psalm. xci, 1.) "For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy:

I dwell in the high and holy place with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." (Isa. lvii, 15.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 43]

[ch_24]

  

CHAPTER XXIV.

Who tiptoes, totters. [*1] Who straddles, stumbles. [*2] The self-regarding cannot cognise; the egotistic are not distinguished; the boastful are not meritorious; the self-conceited cannot excel. Such from the standpoint of the Tao are like remnants of food, or parasites, [*3] which all things probably detest. Hence, those who possess the Tao are not so. [*4]

In a universe where self-sacrifice is the master law of life the self-seeker is a blot on the sun, a fog obscuring the landscape, a cog slowing the wheel of evolution. He is an intruder for whom there is no rightful place, a shadow masquerading as a reality. Like salt, which has lost its flavor, he is "fit neither for the land nor for the dunghill" (Matt. v, 13). Yet so infinite is the divine patience at the heart of things, that, "from the standpoint of the Tao," parasitical though he be, the self-seeker is permitted to remain, notwithstanding his inharmony with the scheme of the world. "The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some count slackness; but is long suffering to you-ward, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance." (II Pet. iii, 9.)











Footnotes

^43:1 "Besser nicht anfangen, Denn erliegen."--German Proverb.

^43:2 "He who stretches his legs does not walk (easily)."--James Legge.

^43:3 Cf. Marcus Aurelius' simile of the man who separates himself from nature. "He is an abscess on the universe."--Bk. v. ch. ix.

^43:4 The teaching of the chapter is illustrated by a quotation in the "Doctrine of the Mean." "It is said in the Book of Poetry, 'Over her embroidered robe she puts a plain garment,' intimating a dislike to the display of the elegance of the former. Just so it is the way of the Lordly Man to prefer concealment, while he every day becomes more illustrious, and it is the way of the small-minded man to seek notoriety, while he daily goes more and more to ruin."

"A wise man never competes under any circumstances."--Confucius.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 44]

[ch_25]

  

CHAPTER XXV.

There was a completed, amorphous something before the Heaven-Earth was born. [*1] Tranquil! Boundless! Abiding alone and changing not! Extending everywhere without risk. It may be styled 'the world-mother.' [*2]

I do not know its name, but characterize it--the Tao. Arbitrarily forcing a name upon it I call it the Great. Great, it may be said to be transitory. Transitory, it becomes remote. Remote, it returns. [*3]

The Tao, then, is great; Heaven is great; Earth is great; a king is also great. [*4] In space there are four that are great, and the king dwells there as one of them.

Man's standard is the earth. Earth's standard is the Heaven. Heaven's standard is the Tao. The Tao's standard is spontaneity. [*5]

SPONTANEITY, or action which is natural, and effortless,











[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Lao-tzu's symbol for perfection, has a modern apostle in that master of art critics, John Ruskin. This is what he writes in "Sesame and Lilies":

"All good work is essentially done that way--without hesitation, without difficulty, without boasting; and in the doers of the best there is an inner and involuntary power which approximates literally to the instinct of an animal. Nay, I am certain that in the most perfect human artists reason does not supersede instinct, but is added to an instinct as much more divine than that of the lower animals as the human body is more beautiful than theirs." (III ed. p. 149.)



Footnotes

^44:1 The Tao is neither clear nor misty, high nor low; neither here nor there, good nor evil; as without shape, yet as having shape, and none know whence It came. Yet It has always existed, and the Heaven-Earth sprang from it.--Su-cheh.

^44:2 Lit. "The Mother-of-all-under-heaven."--Kundalini.

^44:3 From Non-existence the Tao comes into Existence, and returns whence It appeared. In other words Manvantara succeeds Pralaya, and Pralaya follows Manvantara throughout Eternity.

^44:4 I. Esdras iv, 1-12.

^44:5 The monarch is only great as he is worthy of being the visible representative of the Invisible Powers, The Four Great Ones (the Lords of Karma). This courtly phraseology conveys a veiled warning to the reigning sovereign that there were Those higher than he. The warning is repeated and emphasized in less disguised language in the succeeding chapter.

"If man conform to the (requirements of) the earth he obtains all that he needs; if the earth conform to (the laws of) heaven it becomes fertile; if heaven conform to the Tao it becomes able to fulfill Its functions; if the Tao conform to Spontaneity It realizes Itself. Then that which should be square becomes square, and that which should be round becomes round."--Wang-pi.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 46]

[ch_26]

  

CHAPTER XXVI.

Lightness has its roots in heaviness. Restlessness has a master in stillness. Therefore, the Holy Man travels all day without leaving the baggage wagon. [*1] Surrounded by sensuous enjoyments he remains peaceful and free.

How, then, can the Lord of ten thousand chariots [*2] regard his personality as of less importance than his royal trust? By levity he will loose his ministers; by restlessness he will loose his throne.

The frail leaves of the woods owe their stability to the mountains in which the trees are rooted. It is the mighty flood which is the origin of the fleecy, fleeting clouds in the summer sky. The very conception of "heaviness" would be impossible without the idea of "lightness." Woe to that man whose passing moods have no foundation in a weighty soul. He will be swept as driftwood hither and thither, and never reach port.

All movement starts from rest, and is controlled by the still. It is the quiet river-bed which directs the course of the impetuous torrent. The restless wind is scattered by the passive block of masonry. It is the man whose heart is still who comes to the front as one of the world's rulers. Restlessness in the citadel of the soul will overthrow the loftiest prince. Even the Lord Jesus would have become tainted when he ate with publicans and sinners had he possessed no unchanging point of rest within. [**]







[p. 47]

"See, O see, the flashing gold
    From a thousand suns outglancing,
  See the starry Heavens unrolled,
    And the skies around me dancing:
  Yet I feel a softer splendor,
    Flowing o'er my heart, like balm,
  O how thrilling, and how tender!
    It is Christ!--Creation's Calm."



Footnotes

^46:1 i.e. He never throws aside his gravity.

In the eighth chapter of the first book of the Confucian Analects we read, "Confucius remarked, If the Wise Man is not serious he will not inspire respect, nor will his learning be solid."

^46:2 The reigning Sovereign.

^46:* I am indebted for these thoughts to Victor von Straus. See his Lao-Tse's Tao Te King, in loc.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 48]

[ch_27]

  

CHAPTER XXVII.

Good doers leave no tracks. [*1] True words have no defects. Skillful plans require no calculations. Able closers need no locks and bars, yet none can open what they shut. [*2] Real strength wants no cords, yet none can loose it. [*3]

It follows that the Holy Man when helping others, works in accordance with the unchanging goodness. Hence, He rejects none. He does the same when helping nature to develop. Therefore, he rejects nothing. This may be called 'obscured perception.' [*4]

Thus the Good Man is the bad man's instructor; the bad man the Good Man's material. Yet he does not esteem himself a teacher, [*5] nor does he love his material. [*6]

Although one may be wise, here he is deceived. [*6a]















[p. 49]

This is 'The Cardinal Mystery.' [*7]

The Christ declared that his disciples were the salt of the earth, the light of the world; but salt and light act towards all things with equal impartiality; moreover, the salt, because one with the whole, is unnoticed when the flavors are praised; light is indistinguishable from the landscape which it reveals. "Good doers leave no tracks." It is this universalizing of his heart which gives the Sage his power. One with God he is one with all. The fuel dies that the flame may soar. What would become of man if the atmospheric oxygen insisted on remaining itself? The mother travails in pain that the child may be born. The cross is the center of all--"the symbol, not of separatism, but of universality."





Footnotes

^48:1 Matt. vi. 3.

^48:2 i.e. They are independent of externals.

^48:3 The paragraph teaches that the most forceful energies operate on the spiritual planes. Prayers are more valuable than gold.

^48:4 In his dealings with humanity the Sage never departs from the eternal law of the Divine Wisdom, that every cause produces its own effect, and that no effect occurs without an adequate cause. The idea may be illustrated by a verse in section 99 of the Koran: "Whosoever hath wrought an ant's weight of good shall behold it, And whosoever hath wrought an ant's weight of evil shall behold it." (Stanley Poole's translation.)

The "perception" of the Sage is said to be obscured because it regards the hidden Law, rather than the immediate gain or immediate loss of the individual. The miracles of the Christ were the phenomena of his ministry of which he thought least.

^48:5 Says Su Cheh: "Though himself unable to forget the world, the Sage is able to let the world forget him."

^48:6 11e radiates power as the sun heat. The Lord Jesus was more concerned to witness for the truth than to save individuals.

^48:6a Cf. chaps. [*20], [*58], [*73].

^49:7 Huai-nan-tza illustrates the general teaching of the chapter by two illustrations from Chinese history. The Builder of the Great Wall could not retain the succession to the throne in his family; whereas the descendants of the virtuous Wu Wang swayed the scepter for thirty-four generations.

"Mystery" here reminds us of The Abyss of chap. [*1].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 50]

[ch_28]

  

CHAPTER XXVIII.

One conscious of virility, maintaining muliebrity, is a world-channel. From a world-channel the unchanging energy never departs. This is to revert to the state of infancy.

One conscious of brightness, placid in shade, is a world-model. In a world-model the unchanging energy remains undiminished. This is to revert to the unlimited.

One conscious of merit, content in disgrace, is a world-valley. In a world-valley the unchanging energy is sufficient. This is to revert to simplicity.

Simplicity scattered becomes capacity, and in the hands of the Holy Man, administrators.

Thus the Supreme Mandate may not be sundered.

True power is the power to be without power. The highest perfection is "infancy," "simplicity"--the surrender of the individual to the universal. Man is greatest when he stoops. The simplicity of the divine is more potent than the multiplied devices of human effort. Do we not read of Wisdom that "being but one she can do all things" (Wisdom of Solomon vii, 27); and did not the Christ choose "little children" as types of His kingdom? That man who is wise enough to emulate the simplicity of the child will, by the purity of his life and the strength of his thought, be an administrator and distributor of spiritual treasure, a great principle and mighty power which no evil force can divide.

In a word, the Kingdom of God will be established when the strong are willing to be weak; when the radiant are satisfied though clouded; when the meritorious though unknown are contented.

"When will Christ's kingdom be realized?" is one of the questions found in an uncanonical gospel. The answer is "When ye shall trample on the garment of shame, when the

[p. 51]

two shall be one and the male as the female, neither male nor female." In the end all consciousness of separation will be superseded, a state our author well calls--the unchanging energy.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 52]

[ch_29]

  

CHAPTER XXIX.

I perceive that no desire can succeed which has as its objective the moulding of the state. The state possesses a divine capacity, which cannot be moulded.

To make is to mar; to grasp is to lose.

Thus in nature some things lead, others follow; some inspire, others expire; some are strong, some are weak; some survive, others succumb; hence, the Holy Man renounces excess, extravagance, exaltation. [*1]

N.B.--This chapter has a special message for the present time, when the European and American races are yearly bringing the peoples of Africa and of Asia more under their control, and when the Church is aggressively spreading its faith among the nations of the earth. All power exercised over those who are weaker, whether it be secular or spiritual, is an evil when it subverts natural growth; or denationalizes any, either in thought or in act. We can only influence and work no mischief, when we recognize the mysterious subtlety which lies at the root of things, and which cannot be moulded. Who makes mars; who grasps, loses. "And when they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen were restive. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah: and God smote him there for his rashness; and there he died by the ark of God." (II Sam. vi, 6, 7.)





Footnotes

^52:1 The Sage leaves everything to work out its own destiny "Even should a Master--a Jivanmukta, one who has attained union, while still in the body, with that Higher Self--cast the mantle of his power round the disciple, should be wrap him in his aura, even then, it would be of no profit, if the disciple is not ready to burst the veils of his Soul with self-effort.

"If the nature of the disciple does not respond of its own will, and grow of its own energy, the artificial exaltation would be not only unprofitable but even injurious. For the instant the protecting wall were removed, the reaction would sweep the unprepared neophyte off his feet.... And that is why it is so difficult for a Master to interfere with the natural growth of the disciple.... Nature must work on in her own way, and growth must proceed from within without and never from without within."--The World-Mystery, by G. R. S. Mead, B.A., M.R.A.S., pp. 146, 147.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 53]

[ch_30]

  

CHAPTER XXX.

When one uses the Tao in assisting his sovereign, he will not employ arms to coerce the state. Such methods easily react. [*1]

Where military camps are established briers and thorns flourish. When great armies have moved through the land calamities are sure to follow. [*2]

The capable are determined, but no more. They will not venture to compel; determined, but not conceited; determined, but not boastful; determined, but not arrogant; determined because it cannot be helped; determined, but not forceful.

When things reach their prime, they begin to age. This cannot be said to be the Tao. What is NOT the Tao soon ends. [*3]







War is crude, unrefined cruelty; a creator of divisions, and an opponent of the unity underlying creation; brute force and strategy are its weapons, each a contradiction of the simplicity and purity of God; its effects extend beyond the physical, and to those who have open ears there come from the Unseen, echoes similar to the lament of the Great Spirit in Hiawatha:

"O my children! my poor children!
  Listen to the words of wisdom,
  From the lips of the Great Spirit,
  From the Master of Life, who made you!"

"I am weary of your quarrels,
  Weary of your wars and bloodshed, [p. 54]
  Weary of your prayers for vengeance,
  Of your wranglings and divisions;
  All your strength is in your union,
  All your danger is in discord;
  Therefore be at peace henceforward,
  And as brothers live together."

Armies when contending seem to be the most commanding forces in the universe, yet is their strength unequal to the Spiritual Force--electricity.



Footnotes

^53:1 "With what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again."--Luke.

^53:2 Although the Tao Teh King is now little read, so manifest is the Law of Retribution that this sentence has become one of the commonest proverbs in the Chinese colloquial.

^53:3 See chap. [*55].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 55]

[ch_31]

  

CHAPTER XXXI.

The magnificence of the army cannot make it an auspicious weapon. It is possible that even inanimate Nature detests it. Hence, one who possesses Tao has nothing to do with it.

The Master Thinker (the Sage) when at home honors the left. When leading troops he honors the right. Soldiers are instruments of ill omen. They are not agents for a Master Thinker. Only when it is inevitable will he employ them. What he most prizes is quiet and peace. He will not praise a victory. To do so would show delight in the slaughter of men. As for those who delight in the slaughter of men, the world is too small for the gratification of their desires.

When affairs are felicitous the left is honored, but when they are inauspicious the right is honored. The Second Officer is placed on the left, but the Commander-in-Chief is placed on the right. That is to say, his position is as if he were attending a funeral. The slayer of multitudes should bitterly weep and lament. Having fought and won it is as if he were presiding at a funeral.

NOTE.--This chapter was doubtless originally a commentary on the preceding section, but subsequently incorporated in the text through the carelessness of a copyist. The language is unlike Lao Tzu's style, and contains one or more anachronisms.

The references to the right and the left will be understood when it is remembered that in China the left is the seat of honor, the right the lower and inferior seat.

Legge remarks that "the concluding sentence will suggest to some readers the words of the Duke of Wellington after Waterloo that to gain a battle was the saddest thing next to losing it."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 56]

[ch_32]

  

CHAPTER XXXII.

Tao--the Eternally Nameless.

Though primordial simplicity is infinitesimal, none dare make it a public servant.

Were princes and monarchs able to maintain it, all creation would spontaneously submit. Heaven and earth harmonized, there would be an abundance of nourishing agencies; the people unbidden, would co-operate of their own accord.

Names arose when differentiation commenced; once there were names it became important to know where to stop. This being known, danger ceased.

The Tao spread throughout the world, may be compared to mountain rivulets and streams flowing towards the sea.

One Life pervades all, the names by which men identify the phenomenal aspects of The One being but attributes of That. Infinitesimal! It defies analysis but is nevertheless The Force above all forces and in all forces. Were the rulers of earth able to emulate It and so cease to arouse opposition; were they able to maintain this Primordial Simplicity, which being impersonal, generates no force with self-gratification as its objective, everything would be harmonized, for there would be no loss of effort, as there must inevitably be where the full force of action is broken by the personal side wishes of its generator. Then the intellectual and the emotional, the ratiocinative and the spiritual, the aesthetic and the scientific, the strength of the man and the tenderness of the woman, the experience of the adult and the innocence of the child would be diffused into one grand, homogeneous, all-comprehensive consciousness--the whole man, memory, imagination, reason, co-ordinated and united in the worship of the Unseen. "The Tao into whom," in the words of the Gita, "all desires flow as rivulets flow into the ocean, which is filled with water, but remaineth unmoved, would be spread throughout the world."

[p. 57]

Yet the differences in creation, which have given rise to names, have their uses--danger arises only when man stops at the name, instead of passing on to the Nameless. "And He gave some to be apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints ... till we all attain to the unity of the faith ... unto a full grown man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." (Eph. iv, 11, 13.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 58]

[ch_33]

  

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Who knows men has discernment; who knows himself has illumination. [*1]

Who overcomes men has strength; who overcomes himself has determination. Who knows contentment has wealth. [*2]

Who acts vigorously has will. [*3]

Who never departs from his base, endures long; he dies, but does not perish; he lives eternally. [*4]

Immortality is a prize to be won, not an estate to be inherited. "These are they which come out of the great tribulation, and they washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb." (Rev. vii, 14.) They ate the flesh and drank the blood of the Son of Man. (John vi, 54); and then in turn poured out their own blood for the thirsty and gave their own flesh to the hungry, thus filling up on their part "that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ." (Col. i, 24.) There is no alkali but this spiritual self-surrender, which finds its meat and its drink in doing the will of the Father (John iv, 34), which can wash our robes free of the stains of mortality, and make them pure with an incorruptible









[p. 59]

whiteness. To attain to this not only is it necessary to know men but to know one's Self; not only is contentment required, but a vigorous- will, and "Ile that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death." (Rev. iii, 11.) E coelo descendit (gnuthi seayton)--"From heaven descends (the precept) 'know thyself.'" (Juvenal ii, 27.)



Footnotes

^58:1 The discernment which gives knowledge of men by providing points for comparison produces the illumination which leads to self-knowledge. Su Cheh says that one can never know himself until he puts all distinctions on one side; a statement supported by Porphyry, who in his treatise on sensation says that the mind only sees itself when it regards objects, as ''the mind embraces everything, and all that exists is nothing but the mind, which contains bodies of all kinds." See Encyc. Britt., 9th edit., vol. i., p. 461. Comp. also the teachings of Plotinus.

"I, the imperfect, adore my own perfect."--Emerson in his essay on "The Oversoul."

^58:2 "The Princely Man is contented even in poverty."--Chinese proverb. See Phil. iv. 11.

^58:3 "When I seek nothing from without, but vigorously attend to myself there is nothing which can interfere with my will."--Su Cheh.

^58:4

"So death, so called, can but the form deface,
  The immortal soul flies out in empty space,
  To seek her fortune in another place."




     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 60]

[ch_34]

  

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Supreme is the Tao! All pervasive; it can be on the left hand and on the right.

All things depend on it for life, and it denies none.

Its purposes accomplished, it claims no credit.

It clothes and fosters [*1] all things, but claims no lordship.

Ever desireless, it may be named 'The Indivisible.'

All things revert to it, but it claims no lordship. It may be named 'The Supreme.'

Because to the end it does not seek supremacy; it is able to accomplish great things. [*2]

Says an unknown pagan quoted by Philoponus--"All things are full of God: on all sides hath He ears, ears that hear, can hear through rocks, and compass earth, and pierce through man himself to hear the smallest thought he hides within his breast."

And says a modern theologian: [**] "The universe is God living his life, and living it by limitation. But beyond and behind are the infinite resources of his being."









Footnotes

^60:1 There is an alternative reading--"lovingly nourishes."

^60:2 In many editions this sentence refers to the Sage, and not to the Tao. Commenting on the conclusion of the chapter Su Cheh says, "Who makes himself great is small." See Matt. xx. 26, 28.

"Whither shall I go from Thy spirit?
  Or whither shall I flee from Thy presence?
  If I ascend into heaven, thou art there:
  If I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there.
  If I take the wings of the morning,
  And dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;
  Even there shall Thy hand lead me,
  And thy right hand shall hold me."
                                        (Psa. cxxxix. 7-10.)



^60:* R. J. Campbell, B. A.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 61]

[ch_35]

  

CHAPTER XXXV.

Apprehend the inimitable conception, you attract the world; coming it receives no harm, but is tranquil, peaceful, satisfied. [*1]

Like transient guests, music and dainties pass away.

The Tao entering the mouth is insipid and without flavor; when looked at it evades sight; when listened for it escapes the ear--(yet) its operations are interminable.

Peace, prosperity, permanence of Empire, are according to the 72nd Psalm (attributed by tradition to Solomon), dependent on the righteousness of the King's rule--who apprehends the Inimitable, The Supreme, "The Hidden Wisdom" (I Cor. ii, 6-30) is omnipotent, "the Alpha and the Omega," the Ruler who directs the destinies of all. Yet THIS, which is ALL is NO-THING.

(Cf. The Classic of Purity.)





Footnotes

^61:1 The text may be read in two ways and it is impossible to say which is correct. It may be rendered as in the translation, or it may be understood thus--"Apprehend the Inimitable Conception. Go throughout the world; go, without harm, you will remain tranquil, peaceful, satisfied." The Chinese may be read either way, and from the viewpoint of The Wisdom both interpretations are equally true.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 62]

[ch_36]

  

CHAPTER XXXVI.

When about to inhale it is certainly necessary to open the mouth; when about to weaken it is certainly necessary to strengthen; when about to discard it is certainly necessary to promote; when about to take away it is certainly necessary to impart--this is atomic perception.

The weak overcome the strong.

Fish cannot leave the deeps.

The innerness of the government cannot be shown to the people.

"Though He was a Son, yet (He) learned obedience by the things which He suffered; and having been made perfect, He became unto all them that obey Him the cause of eternal salvation." Before the Christ could weaken the pride of the sinner and humble man's false exaltation He had to strengthen and uplift the sinner with the knowledge that He had Himself become for his sake "of no reputation." The intellect may fail to grasp the full meaning of this sacrifice but the spirit knows that its safety lies in surrendering before the surrender of God on its behalf, even as the security of the fish lies in the yielding water.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 63]

[ch_37]

  

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Tao--eternally actionless and the cause of all action!

Were princes and monarchs able to acquiesce the myriad existences would by degrees spontaneously transform. Transforming and wishing to function I would immediately guide by the simplicity of the nameless.

The simplicity of the nameless is akin to desirableness.

Desireless and at rest the world would naturally become peaceful. [*1]

The charm of Calvary is the non-attachment and abstention from assertive action of its Central Figure. Free from care for the body or the things of the body, "desireless and at rest," the Lord Jesus became the grain of wheat (Cf. John xii, 24) which is to-day transforming the world with its harvests.





Footnotes

^63:1 Cf. chap. [*32].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 64]

[ch_38]

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Superior energy is non-action, hence it is energy. [*1]

Inferior energy will not resign action; hence, it is not energy. [*2]

Superior energy is actionless because motiveless. [*3]

Inferior energy acts from motive.

Superior magnanimity is active but motiveless.

Superior equity is active from motive.

Superior propriety [*4] is active; [*5] it bares its arm and asserts itself when it meets with no response. [*6]

Thus as the Tao recedes there are energies; as the energies recede there is magnanimity; as magnanimity recedes there is equity; as equity recedes there is propriety. [*7]















[p. 65]

Inasmuch as propriety is the attenuation of conscientiousness it is the origin of disorder.

The beginnings of consciousness are flowers of the Tao, but the commencement of delusion.

Therefore the men who are great [*8] live with that which is substantial, they do not stay with that which is superficial; they abide with realities, they do not remain with what is showy. The one they discard, the other they hold.

The highest energy appears as inaction. To pray the Father in secret is more effective than shouting to the unresponsive crowd. A realization of the "mystery" of the Kingdom, and an understanding of the "riches of the glory" of Christ in the heart is a higher experience than conscious effort to "do all in the name of the Lord Jesus," or even than earnest strife to produce "the fruit of the Spirit." These are excellencies which are indispensable, but they arc lights which cast shadows; that which is highest--superior energy--is shadowless. The higher will always result in the lower, but all attempts to build up the lower without the spiritual backing of the higher works as much evil as good. Rudyard Kipling somewhere says, "Good work has nothing to do with, doesn't belong to, the person who does it. It is put into him or her from the outside." Jesus said the same when He declared the kingdom of God to be composed of those who are unconscious of self--"Suffer the little children ... 



[p. 66]

such is the kingdom of heaven." "Many will say to Me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy name do many mighty works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from Me, ye that work iniquity."



Footnotes

^64:1 In this chapter, as elsewhere, though Lao-tzu employs conventional terms, he suggests rather than expresses. "Unto them that are without all things are done in parables." (Mark iv. 11.)

^64:2 It is the shadow of the infinite in the finite. Superior energy is a ray from the Name which cannot be named; inferior energy a ray from the Tao which can be expressed. (Cp. ch. [*1].) vid. Chinese Buddhism, by Joseph Edkins, D.D., pp. 371-379.

^64:3 The old Roman ideal--"honestas."

^64:4 Magnanimity represents Energy in manifestation. Elsewhere the character here translated "magnanimity" has been rendered "benevolence."

"Equity" stands for the first differentiation of manifested Energy.

"Propriety" represents a still further differentiation, e. g., when the processes of evolution have separated the bird from the fish.

^64:5 Nothing is said about the inferior qualities because the magnanimity, equity and propriety mentioned in the text, being themselves but reflections, anything inferior would be shadows of shadows.

^64:6 Facilis descensus Avernus.

^64:7 Observe the difference between Lao-tzu the Mystic, and Confucius the Moralist. Confucius taught that Magnanimity and Equity were the essentials. Confucius made much of Propriety. [p. 65] Men, he said, would attain perfection by pursuing these. Lao-tzu taught that these are but subtle forms of selfishness, and therefore productive of evil, useless shells when the life which they preserved has departed.

The whole chapter, says Dr. Paul Carus, "undoubtedly criticizes the Confucian method of preaching ethical culture without taking into consideration the religious emotions."--Lao-tsze's Tao-teh-king, p. 306. 

^65:8 "To dwell in the wide house of the world, to stand in the correct seat of the world, and to walk in the great path of the world; when he obtains his desire for office, to practice his principles for the good of the people; and when that desire is disappointed, to practice them alone; to be above the power of riches and honors to make dissipated, of poverty and mean condition to make swerve from principle, and of power and force to make bend--these characteristics constitute the great man."--Mencius. (Legge's translation.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 67]

[ch_39]

  

CHAPTER XXXIX.

The things which from of old harmonized with the One are:--The heavens, which through the One are clear; the earth, which through the One is reposeful; the gods, which through the One are spiritual; space, which through the One is full; whatever has form, which through the One develops; princes and monarchs, which through the One adjust the empire: these are all effects of the One.

Were the heavens not thus clear they would be liable to rend; were the earth not thus reposeful, it would be liable to frothiness; were the gods not thus spiritual, they would be liable to imbecility; were space not thus full, it would be liable to exhaustion; were that which has form not thus developed, it would be liable to annihilation; were princes and monarchs not thus regulated, their dignities and honors would be liable to a downfall.

Hence humility is the root of honor; lowliness the foundation of loftiness. It is on this account that princes and monarchs style themselves "kithless," "friendless," "unworthies." Do they not thus acknowledge humility as their root?

The enumeration of the parts of a carriage do not make a carriage.

Desire neither the polish of the gem, nor the roughness of the stone.

When the senses rule they become vehicles of death and deceit. The emotions when uncontrolled, impart their color to every conclusion; when the desires are unregulated they compel the reason to think that their wishes are without

[p. 68]

blame, so that, until he has risen above sensation and desire, and can view himself as a being apart, man is unable to discriminate the true from the false and is liable to destruction. Until he rests in the undivided harmony of his spirit, and knows that pleasure and pain exist only in his phenomenal self, without any counterpart in his real life, man regards virtue and vice with blurred eyes, but "if thine eye be single, thy whole body is full of light." A truth-seeker must be selfless or he will fail in his search, an eye to personal results will vitiate his every inference and cause him to mistake parts of the carriage for the whole. Seek, therefore, THE ONE alone, and do not be drawn aside by desire, whether desire for the beauty of the gem or the roughness of the stone. Be identified with the spirit, not with the form. "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not upon thine own understanding." Humility is the root of honor, lowliness the foundation of loftiness.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 69]

[ch_40]

  

CHAPTER XL.

The movements of the Tao are cyclical; the sufficiency of the Tao is latency. [*1]

All that is, [*2] exists in being (bhava), being in non-being. [*3]

"So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed upon the earth; and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, he knoweth not how. The earth yieldeth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear." "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field: which indeed is less than all seeds; but when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the heaven come and lodge in the branches thereof." "The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened."









Footnotes

^69:1 Literally "weakness," the weakness of latent strength.

^69:2 Literally "heaven, earth, the myriad existences."

^69:3 The yet unformed ships exist in the forest trees.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 70]

[ch_41]

  

CHAPTER XLI.

The true student hears of the Tao; he is diligent and practices it.

The average student hears of it; sometimes he appears to be attentive, then again he is inattentive.

The half hearted student hears of it; he loudly derides it. If it did not provoke ridicule it would not be worthy the name--Tao.

Again there are those whose only care is phraseology.

The brilliancy of the Tao is as obscurity; the advance of the Tao is as a retreat; the equality of the Tao is as inequality; the higher energy is as cosmic space; the greatest purity is as uncleanness; the widest virtue is as if insufficient; [*1] established virtue is as if furtive; the truest essence is as imperfection; the most perfect square is cornerless; the largest vessel is last completed; the loudest sound has fewest tones; the grandest conception is formless.

The Tao is concealed and nameless, yet it is the Tao alone which excels in imparting and completing.

Of Himself the great Master said: "The foxes have holes and the birds of the heaven have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head." Of those who would be His disciples the same Master said: "He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me. And he that doth not take his cross and follow after Me is not worthy of Me." In the Indian Gita the qualifications for discipleship are described as "Unattachment, absence of



[p. 71]

self-identification with son, wife or home, and constant balance of mind in wished-for and unwished-for events." "For narrow is the gate, and straightened the way, that leadeth unto life, and few be they that find it." No wonder that when "the half hearted" hear of it, they loudly deride it. It means obscurity, retreat, self-repression, crucifixion, until the flesh rebels and cries out in bitterness, only to find its wail unheeded. There is nothing here to attract any but those who are indifferent to objects of sense. Established virtue is as if furtive. The square which is most complete is without parts, it has no corners; in the words of Paul, the true student is "as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things"; for though "concealed and nameless, yet it is the TAO alone which excels in imparting and completing."



Footnotes

^70:1 The "Virtue" of this chapter is the "Energy" of chap. [*38] and elsewhere. See "energy" in index.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 72]

[ch_42]

  

CHAPTER XLII.

The Tao produced One. The One produced two; the two produced three; [*1] the three produced all things.

Everything is permeated by the yin and the yang and vivified by the immaterial breath. [*2]





The above quotation would be perfectly intelligible to any Chinese scholar without explanations. Indeed it would be difficult to convince him that it had not been taken from his own writings.}

[p. 73]

That which men hate is to be kithless, friendless and considered unworthy, but princes and dukes thus style themselves. [*3] From this it would appear that advantages are disadvantageous, and disadvantages are advantageous. I teach that which others have taught.

The violent and the fierce do not live out their years.

I shall be chief among the teachers. [*4]

The trinitarian conception is universal. It is seen in the three-fold character of cell growth--cell-enlargement, cell-specialization, cell-multiplication; in the triune process year by year of birth in spring, maturity in summer, decay in autumn; it is seen in the body, soul and spirit of which man is composed; and in the father, mother, offspring of the completed family life. As Zoroaster has said: "The number 3 reigns throughout the universe, and the Monad is its principle." It is natural therefore that Lao-tzu should give it a prominent position in his philosophy; equally natural that he should proceed without a break from the trinitarian process





[p. 74]

of creation to humility. For not only is the Trinity everywhere, but everywhere it is a sacrificing Trinity. The mineral kingdom gives its life for the vegetable, the vegetable for the animal, while the mineral and the vegetable are helped toward the realization of their being by the expenditure of man's strength. So also in the Bible the Father yields the Son, the Son does not please himself (Rom. xv, 3), and the Spirit bears witness not to Himself, but to the other two persons of the Trinity. Self-sacrifice is the root of life. Who seeks loses; who loses finds. By this we perceive the advantages of the disadvantageous, and the disadvantages of the advantageous.



Footnotes

^72:1 Georg von der Gablentz observes that rendered literally this should read--

1. (Tao) + 1 + 2 + 3 = 7. See Dr. Edkins illuminative historical notes in The China Review, vol. xiii. p. 16. Universal Genesis starts from the One, breaks into Three, then Five, and finally culminates in Seven, to return into Four, Three, and One. Cf. Secret Doctrine, ii, 170, 658. See also iii, 397 et al.

^72:2 2. In an essay on Tauism published in the first volume of the "China Review," Chalmers gives the following--"There is a Trinity observable in all the manifestations of Tau, corresponding to the three principal senses in man, hearing, seeing, and feeling, and to sound, colour and form, in the external world. The terms of this trinity are generally in Chinese, Yin, Yang and Hwo-hi. The Hwo-hi--the harmonious Breath or Spirit,--is held by Lau-tsze to be present in nature intermediate between the yin and yang; which you must know, denotes in Chinese the two members of 'an inevitable dualism which bisects nature.' (Emerson) Heaven and Earth, for instance, are a duality, the greatest duality of which we have any cognizance, but there is an intermediate Breath--we may call it a Spirit,--shadowed forth in the spiritual nature of man, which constitutes the third term. Thus while the Confucianists, following the Yih-king, rest in Dualism, and materialism; the Tauist, though denying an eternal, personal God, is a sort of Trinitarian, and the third member of his trinity is Spirit, personal or impersonal. No numerical character belongs to Tau, however, for Tau is chaotic; when the mind approaches that, all things seem to be blended in unity and it remains utterly inscrutable."

In the same essay we find the following quotation describing the Pythagorean theory of numbers--

Unity is a male monad, begetting after the manner of a parent all the rest of the numbers. Secondly, the duad is a female number, and the same also is by arithmeticians called even. Thirdly, the triad is a male number. This also has been classified by arithmeticians under the denomination uneven. And in addition to all these is the tetrad, a female number, and the same also is called even, because it is female. Therefore all the numbers that have been derived from the genus are four; but number is the indefinite genus, from which was constituted according to them, the perfect number, viz. the decade. For one, two, three, four become ten if its proper denomination be preserved essentially for each of the numbers. Pythagoras [p. 73] affirmed this to be a sacred quaternion source of everlasting nature, having, as it were, roots in itself; and that from this number all the numbers receive that originating principle. For eleven, and twelve, and the rest partake of the origin of existence from ten. Of this decade, the perfect number, there are termed four divisions, namely monad, square and cube. And the connections and blendings of these are performed, according to nature, for the generation of growth completing the productive number. For when the square is multiplied into itself, a biquadratic is the result. But when the square is multiplied into the cube, the result is the product of a square and cube; and when the cube is multiplied into the cube, the product of two cubes is the result. So that all the numbers from which the production of existing (numbers) arises is seven, namely monad, number, square, cube, biquadratic, quadratic cube, cubocube." Hippolylus, (Ante-Nicene Christian Library, Vol. vi. p. 32.)

^73:3 Indicating that any virtue they possess lies in the unsearchable realms of the infinite rather than on the objective plane of existence. See ch. [*39].

^73:4 The advantages of weakness had been taught before Lao-tzu, but not the danger of self-assertiveness. It is on his insistence on this that Lao-tzu bases his claim to be a leader of the leaders. See chaps. [*9], [*29], [*30], [*73], [*76].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 75]

[ch_43]

  

CHAPTER XLIII.

The world's weakest drives the world's strongest.

The indiscernible penetrates where there are no crevices. [*1]

From this I perceive the advantages of non-action. [*2]

Few indeed in the world realize the instructions of the silence, or the benefits of inaction. [*3]

Those who have heard the voice which speaks in the silence, and have learned the benefits of non-action know that no armour is so safe a panoply as the shield of weakness, even according to that strange word of the Apostle Peter, "Forasmuch then as Christ suffered in the flesh, ARM yourselves also with the same mind." The Christ conquered on the cross; His crown of thorns is a crown of crowns, and my greatest strength lies in my power to divest myself of self. Though indiscernible this power "penetrates where there are no crevices."









Footnotes

^75:1 "Without and within all beings, immovable and also movable; by reason of His subtlety imperceptible; at hand and far away is That." Bhagavad Gita.

"For wisdom is more moving than any motion; she passeth and goeth through all things by reason of her pureness."--Wisdom of Solomon, vii, 24.

^75:2 As the indiscernible meets with no obstacles, so the power of non-action is irresistible.

^75:3 Chinese history supplies a severe, if somewhat crude example, of the doctrine of inaction. It is stated that when Ju-shih-ki (Tang dynasty A.D. 618-905) was on the eve of accepting an official position, his uncle called him and said that he felt ill at ease respecting him. "What will you do, Nephew," he asked, "if some one strikes you?" "Receive the blow in meekness" was the reply. "If you are reviled, what then?" "I shall be silent." "What if you are spat upon?" "I shall wipe away the spittle." "In doing that," answered his uncle, "you may be showing resentment to the spitter, and that would be a wrong."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 76]

[ch_44]

  

CHAPTER XLIV.

Fame or life, which is dearer? Life or wealth, which is more? Gain or loss, which is worse?

Excessive love implies excessive outlay. Immoderate accumulation implies heavy loss. [*1]

Who knows contentment meets no shame. Who knows when to stop incurs no danger. Such long endure.

We possess nothing more valuable than our ideals, but the only ideal which is not immoderate is that ideal content which is content with nothing for self; to stop short of this is to linger where danger lurks. Mystics of all ages, irrespective of their religious profession have realized this. A few paragraphs from a Spanish Catholic of the sixteenth century--Saint Jean de la Croix--will illustrate Lao-tzu's thought:

"To enjoy the taste of all things, have no taste for anything.

"To know all things, learn to know nothing.

"To possess all things, resolve to possess nothing.

"To be all things, be willing to be nothing.

"To get to where you have no taste for anything, go through whatever experiences you have no taste for.

"To learn to know nothing, go whither you are ignorant.

"To reach what you possess not, go whithersoever you own nothing.

"To be what you are not, experience what you are not.

"When you stop at anything, you cease to open yourself to the All.

"For to come to the All, you must give up the All.

"And if you should attain to owning the All, you must own it, desiring Nothing." [**]

With this compare an hitherto untranslated saying by Lu Hui-neng, the sixth and last Chinese Buddhist Patriarch: "To be able to separate one's self from all affections is the pith of tranquillity."







Footnotes

^76:1 "Every excess causes a defect; every defect an excess."--Emerson's Essay on Compensation.

^76:* Quoted in "The Varieties of Religious Experiences" (Gifford Lectures 1901-1902) by William James, LL.D., etc., p. 306.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 77]

[ch_45]

  

CHAPTER XLV.

The greatest attainment is as though incomplete; but its utility remains unimpaired.

The greatest fulness is as a void; but its utility is inexhaustible.

The greatest uprightness is as crookedness; the greatest cleverness as clumsiness; the greatest eloquence as reticence.

Motion overcomes cold; stillness conquers heat.

Purity and stillness are the world's standards. [*1]

Read Paul's description of the work of the great Master of humility--the Lord Jesus. "Who, being in the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death of the cross." His "greatest attainment" was His self-annihilation. "Wherefore also God highly exalted Him, and gave Him the name which is above every name." Hear Paul once more on the same theme: "In Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily." But how does the Christ describe Himself? "I am meek and lowly of heart." "The greatest fulness is as a void, but its utility is inexhaustible." Paul writes of Jesus the Christ, as He "Who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of all creation," but to His disciples Jesus said, "I am in the midst of you as he that serveth," and later, as if to further impress this upon them, He washed their feet. The stillness of His heart conquered the heat of their passions; it is the movings of His love which is overcoming the cold isolations, dividing the different races. In the purity and



[p. 78]

stillness of His inner being He illustrates Nature's profoundest secret. "Nature," says Emerson, "will not have us fret and fume. She does not like our benevolence, our learning, much better than she likes our frauds and wars. When we come out of the caucus, or the bank, or the Abolition convention or the Temperance meeting, or the Transcendental Club into the fields and woods, she says to us, 'So hot? my little sir.'" Purity and stillness are the world's standards.



Footnotes

^77:1 Ho-shang-kung, with a fine perception of the greatness inseparable from goodness, remarks--"Heaven and earth yield to the man who is pure and still."

"Purity and stillness" are according to Wu-ch'eng attributes of non-action (or non-attachment).


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 79]

[ch_46]

  

CHAPTER XLVI.

When the Empire is controlled by the Tao, riding horses are employed in agriculture; when the Empire is without Tao, war horses are in every open space. [*1]

There is no sin greater than covetousness; no calamity greater than discontent; no fault greater than acquisitiveness.

Who therefore knows the contentment of content possesses unchanging content.

"Everywhere THAT has hands and feet, everywhere eyes, head, mouths; all-hearing, He dwelleth in the world, enveloping all," sang the ancient Indian poet. "The eyes of all wait upon Thee; and thou givest them their meat in due season," chanted the Hebrew Psalmist. Yet the world is devastated continually, and plunged into the miseries of war by man's covetousness. What would become of the race if the ALL-FATHER, like his children, were acquisitive--moved by desires for the personal self? How is the Empire to be freed from that which is NOT-TAO--covetousness--and brought under the control of THE TAO so that all shall enjoy the "unchanging content?" Chu-hsi, the great Confucian commentator, shall supply the answer--

"Heaven and man are not properly two, and man is separate from heaven only by having this body. Of their seeing and hearing, their thinking and revolving, their moving and acting, men all say--It is from ME. Every one thus brings out his SELF, and his smallness becomes known. But let the body be taken away, and all would be heaven. How can the body be taken away? Simply by subduing and removing that self-having of the ego. This is the taking it away."





Footnotes

^79:1 "In the former case says Han Fei Tzu, there will be no work for soldiers. In the latter, lice will swarm in the armour, and swallows build their nests in the tents--of soldiers who return no more.'"--Remains of Lao Tzu.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 80]

[ch_47]

  

CHAPTER XLVII.

The world may be known without going out of doors.

The heavenly way (Tao) may be seen without looking through the window. [*1]

The further one goes the less one knows.

Hence the Holy Man arrives without traveling; [*2] names without looking; accomplishes without action. [*3]

The knowledge of the Sage is intuitive. He requires only to concentrate his attention on a subject to understand it. All men have intuitions, certain facts of which they are convinced without having reasoned on them, but most are guided by impulse, their motives arise in that which is without, instead of from what is within. The man who is dependent on reason, like the blind man who relies on touch, is liable to deception. The further he goes the less he knows. The Heavenly Way is only perceptible to the inner eye. "If therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light." Hence the Sage arrives without traveling. So also the "Upanishads." "Though sitting still, he walks far; though lying down he goes everywhere." Says Alipili: "If







[p. 81]

that which thou seekest thou findest not within thee thou wilt never find it without thee."

"Truth is within ourselves; it takes no rise
  From outward things, whate'er you may believe."

By concentration on this inner universe, by meditation on the Higher Self, by unselfish obedience to the holy vision, the world may be known without going out of doors. The unselfish, who are devoid of self-seeking, who subordinate the finite to the Universal Will, may follow this Divinity within wherever it leads. "If ye abide in my word, then are ye truly my disciples; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." The pure in heart, or the single-minded, "see God."



Footnotes

^80:1 Su-cheh writes, ''Spirit is universal, knowing nothing of either near or far, ancient or modern. It is thus that the Sage knows everything without going from the door, or looking through the window. Men of the present day are limited by matter, the spirit within them is limited by ears and eyes, thus they are thrown into confusion by desires and by their bodies; thus mountains and rivers become barriers; they know nothing excepting what their eyes see, or their ears hear, and in this way even such trifles as doors and windows obstruct them. Are you not aware that the Sage having recovered his original nature is satisfied? Why desire to go abroad to search? The farther you go the less you will know." See "The Voice of the Silence," p. 13 (note).

Wang-pi says: "All things have one ancestry; all roads meet at one point; all thought leads to the same conclusion; all religions point to the same goal."

^80:2 i.e. he knows intuitively and does not require to go over each point step by step.

^80:3 Comp. Deut. xxx, 12-14, Rom. x, 6-8.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 82]

[ch_48]

  

CHAPTER XLVIII.

The pursuit of study brings daily increase; the pursuit of Tao daily decrease; decrease upon decrease, until non-action is reached, whence all action proceeds. [*1]

Only continued non-concern will win the Empire; where there is concern there is an insufficiency for the task.

As mere outwardness retreats the true inwardness is discerned. Beware lest intellectual evolution become spiritual devolution. God has chosen "the things that are not, that He might bring to naught the things that are." Study brings daily increase, the Tao daily decrease, until non-action is reached. The force with which men of violence seize the Kingdom of God is not the self-assertion of the passions, but that mystic force which does violence to the lower nature, plucks out the right eye, or cuts off the right foot. This philosophy is not concerned lest it suffer wrong, or be defrauded of right, knowing that only continued non-concern will win the Empire.

"Surely," says Thomas a Kempis, "an humble husbandman that serveth God is better than a proud philosopher who, neglecting himself, is occupied in studying the course of the heavens."





Footnotes

^82:1 Students will find illumination on this chapter in the earlier pages of The Voice of the Silence.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 83]

[ch_49]

  

CHAPTER XLIX.

The Holy Man is not inflexible, he plans according to the needs of the people.

I would return good for good. I would also return good for evil. [*1] Thus goodness operates (or "thus all become good").

I would return trust for trust. I would also return trust for suspicion. Thus trust operates (or "thus all become trustworthy").

The Holy Man as he dwells in the world is very apprehensive concerning it, blending his heart with the whole. [*2] Most men plan for themselves. [*3] The Holy Man treats every one as a child. [*4]

The Sage, calm and passionless, without regrets, without desires, having risen above all that is separative, adapts himself to the needs of mankind as water to the shape of the vessel into which it is poured. Knowing that, as a Japanese proverb expresses it, pleasure is the seed of pain, pain is









[p. 84]

the seed of pleasure (raku wa ku no tane; ku wa raku no tane), he treats all men, the good and the bad, the sincere and the insincere, with equal benevolence. Alfred Sutro records of Maeterlinck that he regarded the humble, the foolish, the saint, the sinner, with the same love and almost the same admiration. "Nothing is contemptible in this world but scorn." "He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust."



Footnotes

^83:1 cf. of ch. [*63]. "The man who returns good for evil is as a tree which renders its shade and its fruit even to those who cast stones at it."--Persian Proverb.

^83:2 "In the world good and evil, trustworthiness and hypocrisy arise from too much emphasis being placed on the personality. In this way mutual recriminations and injuries arise, without any standard whereby they may be decided. The Sage, apprehensive concerning these, blends his heart with the whole, and treats all, the good and the bad, the trustworthy and the hypocrite alike."--Su-cheh. Cp. "The Path of Discipleship," by Annie Besant, p. 106.

^83:3 Literally "direct their thoughts to their own ears and eyes." My rendering is supported by such commentators as Wang-pi and Ho-shang-kung. The passage has been usually modeled according to the teachings of The Doctrine of The Mean, and made to say that all the people turned their eyes towards the Sage.

^83:4 He makes no distinctions but treats all with equal impartiality. The same note was struck by the Hindu Mahabharata--"There is no distinction of castes; the whole world is created by God."

"The friend, or the enemy, is merely the ascription of the desire nature to certain patent facts, and varies with the attitude of the mind."--Studies in The Bhagavad Gita, by The Dreamer (The Yoga of Discrimination), p. 79.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 85]

[ch_50]

  

CHAPTER L.

Birth is an exit; death an entrance. [*1]

Three in ten are ways of life; three in ten are ways of death; three in ten also of those who live move into the realm of death. [*2] Why is this? Because of their excessive strivings after life. [*3] It has been said that he who thoroughly understands how to care for his life will not need to shun the rhinoceros or the tiger; he need not fear weapons even in the midst of a battle. The rhinoceros finds no place into which to thrust its horn; the tiger no place into which to fix its claws; nor the sword a place into which to flesh its point. Why is this? Because such an one is not moved by the thought of death. [*4]









[p. 86]

"So dear to heav'n is saintly chastity,
  That when a soul is found sincerely so,
  A thousand liveried angels lackey her,
  Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt,
  And in clear dream, and solemn vision,
  Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
  Till oft converse with heav'nly habitants
  Begin to cast a beam on th' outward shape,
  The unpolluted temple of the mind,
  And turns it by degrees to the soul's essence,
  Till all be made immortal."
                                  (Milton's Comus.)

"When all desires that dwell in the heart cease, then the mortal becomes immortal, and obtains Brahman." (Upanishads.)

________

The student will find an admirable summary of the various Taoist explanations of this chapter in Dr. Edkins' essay, entitled "Tao Te Ching" in the thirteenth volume of The China Review.



Footnotes

^85:1 "We begin our life surrounded by the Karma of our former existences; as we have acted during life so we leave it to enter another existence."--Thos. Kingsmill, in loc.

A native commentator supplies the following: "When the passions come out from a man, and he within is calm, he lives: when they enter and so lead to action, he dies."

^85:2 The text is enigmatical. Scholars are not agreed as to whether it should read "Three in ten" or "Thirteen." I have tried to faithfully represent the text, but see Secret Doctrine (vol. i), pp. 401-403.--2 * 6 + 1 = 13; also, vol. ii, 440.

^85:3 Prof. Legge describes the first three as "those who eschewed all things, both internal and external, tending to injure health." The second three as "those who pursued courses likely to cause disease and shorten life; the third would be those who thought that by mysterious and abnormal courses they could prolong life, but only injured it. Those three classes being thus disposed of, there remains only one in ten rightly using the Tao, and he is spoken of in the next paragraph."

^85:4 Mencius quotes the philosopher Tsang as saying "If, on self-examination, I find that I am not upright, shall I not be in fear even of a poor man in his loose garments of hair clothe If, on self-examination, I find that I am upright, I will go forward against thousands and tens of thousands."

Says Chuang-tzu: "The Sage, answered Wang-i, is a spiritual being. If the ocean were scorched up he would not feel hot. If all the rivers were frozen hard he would not feel cold."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 87]

[ch_51]

  

CHAPTER LI.

What the Tao produces and its energy [*1] nourishes, nature forms and natural forces establish. On this account there is nothing that does not honor the Tao and reverence its energy. This honor and reverence are spontaneous, not the result of a mandate.

So the Tao produces. Its energy nourishes, increases, feeds, establishes, matures, controls, broods over. It produces, but keeps nothing for itself; acts, but does not depend on its action; increases, but does not insist on having its own way. This indeed is the mystery of energy. [*2]

               "The lark
 Soars up and up, shivering for very joy;
 Afar the ocean sleeps; white fishing gulls
 Flit where the strand is purple with its tribe
 Of nested limpets; subject creatures seek
 Their loves in wood and plane--and God renews
 His common rapture."

Professor Drummond expresses the innerness of this chapter when he writes--"Are we quite sure, that what we call a physical world, is, after all a physical world? The preponderating view of science at present is that it is not. The very term 'natural world,' we are told, is a misnomer; that the world is a spiritual world, merely employing 'matter' for its manifestation." "Raise the stone and there thou shalt find me, cleave the wood and there am I." Sayings of our Lord. (Logion v.)







Footnotes

^87:1 The word rendered "energy" is again the Teh of chap. 38. "That which below produces the grain, and above becomes the stars, that which circulates through heaven and earth, is called the Divine Energy."--Kuan-tzu Wu-ch'eng in his commentary refuses to distinguish between the Tao and its energy. cf. Eph. iv, 6.

^87:2 Translated by Dr. Edkins "Secret Energy." The original is "secret or profound Teh." Comp. the conclusion of chap. [*2].

See "A Vision of Beginnings," Theosophical Review, vol. xxx, p. 125.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 88]

[ch_52]

  

CHAPTER LII.

Everything has its origin in the mother of all under heaven. [*1]

To know the mother the child must be perceived; the child being born the qualities of the mother must be maintained, to the end of life there will be then no peril. [*2]

Close the doors of the senses, and the whole of life will be without care; open them, attend to the affairs of life and to the end deliverance will be impossible. [*3]

Perceive the germ,--that is enlightenment. [*4]

Maintain weakness,--that is stability. Employ the light; revert to this enlightenment; no calamity will then be bequeathed to the body. [*5]











[p. 89]

This is indeed to practice the unalterable. [*6]

Those who live the life of the body die, but for those who live the life of soul

"There is no death! The stars go down
    To rise upon some other shore,
  And bright in heaven's jeweled crown
    They shine for evermore."





Footnotes

^88:1 In all mythologies the male stands for the Unmanifest, the female for the Manifested--the womb which gave birth to creation. See Isis, and the goddess Moot, the Mother, of Egypt, The Sephira of the Kabalists; Aditi of the Hindoos; Sophia of the Gnostics; Wisdom in the Proverbs of Solomon. In all theogonies we find the symbol of the egg, the ovum of the mystic mother. In Christendom it survives in the "Easter Egg."

^88:2 Separation is necessary for growth, but safety lies in the preservation of the consciousness of non-separateness.

^88:3 The text may be illustrated by a parable from Chuang-tzu--"There was once a man who was afraid of his own shadow, and had a strong dislike to his oven footprints. So he tried to escape from both; but the quicker he ran the more footprints he made, and fast as he went his shadow kept up with him. He thought he was going too slowly, so he ran faster and faster without stopping, until his strength gave out and be fell dead. He did not know that if he stayed in a shady place his shadow would have disappeared, and that if he had only remained quiet and motionless he would not have made any footprints. Stupid fellow that he was."--Chuang-tzu by Balfour.

^88:4 "Injuries spring from desires, though small in the beginning they swell to great dimensions. Now to know that the small will become great, and to exclude it, that may be said to be enlightenment.'--Su-cheh.

^88:5 Bodily vigor, like mental purity, depends on what the mind relates itself to.

^89:6 Compare chaps. [*16] and [*55].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 90]

[ch_53]

  

CHAPTER LIII.

When knowledge compels me to practice the supreme Tao, the danger lies in putting it into action. [*1]

The supreme Tao is a vast plain, yet the people prefer by-paths. The palace is magnificent, but the fields are full of weeds; the granaries are empty, but elegant clothes are worn; sharp two-edged swords are carried, fastidiousness in eating and drinking is displayed, many useless things are amassed--this is robbery and swaggering. [*2]

This is not the Tao! [*3]

The true life of the soul is realized as it exercises its power apart from the senses. Until reborn into the spiritual the senses are blind to the beautiful, or simplicity without superfluity. Man, not realizing this, prefers the by-paths in the lowlands of the physical. These, says Lao-tzu, are not the TAO. To comprehend THAT one must, in the language of Michael de Molinos, know that the center of the kingdom of God is the soul; this must be kept quiet, unoccupied, peaceful, free from fault (personal), inclinations and desires. "Du sollst wissen das Deine Seele der Mittelpunkt, die Wohnung and das Reich Gottes ist; dass deshalb, and damit der hochste aller Konige auf diesem Throne Deiner Seele ruhen kann, Du Dir Muhe geben sollst, diesen Thron







[p. 91]

rein, ruhig, unbesetzt und friedvoll zu erhalten, frei von Schuld und Fehlern, frei von (personlichen) Neigungen, Begierden und Gedanken, und gelassen in Versuchungen und Ungemach."--(Der Geistige Fuhrer, S. 1.)



Footnotes

^90:1 Translators differ widely.

^90:2 If, says Han Fei Tzu as rendered by Giles in his Remains of Lao Tzu, "If accumulation of property prevail in the State, the ignorant masses will naturally take to chicanery in imitation of their betters, and thieving will come into vogue. The lower classes respond to the higher precisely as the lesser musical instruments of a band follow the leading instruments."

A lesson for modern times. Extravagance now-a-days is common, where there should be economy, economy is practiced where there should be extravagance. There is much extravagance in the glory and swagger of war, and too much economy in the impartation of the economic science and the fine arts.

^90:3 The Tao is Simplicity. vid. chap. [*32].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 92]

[ch_54]

  

CHAPTER LIV.

Who plants well will not have his work uprooted; who embraces well will not lose what he holds; the offerings of his sons and grandsons will never end. [*1]

Who thus regulates himself has virtue which is genuine; who thus regulates his household has virtue which overflows; who thus regulates his neighborhood has virtue which excels; who thus regulates the state has virtue which abounds; who thus regulates the world has virtue [*2] which is universal.

Therefore let every man prove himself; let each household, neighborhood, and state do the same; let the world also follow the same course.

How do I know that it must be thus with the world? By this same (which has been just said).

"The kingdom of God is within you." "Every plant which my heavenly Father planted not, shall be rooted up." "Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many abiding places."

This was the teaching, and the daily experience of the Lord Jesus. Whoever roots his life on these levels will not only be never swept from off his feet but will become a regulative force, which will not cease at the stage called death. The offerings of his sons and grandsons will never end.







Footnotes

^92:1 ''Where is that which is so planted that it cannot be uprooted, or so held that it cannot be torn away? Only the Sage knows the truth of spirit and the illusion of matter, so that he can give up the latter for the sake of the former. His virtue overflows, but indeed he establishes nothing, so that what he establishes cannot be uprooted. Truly he grasps nothing, and so what he embraces cannot be taken from him. Will not his sons and his grandsons be able therefore to continue their sacrifices without ceasing?"--Su-cheh.

^92:2 "Virtue" (teh) is the same Chinese word as that translated "energy" in chaps. [*38], [*61], [*55], etc. See Index.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 93]

[ch_55]

  

CHAPTER LV.

Who cherishes energy in abundance is comparable to an infant child. Poison insects will not sting him; fierce beasts will not seize him; birds of prey will not strike him. [*1]

His bones are weak; his sinews pliable; his grip firm; [*2] unconscious of sex, his virility is active [*3]--the excellency of his physique. He may cry all day without becoming hoarse--this is the consummation of harmony.

Knowledge of harmony is called 'The Unalterable'; [*4] knowledge of the Unalterable is called 'Illumination.'

Increase of life is called infelicity, the resting of the mind in the vitality of form is called animality.

The corporeal begins to age as it nears its prime. This indeed is not the Tao. What is not the Tao soon ends. [*5]

"The Great Man never loses his child's heart," says Mencius, and Lao-tzu in language which is both quaint and suggestive expands the same thought. The infant has neither the desire nor the ability to appreciate sensuous pleasure. It may cry all day and not become hoarse. It lacks that passionate vehemence which would produce exhaustion after a similar effort by an adult. Its innocence and its weakness are its strength. It receives no harm from poisonous











[p. 94]

insects, fierce beasts, or cruel birds--the lusts and passions of the animal man. Without prejudices, the infant seeks only that which is essential, "mother's milk," indifferent whether it comes from this woman, or from that. Its inner harmony is undisturbed. Its bodily organs are perfect; the years add nothing to them, but only develop their functions, but do not add to them. "Except ye turn and become as little children, ye shall in no wise enter the kingdom of heaven." [**]

Says the Indian Gita (the Lord's Song): "The contacts of the senses, O son of Kunti, giving cold and heat, pleasure and pain, they come and go, impermanent; endure them bravely, O Bharata. The man whom these torment not, O chief of men, balanced in pain and pleasure, steadfast, he is fitted for immortality." [*+] He has escaped from that which "is not the Tao."







Footnotes

^93:1 Hsu-hui-hi explains this to mean that nature will cease to be inimical to man when man ceases to injure Nature. Cf. chap. [*50].

^93:2 "A curious anticipation of recent scientific investigation into the clinging power of new-born infants."--Maclagan.

^93:3 "Baby boys before emptying the bladder are frequently troubled with erections, which is here misinterpreted as a symbol of vigor."--Carus.

^93:4 See conclusion of chap. [*52]. Also comp. chap. [*16].

^93:5 The two concluding paragraphs express the opposite of the eternal, or unalterable. The conclusion of this chapter is almost identical with that of chap. [*30].

^94:* Matt. xviii, 3.

^94:+ Discourse, ii, 14-15.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 95]

[ch_56]

  

CHAPTER LVI.

Who knows does not speak; who speaks does not know. [*1]

Close the doors of the senses; blunt the sharp; unravel the confused; harmonise the dazzling; become one with the all. This is the Mystery of Unity. [*2] There will then neither be love nor hate; profit nor loss; favor nor disgrace. It follows that in the universe there is nothing nobler. [*3]

"The profoundest truths of spiritual experience are those which are not intellectually ascertained but spiritually discerned, which are not taught to us but revealed in us; and these never can be adequately put into words. They defy definition; they transcend expression. The highest experiences even of earthly love and hope and joy cannot be translated into terms of common speech. As there is a life which can be expressed only in terms of music, and another which is expressible only in terms of art, so there is a life which is truly inexpressible. All that he who has obtained even a glimpse of this realm can hope to do is to afford a glimpse to others, by recalling a like experience in their life, 'comparing spiritual things with spiritual.'"--Lyman Abbott, D. D.









Footnotes

^95:1 "The moment a man can really do his work he becomes speechless about it."--Sesame and Lilies, by John Ruskin, p. 149.

"But why should we expound our own views uncalled for? The danger of self-assertion is there." The Science of the Emotions by Bhagavan Das., p. 177.

^95:2 "Blunt your own sharp points and you will be able to unravel the confusion of others; soften your own glare, and you will be able to put yourself on a level with others; then, when there is no difference between yourself and others, when you are one with the world, you will have attained to spiritual experiences which are inexpressible. Hence it is called the mystery of unity."--Wu-ch'eng. Cf. Matt. vii, 1-5.

^95:3 Chaps. [*4] and [*52].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 96]

[ch_57]

  

CHAPTER LVII.

Rule the Empire with uprightness. The employment of the military is a strange device. The Empire is won by non-concern. How do I know this? Thus--The more superstitious restrictions in the land the poorer the people; [*1] the more the people are concerned with the administration the more benighted the state and the clans; [*2] the more craftiness is displayed the greater the number of novelties which arise. The more legislation there is the more thieves and robbers increase.

It is for these reasons that a sage has said [*3]--'I do nothing, but the people spontaneously reform. I love tranquillity, and the people spontaneously become upright. I have no concerns, and the people naturally grow wealthy. I am without desire, and of their own free will the people revert to primitive simplicity.' [*4]

"Which of you by being anxious can add one cubit unto his stature?" The Kingdom of God is not won by anxiety. Self-assertion, desires to better clothe and feed the self, are "strange devices." Evil is not overthrown by resistance but by submission; it is not the passive quiet of the coward, nor the sullen stolidity of the slave, but the selfless service of the Christ, which disarms the enemy. When the left cheek is voluntarily submitted for a blow like that which stings the right, when the cloak is given to him who snatches the coat, when not only is the demand for the first mile granted,









[p. 97]

but the second also, and that from sheer goodwill toward the oppressor evil becomes ashamed, it cannot understand such carelessness. "The Empire is won by non-concern."



Footnotes

^96:1 Where weeds abound flowers are scarce.

^96:2 See chap. [*36].

^96:3 There were Sages before Lao-tzu, and their teachings were his, but their names have been forgotten, and their works lost.

^96:4 "He who would have good government in his country must begin by putting his house in order, and to do that, he must begin by attending properly to his personal conduct."--The Great Learning. Comp. chap. [*19].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 98]

[ch_58]

  

CHAPTER LVIII.

When the government is not in evidence [*1] the people are honest and loyal.

When the government is meddlesome the people are in want.

Misery!--Happiness lies by its side! [*2] Happiness!--Misery lurks beneath. He who understands the end has progressed beyond limitations.

The regular becomes the irregular; the good becomes unpropitious. This has bewildered men from time immemorial!

Hence the Holy Man is a square which has not been cut, and whose corners have not been planed; [*3] he is straightforward without being reckless, and bright without being dazzling.

The chapter proceeds from the outer to the inner, from that which is objective and manifest to that which is subjective and not so manifest. The evils of a meddlesome government are plain, they arise from too much emphasis being placed on externals rather than on principles. Less manifest to the "man on the street" is the trouble which arises from confusing happiness and misery, which are not separate







[p. 99]

but the reverse sides of the same shield. Jesus referred all his experiences, the success which attended his preaching, and the sorrow in which sin involved him, equally to the Father's will. Hence the "Prince of this World" found nothing in him.

"Omnes! Omnes! Let others ignore what they may,
 I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,
 I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--And I say there is in fact no evil
 (Or if there is, I say it is just as important, to the land or to me as anything else)."

Thus the poet Walt Whitman, in his "Starting from Paumanok," confirms, in his own fashion, the teaching of our pre-Christian Chinese mystic. Robert Browning also sings the same theme in one of his later poems

"Ask him--'Suppose the Gardener of Man's ground
    Plants for a purpose, side by side with good,
  Evil--(and that he does so--look around!
    What does the field show?)--were it understood
  That purposely the noxious plant was found
    Vexing the virtuous, poison close to food.
  If, at first stealing forth of life in stalk
  And leaflet promise, quick his spud should balk
  Evil from budding foliage, bearing fruit?
  Such timely treatment of the offending root
  Might strike the simple as wise husbandry,
  But swift sure extirpation would scarce suit
  Shrewder observers. Seed once sown thrives: why
  Frustrate its product, miss the quality
  Which sower binds himself to count upon?
  Had seed fulfilled the destined purpose, gone
  Unhindered up to harvest--what know I
  But proof were gained that every growth of good
  Sprang consequent on evil's neighborhood?'"



Footnotes

^98:1 Like the sun behind the clouds, felt but not seen.

^98:2 "Calamitas virtutis occasion." (Calamity is virtue's opportunity).--Seneca.

^98:3 The Sage is four-square, perfect, not because he has become adjusted to the limitations of time and space, but because he has risen above these and is one with the Invisible.

"The peace which comes of surrendering all likes and dislikes is possible only when the Triangle becoming Quaternary is inscribed in the Circle, when the Perfect Man--unifying his consciousness by indrawing the purified personality--so expands as to step beyond the limitations of the causal body and embrace the Logos--when the Divine Man, now a perfect square, recognizes Himself as a mode of expression of the Divine Life, a form of the Divine Consciousness, an organ of Iswara and an image and reflection of the true Self."--Studies in the Bhagavad Gita, by The Dreamer. (The Yoga of Discrimination) p. 110.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 100]

[ch_59]

  

CHAPTER LIX.

For the regulation of mankind and the service of heaven nothing equals reserve power. [*1] Reserve power means a speedy submission. Speedy submission implies a rich store of energy. A rich store of energy means the subjugation of everything. Everything being subdued none knows his limits. His limits being unknown his sovereign power is assured, having the root [*2] of sovereignty which endures for long.

This may be described as a 'deep taproot,' and a 'durable peduncle,'--the perpetual vitality and continued manifestation of the Tao.

The Tao, the eternal THAT is all powerful because It remains ever beyond the attraction to this or that. Therefore the Lord Jesus taught his disciples that the way to obtain all that is needful for earth is to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness.







Footnotes

^100:1 Literally--"parsimoniousness;" "the harvest which must not be wasted."

^100:2 Literally--"mother."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 101]

[ch_60]

  

CHAPTER LX.

Govern a great state as you would fry a small fish.

Employ the Tao to establish the Empire and the Daemons will display no energy; not that they are devoid of energy, but that they will not use it to man's detriment; (further) not only will man suffer no hurt from the Daemons but he will not be injured by the sages.

When neither harm, the attributes of the Tao blend and converge. [*1]

Error cannot withstand truth. To practice the constant presence of God is the surest talisman against all evil. To him who dwells "in the secret place of the Most High" it is ever true that he knows neither the evil nor the plague. "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper." (Vid. Psa. xci.)





Footnotes

^101:1 With one accord Lao-tzu's translators condemn this chapter as utterly unintelligible, it may therefore be as well to supply a paraphrase.

As a small fish stewing in the pan will be broken up if it be moved about too much, so will the Empire be fatally injured if its natural development be interfered with. The only safe course is to follow the Tao, That if employed for the regulation of mankind will make everyone a Sage in due course in which case all will be safe from evil. The daemons could harm no one if there were not some affinity between them and the injured, and in like manner the Sages can only benefit those who are akin with themselves. Lao-tzu in the text expresses this by saying that mankind will receive no hurt from the Sages, that is to say they will receive positive good, for the absence of benefits is in itself an injury. When, in a word, the Tao is supreme, man receives neither positive harm from the spiritual forces which surround him, nor negative injury from the Elders of his race, who are ever ready to help all capable of receiving it. Cf. chap. [*66].

"Attributes of the Tao" is represented in the Chinese by the character elsewhere translated "Energy." See index.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 102]

[ch_61]

  

CHAPTER LXI.

A great country is lowly. Everything under heaven blends with it. It is like the female, which at all times and in every place overcomes the male by her quietude. Than quietude there is nothing that is more lowly. Therefore a great state gains the smaller state by yielding; while the smaller state wins the greater by submission.. In the one case lowliness gains adherents, in the other it procures favors.

For a strong state there is no safer ambition than to desire to gather men and care for them; and for the weaker state there is nothing better than the ambition to become an indispensable servant. [*1]



[p. 103]

When each obtains what each desires the strongest should be the humblest.

A passage from "The Varieties of Religious Experience," by William James (p. 372) forms an excellent commentary on this section of Lao-tzu's writing--"Reenacted in human nature is the fable of the wind, the sun, and the traveler. The sexes embody the discrepancy. The woman loves the man the more admiringly the stormier he shows himself, and the world deifies its rulers the more for being wilful and unaccountable. But the woman in turn subjugates the man by the mystery of gentleness in beauty, and the saint has always charmed the world by something similar. Mankind is susceptible and suggestible in opposite directions, and the rivalry of influences is unsleeping."



Footnotes

^102:1 Dr. Carus has the following note to this chapter: "States in a federative empire, such as was the Chinese empire in the days of Lao-Tsze, grow powerful when they serve the common interests of the whole nation. It would be as impossible for great rivers to flow in high mountains as for great states not to be subservient to the universal needs of the people. Streams become naturally great when they flow in the lowlands where they will receive all the other rivers as tributaries. The largest states are not always the greatest states. A state acquires and retains the leadership not by oppressing the other states, but by humbly serving them, by flowing lower than they. This truth has been preached by Christ when he said: 'Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant.' An instance in the history of China that illustrates Lao-Tsze's doctrine, which at first sight appears as paradoxical as all his other teachings, is the ascendancy of the House of Cho, which under the humble but courageous Wu Wang succeeded the Shang dynasty, whose last emperor, Chow Sin (+1122 B.C.) received the posthumous title Show, the abandoned tyrant. Other instances in history are the rise of Athens in Greece and of Prussia in Germany. Athens' ascendancy began when, in patriotic self-sacrifice, it served the cause of Greece, viz., of all the Greek states; and its decay sets in with the oppression of the Athenian confederates, i.e. when Athens ceased to serve and began to use the resources of the Ionian confederacy for its own home interests." Lao-Tsze's Tao-Teh-King, by Dr. Paul Carus, p. 313, 314.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 104]

[ch_62]

  

CHAPTER LXII.

The Tao has of all things the most honored place. [*1]

It is the good man's treasure, and that which protects the bad man.

Its excellent words may be displayed before all. Its noble deeds assist all men.

Why should a man be cast aside because he is bad? [*2]

Hence when the sovereign has been enthroned, and the chief ministers have been appointed, though one escorted by a team of horses, present the jade symbol of office, it would not equal the stilling of the heart, and entering this Tao.

What is the reason that this Tao has been held in such esteem from the beginning? May we not say that it is because those who seek receive, and those who are guilty escape by its (help)? [*3] Hence it becomes the most valued thing under heaven. [*4]









[p. 105]

The noumenal is the real, the phenomenal, the reflection, and the wise man seeks the former rather than the latter. Earth's fairest pageantries are insignificant compared with That--her costliest gifts as dust compared with That. Only as man harmonizes with That can he escape the Nemesis of guilt, a harmony which is possible because God and man are identical, differing only as the infinite differs from the finite; the impure or differentiated from the pure or undifferentiated. Jesus is at once a door through which God enters the generations of sin, and through which sinners pass into the realms of the eternal.



Footnotes

^104:1 This is the rendering of Dr. James Legge.

^104:2 "To merely regard the external appearance of things is like standing outside the hall door, the TAO is within, and That is the most honorable. Men fail to perceive that all things possess It. However, the man of virtue knows that the Tao is his, and hence it is said to be the good man's treasure.' But the foolish and ignorant man also possesses the Tao, otherwise he would not be able to endure. Hence it is said to be the bad man's guardian.' Though men wander far from the Tao, the Tao never departs far from men."--Su-cheh.

^104:3 This is the only place in the Tao-teh-king where the idea of guilt occurs. The notion is Buddhistic, rather than Taoistic or Confucian.

^104:4 "Men, alas, will not seek for the root of truth. It is within themselves. If they sought it they would find it. The Tao has neither merit nor demerit, but men unfortunately do not understand this. If they did they would escape the defilement of sin."--Su-cheh.

"The Tao (path) may not be left for an instant. If it could be left it would not be the Tao (path)."--The Doctrine of the Mean.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 106]

[ch_63]

  

CHAPTER LXIII.

Practice non-action. [*1] Be concerned with non-concern. [*2] Taste the flavorless. Account the small as great, and the few as many. [*3] For hatred return perfection. [*4]

Manipulate difficulties while they are easy. Take in hand great things while they are insignificant. Every difficult thing in the world had its origin in what was at first easy. Every great thing in the world was once insignificant. Therefore the Holy Man makes no distinctions and thus he is able to accomplish that which is great. [*5]

Small faith can be placed in promises lightly made. [*6]

The easier a matter is reckoned the more difficult it proves at the last; [*7] for this reason the















[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Holy Man sees difficulties in everything, and therefore he encounters no difficulties.

The man who has tasted the flavor of the flavorless, in which all flavors are concealed, is detached and free; he regards everything as alike great and alike small; as equally difficult and equally easy; neither careless nor indifferent; undertaking the most difficult tasks with ease, yet not overlooking the difficulties involved in the easiest affairs, he completes the greatest without difficulty. Living in the eternal, he neither cleaves to this, nor swerves from that.

This is the ideal life!

"What you do not wish others to do unto you, do not do unto them," said Confucius. Of Buddha it is recorded that he said, "A man who foolishly does me wrong I will return to him the protection of my ungrudging love; the more evil comes from him, the more good shall go from me." "He who beareth no ill-will to any being, friendly and compassionate, without attachment and egoism, balanced in pleasure and pain, and forgiving, ever content, harmonious, with the self controlled, resolute, with Manas and Buddhi dedicated to Me, he, My devotee, is dear to Me," was one of Krishna's instructions to Arjuna. In an earlier section Lao-tzu wrote "I would return good for good. I would also return good for evil." In a similar spirit Jesus said to His disciples "Resist not him that is evil; but whosoever smiteth thee on thy right cheek, return to him the other also. Love your enemies, and pray for them that persecute you."

The same commands confront us, no matter to what religious Teacher we turn. By each we are told to rise above the love which is personal, whose shadow is hate, to the love which is universal, in which there is no room for hate; then we are bid rise still higher to the Love which is impersonal, which, because it identifies itself with All, is a segment of the circle which unites the divinity of man with the humanity of God, which sees greatness in the smallest and knows no distinctions. It promises nothing without a full sense of its responsibility. It is prepared for every difficulty, therefore It is able to meet hatred and misrepresentation with PERFECTION.



Footnotes

^106:1 vide Manual iv, p. 65 et seq.

^106:2 cf. I Pet. v, 7. Matt. vi, 25-34.

^106:3 Because there is "nothing either great or small."

^106:4 "For hatred return perfection," i.e. avoid any emotion which will create in fellow-beings "any of the emotions on the side of hate and vice." Be "as gold that melts and becomes the purer the more it is exposed to the fire." "Perfection" is another rendering of the Chinese character elsewhere translated "energy." It includes all the attributes of the Tao.

^106:5 He recognizes no distinctions such as important and unimportant. The text might be rendered "Therefore the Holy Man does not attempt great things, and on that account he is able to accomplish the greatest."

^106:6 "The Master said 'He who speaks without modesty will find it difficult to make his words good.'"--Confucian Analects, xiv, 21.

^106:7 The Empress Dowager of China, who has for so many years ruled China, in the teeth of almost insuperable difficulties, affords a good illustration of the truth of this chapter. Ku-hung-ming, a bright, well educated Chinaman, who took his M.A. in Edinburgh, thus describes the Empress on p. 13 of his "Papers From a Viceroy's Yamen."--She is "neither anti-foreign nor pro-foreign, neither reactionary nor progressive." This evenly balanced mentality enabled her to hold her own amid the conflicting interests and intrigues of the Pekingese Court.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 108]

[ch_64]

  

CHAPTER LXIV.

Whatever is at rest can easily be taken in hand; while yet no omens have appeared plans can be easily formed.

What is brittle is easily broken; what is minute is easily scattered.

Act before necessity arises; regulate before disorder commences. [*1]

The trunk that can scarcely be embraced sprang from a tiny shoot; the tower that is nine stories high was raised from a mound of earth; the journey of a thousand li [*2] commenced when the foot was placed on the ground. [*3]

Who makes, mars; who grasps, loses. [*4]

The Holy Man practises non-action, hence he never injures; he never grasps, hence he never loses. The majority are too eager for results in attending to their affairs, and spoil everything. There would be no such failures were they as cautious at the end as at the beginning. [*5]

Hence the Holy Man desires passionlessness; [*6] he does not prize articles that are rare; he













[p. 109]

studies to be unlearned; [*7] he reverts to that which the masses pass by. In this way he promotes the natural development of all things without venturing to interfere.

"Think not," said the Lord Jesus, "that I came to destroy the law or the prophets; I came not to destroy, but to fulfill." There is a natural development which cannot be disturbed without producing injurious reactions. Whoever, therefore, takes upon himself the office of a teacher assumes a responsibility which is heavy. The words of the Lord to Peter are, when rightly comprehended, awful enough to warn off all but the most Spirit-pressed from attempting to preach to their fellow-men. "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." We dare not refuse our aid and guidance, but it requires omniscience to offer it as it ought to be given. By practising non-action the wise man promotes development without marring it with the impress of his own personality.





Footnotes

^108:1 "Take time by the forelock." Remember that everything depends on being right in the beginning.

^108:2 "li"--1894 ft. English, making 27 4-5 li equal to ten miles.

^108:3 I Pet. v, 8, 9.

^108:4 See chap. [*29].

^108:5 i.e. if they ceased to "take thought for the morrow," and only cared to be true to themselves and their duty. Heb. iii, 14.

^108:6 "The common herd are full of incessant solicitude; the holy Man is simple and ignorant."--Chuang-tzu.

"Desire nothing to happen as you wish, but wish things to happen as they do."--Epictetus.

"Whatever is agreeable to thee, O Universe, is agreeable to me; nothing is early or late for me that is seasonable for you."--Marcus Aurelius.

"Desire is guided from without, will from within."--Ancient Wisdom. p, 279.

"One should neither rejoice at obtaining what is pleasant, nor sorrow in obtaining what is unpleasant."--Bhagavad Gita.

"One who has self-control, looks within at his mind, and in his mind there is no mind; he looks at his form, and in his form there is no form; he looks further and observes Nature, and in Nature there is no Nature."--The Classic of Purity.

^109:7 The student will here recall Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa (born near Treves A.D. 1401, died 1473) and his favorite phrase "learned ignorance," or "learned not-knowing." Wisdom is from within, it is born of the spirit; intellect is from without, it leads to superstition.

"If thou wilt know or learn anything profitably, desire to be unknown, and to be little esteemed."--Thomas a Kempis.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 110]

[ch_65]

  

CHAPTER LXV.

From the most ancient times those who have practised the Tao have depended on the simplicity of the people rather than on their adroitness.

When the people are difficult to control it is because they possess too much worldly wisdom.

Who governs by worldly wisdom is a robber in the land; who governs without it is a blessing to the state.

To know these two axioms is to become a model. To understand how to be a model is indeed the mystery of energy.

Verily, deep and far-reaching is this mystery of energy. It is the opposite of all that is visible, but it leads to universal concord.

The Christ-man seeks nothing for himself; the world-man ever cries "mine," rather than "my neighbor." The former is simple, the latter adroit. Wise indeed is that man who understands the "Mystery of Energy," the power of action which is desireless. Action which is desireless divert; no portion of its force toward bringing fruit to its author, hence, in the language of Paul, it is the foolish things and the weak things which confound the wise and the mighty. (Vid. I. Cor. i, 27, 28.) Because men fail to comprehend this, their best efforts, like Nebuchadnezzar's image, are part iron and part clay. No politician has yet risen to these sublime heights, no state has yet proven superior to the glamor of "worldly wisdom"; therefore, while seeking to cure the ills they know, they create fresh evils, the end of which they do not see. Who governs by worldly wisdom is a robber in the land.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 111]

[ch_66]

  

CHAPTER LXVI.

That which enables the rivers and the seas to become the rulers of all the water-courses is their ability to remain the lowest;--it is on this account that they are the rulers of them all. [*1] In like manner the Holy Man, if he wishes to direct the people must speak of himself as subject to them; if he wishes to lead them he must put himself in the background. [*2] Hence the Sages are supreme,, but the people are not burdened; they are in the vanguard, but the people are not harmed. [*3] For this reason the whole Empire delights to exalt them, and no one feels annoyance. [*4] Because they do not strive there is none who can strive with them. [*5]











[p. 112]

Mr. Disraeli's tribute to the Duke of Wellington provides an excellent illustration of the teaching in this chapter

                 "Thy calm mien
    Recalls old Rome, as much as thy high deed;
  Duty thine only idol, and serene
    When all are troubled; in the utmost need
  Prescient; thy country's servant ever seen,
    Yet sovereign of thyself whate'er may speed."
 Quoted in Sir Herbert Maxwell's "Life of Wellington."



Footnotes

^111:1 The same illustration is used of the Tao in chap. [*32].

^111:2 Comp. ch. [*7].

It is man's wisdom which prevents him from being wise; it is his desire for lordship which keeps him from attaining power. The postmortem fame of the Roman Emperor Aurelius rests on his lowliness rather than on his "dignities." The constitutional sovereignty of today safeguards the throne better than the sharpest tyranny of olden times. "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him."

Says Tung-kung-shu (B.C. 200), "When one places himself in his qualities below others, in character he is above them; when he places them behind those of others, in character he is before them."

Yang-hsiung (B.C. 53 A.D.) writes: "Men exalt him who humbles himself below them; and gives the precedence to him who puts himself behind them." (Quoted by Legge in loc.)

^111:3 i.e. They do not rebel or disobey their superiors. Cf. chap. [*60].

^111:4 Markgraf of Iyeyasu, who by means of the sword transformed old feudal Japan and laid the foundation of that country's greatness, when on his death bed sent for his grandson and said to him: "You will one day have to govern the Empire. Remember, the true way to govern the Empire is to have a mercy-loving and tender heart."

^111:5 See ch. [*22]


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 113]

[ch_67]

  

CHAPTER LXVII.

It was once generally affirmed that the greater the Self the more impossible it was to compare it with anything else. [*1] Now it is just this greatness which makes it incomparable; should, however, a comparison be demanded, it would have to be described as the eternal, which is imperceptible. Now the Self has three treasures, to which it clings as to inseparables--the first is compassion, [*2] the second, self-restraint, the third, nowhere venturing to claim precedence.

Compassionate--therefore irresistible! [*3]

Self-restrained--therefore enlarged!

Nowhere venturing to claim precedence--therefore efficient! [*4]

Now-a-days men cast compassion on one side, yet expect to be irresistible! They discard self-restraint, yet look for enlargement; They forget to retire, yet demand precedence!--this is death. [*5]

As regards compassion, rely on it when you would contend, and you will overcome; rely on it when you would protect, and you will succeed.











[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] Heaven is ever ready to deliver because of the protection compassion brings. [*6]

"He shall not strive, nor cry aloud;
  Neither shall anyone hear his voice in the streets.
  A bruised reed shall he not break,
  And smoking flax shall he not quench,
  Till he send forth judgment unto victory,
  And in his name shall the Gentiles hope."
                                     (Matt. xii, 19-21.)





Footnotes

^113:1 True greatness cannot be included in any one class to the exclusion of the others, and therefore it cannot be classified.

^113:2 Maclagan, who translates tz'u by gentleness instead of compassion, notes that "Gentleness corresponds to the female element which appears more than once in the Tao-teh-king."

^113:3 Cf. II. Sam. xxii, 36. Hsu-hui-hi notes that compassion is irresistible because it never exerts its strength until force is unavoidable.

^113:4 Lit. "a vessel of highest honor." v. Legge in loc.

^113:5 Can the flower live when the root is gone?

^114:6 Students will observe that my translation differs materially from the renditions of previous laborers in the same field. Whether for better or for worse I must leave to the judgment of Chinese scholars, and the intuitions of those to whom the ancient philosopher is a teacher.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 115]

[ch_68]

  

CHAPTER LXVIII.

The most skillful warriors are not war-like; the best fighters are not wrathful; the mightiest conquerors never strive; the greatest masters are ever lowly.

This is the glory of non-strife; and the might of utilization; these equal heaven, they were the goal of the ancients.

Desire for self-assertion is the controlling motive on the material plane--dogma contends with dogma, creed with creed, Church with Church. On the spiritual plane the sense of separateness which produces contention disappears and as the material is controlled by the moral, the physical by the spiritual, it follows that, centuries of contrary conceptions notwithstanding, the greatest might is that which does not contend. An anonymous writer has well said:

"Force and evil are no remedy. Use those means, and we shall find we only move the trouble from one quarter into another, and the difficulty we apparently get out of in one direction has come home to roost in another, stronger than ever. Goodness, and Goodness only, will destroy evil, and make our lives in this world--and in the next--smooth and comfortable." [**]





Footnotes

^115:* "Absolute Justice"--An anonymous pamphlet published in London in 1901.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 116]

[ch_69]

  

CHAPTER LXIX.

Military commanders have a saying [*1]--

I dare not act as host but only as a guest; [*2] rather than advance an inch I would retire a foot. [*3]

This is marching without moving; bearing the invisible arm; regarding the enemy as if he were not; grasping the sword that is not. [*4]

There is no calamity greater than making light of the enemy; [*5] to make light of the enemy is to endanger my retention of the treasures. [*6] Hence once the opposing forces have met it is the pitiful who conquer. [*7]

"Jesus, therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force, to make him a king, withdrew again into the mountain himself alone," and was thereby endowed















[p. 117]

with a more powerful scepter than if he had accepted a visible crown. Refusing to play the part of a host or master, he gained the kingdom and became its lord.

Missionaries, and all who disturb the natural development of national moral culture, tearing down and destroying where they should only build and conserve, are acting as hosts in lands where they are uninvited guests. The chapter is a warning that it is only those who feel the pity of physical and moral FORCE; who understand the DANGER that is inseparable from all attempts to present truth to the hostile, who ultimately win in the contest.



Footnotes

^116:1 The text does not say, as nearly every translator has made it say, "A certain commander said so and so," but "The general policy of all great generals is thus and thus."

^116:2 i.e. I do not dare to act on my own initiative; before committing myself I wait to discover the intentions of the enemy. The "enemy" is in the text spoken of as the "host."

^116:3 The idea is that the holder of the Tao should always be more ready to yield than to give battle.

^116:4 Although inert he is ever on the alert, and ready for every emergency. Cf. I Pet. v. 8.

^116:5 A warning against allowing active passivity becoming careless indifference. Cf. Eph. vi. 13-18.

^116:6 vid. chap. [*67]. A determination to destroy the enemy regardless of the necessity for the act is contrary to compassion; it reveals an absence of self-restraint.

^116:7 Angry passions and impatient desires to join the battle are naturally aroused when the opposing forces are lying face to face, but here, as always, it is those who feel the pity of it all, but who are yet prepared for every eventuality, who win the day; their very sorrow that a battle is unavoidable, prevents them being hurried by the impetuosity of passion into some foolish and fatal move.

There is a story told of Admiral Dewey which aptly illustrates the military spirit which Lao-tzu is commending. The American ships were making magnificent target practice in Manilla Bay, and the Spanish fleet was sinking. The Americans began to cheer. "Don't shout, boys," said Dewey. "The poor devils are dying."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 118]

[ch_70]

  

CHAPTER LXX.

It is very easy to comprehend my teachings and to put them into practice. Yet there is no one in the world who is able either to comprehend, or to practise them. [*1]

There is an originating principle for speech, an authoritative law for conduct, [*2] but because this knowledge is lacking I am unknown. [*3] Those who know Me are few; those who imitate Me are worthy. Hence the Holy Man wears coarse garments, but carries a jewel in his bosom. [*4]

If a man be before his time, though he stand in the midst of the sun, he will appear to his contemporaries as one dwelling in darkness. The "Wisdom of God" has always been a mystery, and because the "Princes of this world" do not understand it they have in all ages "crucified the Lord of Glory." (I Cor. ii, 7, 8.)











Footnotes

^118:1 An analysis of the atmosphere is a different affair from its inhalation. There is a distinction between Truth and its expression. To intellectually comprehend the words in which Truth clothes herself, is not to grasp Truth herself. Truth can neither be written nor uttered. Truth is Spirit, and besides Truth there is nothing. Cf. John vii, 17.

^118:2 Lit. "Words have an ancestor; affairs a ruler."

^118:3 Confucius, Lao-tzu's great contemporary, likewise complained that he was unknown. Cf. Analects xiv, 37.

^118:4 The chapter reminds us of the question of Jesus recorded in John viii, 43: "Why do ye not understand my speech? Even because ye cannot hear my word."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 119]

[ch_71]

  

CHAPTER LXXI.

The highest attainment is to know non-knowledge. [*1] To regard ignorance as knowledge is a disease. Only by feeling the pain of this disease do we cease to be diseased. The perfected man, because he knows the pain of it, is free from this disease. It is for this reason that he does not have it. [*2]

He who wills to do the Will, must know THAT which is beyond knowledge; he must ascend into the regions of the supersensuous. Listen to a few of the simpler sayings of the Master. "Resist not evil"; "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth"; "Take no thought ... what ye shall eat or drink." Such sentences appeal to the heart but not to the head. They land us in the region where intellectual machinery is worth little more than old iron. Nevertheless, as Lao-tzu says, ignorance of this indicates disease, for Truth, whether a philosophy or a life, is

"The Somewhat which we name, but cannot know,
  Ev'n as we name a star, and only see
  His quenchless flashings forth, which ever show
  And ever hide him, and which are not he."







Footnotes

^119:1 "Non-knowledge in the sense of absolute knowledge. Everything that is absolute appears to us as nothing because all we know we know relatively."

^119:2 "To know what it is that you know, and to know what it is that you do not know--that is understanding."--Confucian Analects ii, 17.

"If any man thinketh that he knoweth anything, he knoweth not yet as he ought to know,"--Paul. (I Cor. viii, 2.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 120]

[ch_72]

  

CHAPTER LXXII.

The limits of the greatest fear have been reached when the people cease to fear that which is to be feared.

Neither regard your lot as mean, nor despise the conditions of your birth, for that which is not despised arouses no disgust.

Hence although the Holy Man knows himself he makes no display; although he loves himself he seeks no reputation. On this account he rejects the one while clinging to the other. [*1]

Discontent with the present and fear of the future constitute the inner life of the multitude, but those who have transcended the limitations of the seen, so that they neither enjoy nor fear the effects of sensation, have entered into a fear which is fearless. "Wherefore receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have grace, whereby we may offer service well-pleasing to God with reverence and awe: for our God is a consuming fire." (Heb. xii, 28-29.)





Footnotes

^120:1 Su-cheh has the following: "The real self of man is as great as heaven and earth. Those who are ignorant of this look upon their physical frame as themselves, and are very careful to cherish that. Thus they know nothing excepting what they see and hear, and consequently are insignificant and rustic. Hence the instruction 'Do not regard your lot as mean!' On the other hand there are those who knowing the greatness of their real selves, are vexed at the contracted limits into which they are born. They long to escape from them but cannot. They do not know that the more they chafe (at their surroundings) and banker after something else, the more heavily their limitations press upon them. Hence the instruction 'Nor despise the conditions of your birth.' The Sage on the other hand is without regrets, and without dissatisfactions. He lives as one of the people; he is in harmony with the Tao. He knows no difference between the wide and the narrow, the clean and the dirty. Because he does not despise life be learns that life is not to be despised."

Cf. Paul's witness concerning himself "I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therein to be content. I know how to be abased, and I know also how to abound: in everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in want. I can do all things in him that strengtheneth me." (Phil. iv, 11-12.)


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 121]

[ch_73]

  

CHAPTER LXXIII.

The recklessly rash die. The cautiously courageous live. Of these two courses it is uncertain which is advantageous and which is disadvantageous, for who can explain why heaven disapproves? Therefore even the Holy Man feels a difficulty here. [*1] This is the way of heaven--

Goodwill, which surely overcomes.

Silence, which certainly responds. [*2]

Without being summoned, spontaneously arriving.

Acting leisurely, but planning effectively.

Heaven's net spreads everywhere, wide in mesh, yet losing nothing. [*3]

"Merry and bright are the waves to-day,
  They dance round our boat like children at play;
  But though wild winds should rise and dark waters roar,
  Till our light bark be cast a wreck on the shore;
  Still the strength which awes us is not found here,
  But beneath where all is calm and clear;
  Where feeling the weight of the law's behest,
  In the depths of the ocean is calm and rest."
                                              (Vantia Bailey.)









Footnotes

^121:1 The higher the knowledge, the greater the responsibility, the narrower the path.

^121:2 "Look at heaven there," answered Confucius, "does it speak? And yet the seasons run their appointed courses and all things in nature grow up in their time. Look at heaven there: does it speak?"--Confucian Analects.

^121:3

"Though the mills of God grind slowly
    Yet they grind exceeding small.
  Though with patience he stands waiting,
    With exactness grinds he all." Friederich von Logau.--Longfellow's translation.

"Und alles ist Frucht, and alles is Samen."--Schiller.




     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 122]

[ch_74]

  

CHAPTER LXXIV.

Why use death as a deterrent, when the people have no fear of death?

Even supposing they shrank from death as from a monster, and by playing on their terror I could slay them, should I dare? [*1]

There is one who inflicts sentence of death. To usurp his functions and to kill would be to assume the role of the Master-Carpenter. There are few who can act as master-carpenter without cutting their hands. [*2]

Dr. Hartmann, of Leipzig, comments as follows on this chapter in the Lotusbluthen: "The death penalty as a deterrent measure is a legacy from an ignorant generation. That which incites men to action cannot be killed. The evil inclination toward crime when driven from the body by execution is only thereby made still more generally harmful, because it again influences others, and leads them to perform similar deeds to those for which the execution took place. Moreover, through suffering the wrong of execution desires for retaliation are aroused in the soul of the executed, and in this way he is made more dangerous than before. What is the use of destroying the tool, while the ringleader is beyond reach? It will be easy for him to find another instrument. What is the use of banishing the evil from the house, when it can readily find another dwelling? Better





[p. 123]

endeavor to reform the criminal, by bringing him to a better conception of things, and in this way transform the evil into a good spirit."



Footnotes

^122:1 Mr. Thos. Kingsmill's translation is illuminative--"With folk who have no fear of death, what object is there in making its apprehension a deterrent? How should we dare to apprehend and to execute people who dread death as the greatest terror?"

^122:2 Cf. chap. [*30].

Cf. a saying by Confucius; he is expounding the fundamental principle of all Chinese law, the veneration of the inferior for the superior, an idea which bas strong affinities with the philosophy of the ancient Greeks. "Why when governing, depend on capital punishment? Seek righteousness and the people will be righteous. The relation between the rulers and the ruled is like that between the wind and the grass. The grass must bend when the wind blows across it." Confucian Analects, xii, 19.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 124]

[ch_75]

  

CHAPTER LXXV.

The people suffer from famine because of the multitude of taxes consumed by their superiors. Because of this they suffer from famine. The people are difficult to govern because of the officiousness of their superiors; because of this they are difficult to govern. Men are continually [*1] dying because they lust after life; because of this they frequently die.

It is only those with whom life is no object who truly value life. [*2]

A warning to rulers and to ruled--The only safety of either a State or an individual is to Seek first the kingdom of God and its righteousness. The more is grasped the less is possessed.







Footnotes

^124:1 Literally--"readily," "easily," "without difficulty."

^124:2 Cf. chaps. [*53], [*65].

Huai-nan-tzu (B.C. 179) illustrates this chapter with a story: "Tzu-fei of the kingdom of King (the present provinces of Hunan and Hupeh) went to a certain place to obtain a very valuable two-edged sword. As he was returning with his prize a terrible storm overtook the vessel, and two scaly dragons wrapped themselves round the ship. Going to the captain Tzu-fei said, 'If this continues how can we live?' The captain confessed that it was the first time he had encountered such an experience, whereupon Tzu-fei bracing himself for a conflict, bared his arm and pulling his two-edged weapon from its sheath said, 'One may discuss benevolence, righteousness and honor with heroes, but to waylay or capture them is impossible. Here, in the midst of this sea I am but a mass of rotten flesh and crumbling bones, though I lose my sword what matters it? Is there anything at all to which I cling?' Leaping into the waters he thrust the dragons through and cut off their heads. He thus saved the lives of all his fellow passengers, and stilled the storm, and for this was subsequently suitably rewarded by his prince."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 125]

[ch_76]

  

CHAPTER LXXVI.

At birth man is supple and weak, at death rigid and strong. So with inanimate nature--say the vegetable creation--in its early growth it is pliable and brittle, at death it is decayed and withered. It follows that rigidity and strength are the way to death; pliability and gentleness the way to life.

Hence a soldier who is arrogant cannot conquer; the tree which is strong is doomed. [*1]

The firm and the great occupy the lower place, the pliable and the meek [*2] the higher.

"Man has a thousand purposes. Death comes one morning and ten thousand wait." "Man has a thousand, a myriad plans for himself; God has only one plan for him." In these Chinese proverbs we find the aroma of the present chapter. Translated into the more prosaic language of the West we express the root idea of Lao-tzu's aphorisms thus: Whatever makes for the increase of self leads to death; Life is found only when self yields to the Self. "Wherefore the Scripture saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. Be subject therefore unto God." (James iv, 6-7.)







Footnotes

^125:1 Having become fit to be used as timber it is in danger from the woodman's axe. The word rendered "doomed" is literally "altogether." Dr. Carus compares it to the German "alle," "it is gone," "finished," or "doomed." No literal rendering of the Chinese is possible. Cf. Taoist Texts by Balfour, p. 83.

^125:2 The phrases "supple and weak," "pliability and gentleness," "pliable and meek" are represented in Chinese by the same hieroglyphs--an illustration of the difficulties and dangers which threaten the European who attempts to render Lao-tzu into intelligible and easy English.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 126]

[ch_77]

  

CHAPTER LXXVII.

The Divine Way is like the drawing of a bow,--it brings down the high and exalts the low. [*1] Where there is superfluity it takes away, where there is deficiency it imparts. It is the way of heaven to diminish abundance, and supplement deficiency. [*2]

The way of man is not so. He depletes the deficient, that he may supplement the superfluous.

Who is able to have a superabundance for the service of the world? Only the possessor of the Tao! Hence the Holy Man acts without priding himself on his actions, completes his work without lingering on it;--he has no desire to display his superiority. [*3]

Man grasps all; God gives all. Man makes himself great; God is content to be small. Man loves to surpass others; God strives that all may be one. A Chinese commentator suggests that Heaven, because universal, equalizes, but that man, because exceedingly parochial, differentiates.









Footnotes

^126:1 So Prof. Giles renders this sentence in his Remains of Lao-Tzu; he adds an explanatory note--"When the bow held vertically (as the Chinese hold it) is drawn, the upper nock is brought down while the lower nock is brought up."

^126:2 Dr. Carus remarks on this passage that "while the first sentence is almost literally like Christ's doctrine, 'whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased,' the second sentence is the reverse of the New Testament teaching that, 'Whoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that which he hath.' Matt. xiii, 12." The difference is, however, only verbal. Christ and Lao-Tzu both teach that the Divine Way is equality, equilibrium, and that whatever contravenes this is wrong. Cf. Luke iii, 4-6.

^126:3 Cf. chap. [*2]. Says Huai-nan-tzu: "He does not depend on the respect of others for his power, nor upon possession for his wealth, nor upon brute force for his strength; but is able to soar between the firmament above and the waters below, in company with his creator."--Taoist Texts by Balfour, p. 92.

"The divine Way," "The Way of Heaven" is in the Chinese "The Tao of Heaven." So also "The way of man" in the text is in the original "The Tao of Man."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 127]

[ch_78]

  

CHAPTER LXXVIII.

Nothing is so flexible as water, yet for attacking that which is hard nothing surpasses it. There is nothing which supplants it.

The weak overcome the strong, the soft control the hard. Every one knows this, but no one practises it. [*1]

Hence a Sage has said--'Who bears his country's reproach is hailed as the lord of his nation's altars. Who bears his country's misfortunes is called the Empire's chief.'

Truth, when expressed in speech, appears paradoxical. [*2]

Said St. Paul: "When I am weak then am I strong." "For we also are weak with him, but we shall live with him by the power of God toward you."

"Measure thy love by loss instead of gain;
  Not by the wine drunk, but by the wine poured forth,
  For love's strength standeth in love's sacrifice,
  And whoso suffers most hath most to give."







Footnotes

^127:1

"The Tongue is an instrument yielding and pliant
  Yet safe in the mouth it ever remains,
  While the teeth are inflexible, hard and defiant,
  And frequently broken to pay for their pains."--Chinese Ode, quoted by Arthur Smith in his Chinese Proverbs.



^127:2 This sentence more properly belongs to the next chapter. Cf. chap. [*70].


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 128]

[ch_79]

  

CHAPTER LXXIX.

To compromise a great hate leaves ill-will behind; that only is a blessing which produces tranquillity.

Therefore the Holy Man does not pry into other people's affairs, [*1] even when he holds the left-hand bond, [*2] possessing the attributes of the Tao, he quietly holds his own; he who lacks the qualities of Tao strives to put everybody right. [*3]

It is heaven's way to be without favorites, [*4] and to be always on the side of the good man. [*5]

The wise man is more concerned with the steadiness and direction of his own thoughts than with the actions of others. By his care to be himself unsullied to the very innermost recesses of his being, he purifies the atmosphere wherever he goes, and accomplishes more than he could were he ever reproaching what he considers untimely. Therefore the cry of the Hebrew prophet, "Be ye clean ye that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isa. lii, 11.)













Footnotes

^128:1 In colloquial Chinese he does not blow aside the fur, to see if it contains burs or chips.

^128:2 ''Contracts were written on two bamboo slips which fitted together, the left one containing the debit or obligations, the right one containing the credits or dues."--Carus, in loc.

The Sage is content with having the truth himself, without seeking to impose his knowledge on everybody else.

^128:3 Cf. Matt. vii, 1-5, vid. T. T. K. chap. [*60].

^128:4 Cf. Rom. viii, 28.

^128:5 Lit.--"The Heavenly Tao is without relatives; it ever sides with the good man."


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 129]

[ch_80]

  

CHAPTER LXXX.

A state may be small, and the population sparse, yet the people should be taught not to rely on force; they should be made to comprehend the gravity of death, and the futility of emigration. Then, though they had boats and carts, they would have no use for them; though they had armor and weapons they would not display them. They should be taught to return to the use of the quippo; to be content with their food, their clothing, their dwellings, and to be happy in their traditions. Though neighboring states were within sight, and the people should hear the barking of their dogs and the crowing of their cocks, they would grow old and die without visiting them. [*1]

Better be a hermit, minus the comforts of civilization, than a millionaire chained to many earthly possessions. Montaigne nobly says, "Let us betimes bid our company farewell ... We should reserve a storehouse for ourselves, and wholly free, wherein we may hoard up and establish our true liberty and principal retreat and solitariness." "Jesus said unto Him, If thou wouldst be perfect, go sell



[p. 130]

that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come follow me." "A man's life consisteth not in the abundance of things which he possesseth."



Footnotes

^129:1 Su-cheh sums up the chapter in a sentence--"If the inner brings satisfaction, the outer will have no attractions."

A native paper laments the degeneracy of present times in the following language: "In ancient times men lived in caves and holes of the earth. They wore leaves for clothing. They used earthenware of the rudest description, their carts had no tires, to record events they simply knotted a cord. In ancient times sovereign and people all sat on mats on the floor. In ancient times the sovereign invited some one to take his place while he retired. The feudal system prevailed. Now every one of these customs is obsolete, and we all know what we have at the present day."--Su Pao.

The Sri Bhagavat says: "While there is the bare ground, why labor for beds? While there is your own arm, why labor for a pillow? While the palms of your hands may be joined, why trouble yourself for dishes and platters? While there are barks on trees, why labor for raiment?'--Dialogues on The Hindu Philosophy by Rev. K. M. Banerjea, p. 24.


     
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 131]

[ch_81]

  

CHAPTER LXXXI.

Sincere words are not (necessarily) pleasant, nor are pleasant words (necessarily) sincere.

The good are not (necessarily) skillful debaters, nor are skillful debaters (necessarily) good men. [*1]

The wise are not (necessarily) well-informed, nor are the well-informed (necessarily) wise. [*2]

The Holy Man does not accumulate. He works for others, yet ever has abundance for himself; he gives to others, yet himself ever possesses superabundance.

The divine way is advantageous, without danger; the way of the Sages is effective without struggle. [*3]

The book closes as it began. In the first chapter we saw the Tao differentiate and lose itself that the universe might become, and in the last our attention is directed to the Man in whom the Tao is incarnate--ever active, but keeping nothing for himself.

"A man there was, though some did count him mad,
  The more he gave away, the more he had." [**]











Footnotes

^131:1 "Confucius remarked, 'With plausible speech and fine manners will seldom be found moral character.'" Analects.

^131:2 "Confucius remarked, 'A man who possesses moral worth will always have something to say worth listening to; but a man who has something to say is not necessarily a man of moral worth.'" Analects.

^131:3 The last sentence is according to the rendering of Mr. T. W. Kingsmill.

Lit.--"Heaven's Tao benefits but injures not; the Holy Man's Tao acts but strives not."

^131:* Quoted by Dr. Legge from Bunyan, in loc.


    
The Tao Teh King: A Short Study in Comparative Religion, by C. Spurgeon Medhurst, [1905], at sacred-texts.com



[p. 132]

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A list of the European translations of the Tao-teh-king, and of the principal articles which have appeared on Lao-tzu, and the religion called Taoism.

Europe's first knowledge of Lao-tzu's work was derived from the Latin versions of the Jesuit Fathers.

1667 P Couplet.

1736 P du Halde.

1808 P Premaire.

FRENCH.

De Guignes, J. Observations sur quelques points concernant la religion et la philosophie des Egyptiens et des Chinois. Rec. de Mem. de l'Ac. des Instr. xl. Paris, 1780.

Julien, S. Lao-tseu-tao-te-king. Le livre de la vie et de la vertu, compose dans le vi. siecle avant l'ere chretianne. Paris, 1842.

--Tao-sse ou le livre de la purete et de la tranquilite. Paris, 1837.

Amiot, P. Sur la seche de Lao-tsee, Ibid xv. pp. 208-259.

Abel-Remusat, M. Memoire sur la vie et les opinions de Laou-Tseu. Paris, 1823. Memoires de l'Academie Royale des inscriptions et belles lettres, vol. vii.

Pauthir, G. Lao Tseu Memoire sur l'origine et la propagation de la doctrine du Tao, trad. du chinois. Paris, 1831.

--Le Tao-te-king ou le livre revere de la Raison supreme et de la Vertu, par Lao Tseu.

--Lao Tseu. La Chine, pp. 110-120.

Klaproth, J. De la religion des Taoszu en Chine. Nouv. ann. de Voy. ii. 1833.

Bazin 4. Recherches sur l'origine l'histoire et la constitution des ordres religieux dans l'empire Chinois. Jours. as. 5s. viii. Paris, 1856.

Rosny de Leon, M. L'idee de Dieu dans la Philosophie Religieuse de la Chine. Bulletins du Ligue Nationale contre l'Atheisme. Paris, 1899.

Hartez de, C. Annales du Musee Guimet, vol. xx.

--Le Livre des Esprits et des Immortels, essai de Mythologie Chinoise, d'apres les Textes Originaux, pp. 206-217. Brussels, 1893.

GERMAN.

Abel und Mecklenburg. Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russiehen Gesandschaft zu Peking uber China-Berlin. 2 vols. 1858.

Plath, J. H. Die Religion und der Cultus der alten Chinesen. Muchen. 1862.

Gabelentz, G. von. Anfangsgrunde der Chinesichen Grammatik. 111-115.

--Allegemeine Real-Encyklopaedie der Wissenschaft und Kunst Zweite sec. xlii.

Scholl, W. Beschreibung der Chinesischen Literatur.

Grill, Julius. Zeitschrift fur Altestamentliche Wissenschaft. v. p. 1-15.

Plaenckner, R. von. Lao-tse. Tao-te-king, der Weg zur Tugend. Leipzig. 1870.

[p. 133]

Reinhold, R. von. Der Weg zur Tugend. Leipzig, 1870. Straus, Victor von. Lao-Tse's Tao Te King. Leipzig. 1870.

--Der Chinesische Philosoph Lao-tse ein Prophet aus den Heiden.

--Allgem. Missions-zeitschr. 1874.

Pfizmaier, A. Ueber einge Gegenstande des Tao-glaubens. Sitz. Ber. K. K. Ac. d. Wiss. Wien. Phil. Hist. Cl. 1875.

Hartman, Dr. Lotusbluthen. Leipzig. 1896.1897.

Hackmann, H. "Die Christliche Welt," den 14 April, 1904. "Allgemein-Menschliches aus dem Taoismus."

DUTCH.

Mansen, J. van. Theosophia. Amsterdam. 1901.

RUSSIAN.

Zwetkoff. Trudui Ashlenoiv rossiskoi dukhronoi missii w Pekinnie. (Works of the Russian Ecclesiastical Mission at Peking). St. Petersburg, 1852-66. 4 vols. Vol. iii, No. 13, deals with the Taoists.

ENGLISH.

Du Halde, P. J. B. A Description of the Empire of China and Chinese Territory, together with the kingdoms of Korea and Tibet, from the French. London, 1738. Vol. 1. 648-669.

Medhurst, W. H. China, Its State and Prospects. London, 1857. Pp. 198-204.

Edkins, J. Phases in the development of Tauism. Transact. Ch. Br. R. As. Soc. 1856. Pp. 83-99.

--J. of Shanghai Scion. and Lit. Soc. No. 111. 1859. Pp. 309-314.

--A Sketch of the Taoist Mythology in its Modern Form. J. N. Ch. Br. As. Soc. Art. iv. 1855.

--Steps in the Growth of Early Taoism.

--Taoism in the Tsin and Han Dynasties. Chinese Recorder, 1884.

Chalmers, J. The Speculations on Metaphysics, Polity and Morality of the Old Philosopher Lao-tsze. London, 1868.

Waiters, T. Lao-tzu. A Study in Chinese Philosophy. London, 1870.

Nevins, J. L. China and the Chinese. Ch. ix. New York, 1869.

Douglas, R. R. Taouism. London, 1879.

--Confucianism and Taouism. 1889.

Martin, W. A. The Chinese. New York, 1881. Pp. 109-117.

Balfour, F. H. Taoist Texts. London, 1884.

--The Divine Classic of Nan-hua, being the works of Chuang-Tsze, Taoist Philosopher. London, 1881.

Giles, H. A. The Remains of Lao Tzu. London, 1886.

--Chuang Tzu. The Mystic, Moral and Social Reformer. London, 1889.

Old, W. R. The Book of The Path of Virtue or a Version of the Tao Teh King of Lao-tsze. Madras, 1894. (T. P. Pub. Soc.)

Carus, P. Lao-Tsze's Tao-teh-king. Chicago, 1898.

Kingsmill, T. W. The Tao-teh-king. Shanghai, 1899.

Legge, James. The Religions of China. Confucianism and Taoism described and compared with Christianity. London, 1880.

--Sacred Books of the East. Vol. xxxix. London, 1891.

--Article in The British Quarterly Review, 1883.

Matheson, G. The Distinctive Messages of the Old Religions. London, 1893. Pp. 61-92.

[p. 134]

Parliament of Religions in Chicago, 1893. Taoism. A Prize Essay, pp. 1355-1358.

Johnson, S. Oriental Religions. China, part v, pp. 859-904.

Scarborough, W. Notes of a Visit to the Famous Wutangshan; ibid. v, pp. 77-82.

Williams, S. Wells. The Middle Kingdom, a Survey of the Geography, Government, Literature, Social Life, Arts and History of the Chinese Empire and its Inhabitants. Revised Ed. London, 1883. Vol. ii, pp. 206-217.

China Review. Tauism by J. Chalmers. Vol. i, 209-220.

--The Historical Characteristics of Taoism, by E. Faber. Vol. xiii, pp. 231-247.

--The Life and Teachings of Lao-tse, by George von der Gabelentz. pp. 189-198.

--The Philosophy, Ethics and Religion of Taoism, chiefly as developed by Chwang-tsze. W. P. Mears. Vol. xxiii, pp. 225-242.

--Tao-teh-king, The. A translation by P. J. Maclagan. Vol. xxiii.

--Tao-teh-king, The. By Dr. Maclagan and T. W. Kingsmill. Vol. xxiii, pp. 265-271.

--Tao-teh-king, The. A translation with notes by T. W. Kingsmill. Vol. xxiv.

--Manchurian Translation of the Tao-te-Ching, Romanised Text of. Vol. xxv, edited by E. von Zach.

James, F. H. Taoism, Chinese Recorder. 1897.

Medhurst, C. Spurgeon. The Tao-teh-king, an Appreciation and Analysis. Chinese Recorder. 1889-1890.

Bixby, J. T. A Chinese Mystic. The Arena, 1892.

Old, W. R. The Philosophy of Simplicity. Theosophical Review. Vol. xxx. The Reading of Tao. Theosophical Review. Vol. xxxiii.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: myst.txt =====



Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [i] 

[i-p0.1]Mysticism:

 

[i-p0.2]A Study in Nature and Development of Spiritual Consciousness

 

[i-p0.3]by

 

[i-p0.4]Evelyn Underhill

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [i_1]   

[i_1-p0.1]PREFACE TO THE TWELFTH EDITION

[i_1-p1]  [i_1-p1.1]Since this book first appeared, nineteen years ago, the study of  mysticism--not only in England, but also in France, Germany and  Italy--has been almost completely transformed. From being  regarded, whether critically or favourably, as a byway of religion, it  is now more and more generally accepted by theologians, philosophers  and psychologists, as representing in its intensive form the essential  religious experience of man. The labours of a generation of religious  psychologists--following, and to some extent superseding the  pioneer work of William James--have already done much to  disentangle its substance from the psycho-physical accidents which  often accompany mystical apprehension. Whilst we are less eager than  our predecessors to dismiss all accounts of abnormal experience as the  fruit of superstition or disease, no responsible student now  identifies the mystic and the ecstatic; or looks upon visionary and  other "extraordinary phenomena" as either guaranteeing or  discrediting the witness of the mystical saints. Even the remorseless  explorations and destructive criticisms of the psycho-analytic school  are now seen to have effected a useful work; throwing into relief the  genuine spiritual activities of the psyche, while explaining in a  naturalistic sense some of their less fortunate psycho-physical  accompaniments. The philosophic and theological landscape also, with  its increasing emphasis on Transcendence, its new friendliness to the  concept of the Supernatural, is becoming ever more favourable to the  metaphysical claims of the mystics. On one hand the prompt welcome  given to the work of Rudolf Otto and Karl Barth, on the other the  renewed interest in Thomist philosophy, seem to indicate a growing  recognition of the distinctness and independence of the Spiritual  Order. and a revival [p. xiv] [i_1-Page_xiv] of the creaturely  sense, strongly contrasting with the temper of late nineteenth-century  thought.

[i_1-p2]Were I, then, now planning this book for the first  time, its arguments would be differently stated. More emphasis would  be given (a) to the concrete, richly living yet unchanging character  of the Reality over against the mystic, as the first term, cause and  incentive of his experience; (b) to that paradox of utter contrast yet  profound relation between the Creator and the creature, God and the  soul, which makes possible his development; (c) to the predominant  part played in that development by the free and prevenient action of  the Supernatural--in theological language, by  "grace"--as against all merely evolutionary or  emergent theories of spiritual transcendence. I feel more and more  that no psychological or evolutionary treatment of man's  spiritual history can be adequate which ignores the element of  "given-ness" in all genuine mystical knowledge. Though the  mystic Life means organic growth, its first term must be sought in  ontology; in the Vision of the Principle, as St. Gregory the Great  taught long ago. For the real sanction of that life does not inhere in  the fugitive experiences or even the transformed personality of the  subject; but in the metaphysical Object which that subject  apprehends.

[i_1-p3]Again, it now seems to me that a critical realism,  which found room for the duality of our full human  experience--the Eternal and the Successive, supernatural and  natural reality--would provide a better philosophic background to  the experience of the mystics than the vitalism which appeared, twenty  years ago, to offer so promising a way of escape from scientific  determinism. Determinism--more and more abandoned by its old  friends the physicists--is no longer the chief enemy to such a  spiritual interpretation of life as is required by the experience of  the mystics. It is rather a naturalistic monism, a shallow doctrine of  immanence unbalanced by any adequate sense of transcendence, which now  threatens to re-model theology in a sense which leaves no room for the  noblest and purest reaches of the spiritual life.

[i_1-p4]Yet in spite of the adjustments required by such a  shifting at the philosophic outlook, and by nearly twenty years of  further [p. xv] [i_1-Page_xv] study and meditation, the final  positions which seem to me to be required by the existence of  mysticism remain substantially unchanged. Twenty years ago, I was  already convinced that the facts of man's spiritual experience  pointed to a limited dualism; a diagram which found place for his  contrasting apprehension of Absolute and Contingent, Being and  Becoming, Simultaneous and Successive. Further, that these facts  involved the existence in him too of a certain doubleness, a higher  and lower, natural and transcendental self--something equivalent  to that "Funklein" spark, or apex of the soul on which the  mystics have always insisted as the instrument of their special  experience. Both these opinions were then unpopular. The second, in  particular, has been severely criticized by Professor Pratt and other  authorities on the psychology of religion. Yet the constructive work  which has since been done on the metaphysical implications of mystical  experience has tended more and more to establish their necessity, at  least as a basis of analysis; and they can now claim the most  distinguished support.

[i_1-p5]The recovery of the concept of the  Supernatural--a word which no respectable theologian of the last  generation cared to use--is closely linked with the great name of  Friedrich von Hugel. His persistent opposition to all merely  monistic, pantheist and immanental philosophies of religion, and his  insistence on the need of a "two-step diagram" of the  Reality accessible to man, though little heeded in his life-time, are  now bearing fruit. This re-instatement of the Transcendent, the  "Wholly Other," as   the    religious fact, is perhaps the most fundamental of the philosophic  changes which have directly affected the study of mysticism. It thus  obtains a metaphysical background which harmonizes with its greatest  declarations, and supports its claim to empirical knowledge of the  Truth on which all religion rests. Closely connected with the  transcendence of its Object, are the twin doctrines emphasized in all  Von Hugel's work. First, that while mysticism is an  essential element in full human religion, it can never be the whole  content of such religion. It requires to be embodied in some degree in  history, dogma and institutions if it is to reach the  sense-conditioned human mind. Secondly, that the antithesis between  the religions of "authority" and of [p. xvi] [i_1-Page_xvi] "spirit," the "Church"  and the "mystic," is false. Each requires the other. The  "exclusive" mystic, who condemns all outward forms and  rejects the support of the religious complex, is an abnormality. He  inevitably tends towards pantheism, and seldom exhibits in its  richness the Unitive Life. It is the "inclusive" mystic,  whose freedom and originality are fed but not hampered by the  spiritual tradition within which he appears, who accepts the  incarnational status of the human spirit, and can "find the  inward in the outward as well as the inward in the inward," who  shows us in their fullness and beauty the life-giving possibilities of  the soul transfigured in God.

[i_1-p6]Second in importance among the changes which have come  over the study of mysticism, I should reckon the work done during the  last decade upon the psychology of prayer and contemplation. I cannot  comment here upon the highly technical discussions between experts as  to the place where the line is to be drawn between  "natural" and "supernatural,"  "active" and "infused" operations of the soul  in communion with God; or the exact distinction between  "ordinary" and "extraordinary" contemplation.  But the fact that these discussions have taken place is itself  significant; and requires from religious psychology the  acknowledgement of a genuine two-foldness in human nature--the  difference in kind between   Animus    the surface-self and   Anima    the transcendental self, in touch with supernatural realities. Here,  the most important work has been done in France; and especially by the  Abbe Bremond, whose "Priere et Poesie" and  "Introduction a la Philosophie de la  Priere"--based on a vast acquaintance with mystical  literature--mark, I believe, the beginning of a new understanding  of the character of contemplation. The Thomist philosophy of Maritain,  and the psychological researches of Marechal, tend to support  this developing view of the mystical experience, even in its  elementary forms, as an activity of the transcendental self; genuinely  supernatural, yet not necessarily involving any abnormal  manifestations, and linked by the ascending "degrees of  prayer" with the subject's "ordinary"  religious life. This disentangling of the substance of mysticism from  the psycho-physical accidents of trance, ecstasy, vision and other  abnormal phenomena which often [p. xvii] [i_1-Page_xvii]  accompany it, and its vindication as something which gives the self a  genuine knowledge of transcendental Reality--with its  accompanying demonstration of the soberness and sanity of the greatest  contemplative saints--is the last of the beneficent changes which  have transformed our study of the mystics. In this country it is  identified with the work of two Benedictine scholars; Abbot Chapman of  Downside and Dom Cuthbert Butler, whose "Western  Mysticism" is a masterly exhibition of the religious and  psychological normality of the Christian contemplative life, as  developed by its noblest representatives.

[i_1-p7]Since this book was written, our knowledge of the  mystics has been much extended by the appearance of critical texts of  many writings which had only been known to us in garbled versions; or  in translations made with an eye to edification rather than accuracy.  Thus the publication of the authentic revelations of Angela of  Foligno--one of the most interesting discoveries of recent  years--has disclosed the unsuspected splendour of her mystical  experience. The critical texts of St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross  which are now available amend previous versions in many important  respects. We have reliable editions of Tauler and Ruysbroeck; of  "The Cloud of Unknowing," and of Walter Hilton's  works. The renewed interest in seventeenth-century mysticism, due in  part to the Abbe Bremond's great work, has resulted in the  publication of many of its documents. So too the literary, social and  historical links between the mystics, the influence of environment,  the great part played by forgotten spiritual movements and  inarticulate saints, are beginning to be better understood. Advantage  has been taken of these facts in preparing the present edition. All  quotations from the mystics have been revised by comparison with the  best available texts. The increased size of the historical appendix  and bibliography is some indication of the mass of fresh material  which is now at the disposal of students; material which must be  examined with truth-loving patience, with sympathy, and above all with  humility, by those who desire to make valid additions to our knowledge  of the conditions under which the human spirit has communion with  God.

[i_1-p8]   [i_1-p8.1]Easter 1930 E. U. 

[i_1-p9][p. xix] [i_1-Page_xix]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [ii]   

[ii-p0.1]PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

[ii-p1]  [ii-p1.1]This book falls naturally into two parts; each of which is really complete  in itself, though they are in a sense complementary to one another.  Whilst the second and longest part contains a somewhat detailed study  of the nature and development of man's spiritual or mystical  consciousness, the first is intended rather to provide an introduction  to the general subject of mysticism. Exhibiting it by turns from the  point of view of metaphysics, psychology, and symbolism, it is an  attempt to gather between the covers of one volume information at  present scattered amongst many monographs and text-books written in  divers tongues, and to give the student in a compact form at least the  elementary facts in regard to each of those subjects which are most  closely connected with the study of the mystics.

[ii-p2]Those mystics, properly speaking, can only be studied  in their works: works which are for the most part left unread by those  who now talk much about mysticism. Certainly the general reader has  this excuse, that the masterpieces of mystical literature, full of  strange beauties though they be, offer considerable difficulties to  those who come to them unprepared. In the first seven chapters of this  book I have tried to remove a few of these difficulties; to provide  the necessary preparation; and to exhibit the relation in which  mysticism stands to other forms of life. If, then, the readers of this  section are enabled by it to come to the encounter of mystical  literature with a greater power of sympathetic comprehension than they  previously possessed, it will have served the purpose for which it has  been composed.

[ii-p3]It is probable that almost every such reader,  according to the angle from which he approaches the subject, will here  find a good deal which seems to him superfluous. But different types  of mind will find this unnecessary elaboration in different places.  The psychologist, approaching from the scientific standpoint, eager  for morbid phenomena, has little use for disquisitions on symbolism,  religious or other. The symbolist, approaching from the artistic  standpoint, seldom admires the proceedings of psychology. I believe,  however, that none who wish to obtain an idea of mysticism in its  wholeness, as a form of life, can afford [p. xx] [ii-Page_xx]  to neglect any of the aspects on which these pages venture to touch.  The metaphysician and the psychologist are unwise if they do not  consider the light thrown upon the ideas of the mystics by their  attitude towards orthodox theology. The theologian is still more  unwise if he refuse to hear the evidence of psychology. For the  benefit of those whose interest in mysticism is chiefly literary, and  who may care to be provided with a clue to the symbolic and  allegorical element in the writings of the contemplatives, a short  section on those symbols of which they most often make use has been  added. Finally, the persistence amongst us of the false opinion which  confuses mysticism with occult philosophy and psychic phenomena, has  made it necessary to deal with the vital distinction which exists  between it and every form of magic.

[ii-p4]Specialists in any of these great departments of  knowledge will probably be disgusted by the elementary and superficial  manner in which their specific sciences are here treated. But this  book does not venture to address itself to specialists. From those who  are already fully conversant with the matters touched upon, it asks  the indulgence which really kindhearted adults are always ready to  extend towards the efforts of youth. Philosophers are earnestly  advised to pass over the first two chapters, and theologians to  practise the same charity in respect of the section dealing with their  science.

[ii-p5]The giving of merely historical information is no part  of the present plan: except in so far as chronology has a bearing upon  the most fascinating of all histories, the history of the spirit of  man. Many books upon mysticism have been based on the historical  method: amongst them two such very different works as Vaughan's  supercilious and unworthy "Hours with the Mystics" and Dr.  Inge's scholarly Bampton lectures. It is a method which seems to  be open to some objection: since mysticism avowedly deals with the  individual not as he stands in relation to the civilization of his  time, but as he stands in relation to truths that are timeless. All  mystics, said Saint-Martin, speak the same language and come from the  same country. As against that fact, the place which they happen to  occupy in the kingdom of this world matters little. Nevertheless,  those who are unfamiliar with the history of mysticism properly so  called, and to whom the names of the great contemplatives convey no  accurate suggestion of period or nationality, may be glad to have a  short statement of their order in time and distribution in space.  Also, some knowledge of the genealogy of mysticism is desirable if we  are to distinguish the original contributions of each individual from  the mass of speculation and statement which he inherits [p. xxi] [ii-Page_xxi] from the past. Those entirely unacquainted  with these matters may find it helpful to glance at the Appendix  before proceeding to the body of the work; since few things are more  disagreeable than the constant encounter of persons to whom we have  not been introduced.

[ii-p6]The second part of the book, for which the first seven  chapters are intended to provide a preparation, is avowedly  psychological. It is an attempt to set out and justify a definite  theory of the nature of man's mystical consciousness: the  necessary stages of organic growth through which the typical mystic  passes, the state of equilibrium towards which he tends. Each of these  stages--and also the characteristically mystical and still  largely mysterious experiences of visions and voices, contemplation  and ecstasy--though viewed from the standpoint of psychology, is  illustrated from the lives of the mystics; and where possible in their  own words. In planning these chapters I have been considerably helped  by M. Delacroix's brilliant "Etudes sur le  Mysticisme," though unable to accept his conclusions: and here  gladly take the opportunity of acknowledging my debt to him and also  to Baron von Hugel's classic "Mystical Element of  Religion." This book, which only came into my hands when my own  was planned and partly written, has since been a constant source of  stimulus and encouragement.

[ii-p7]Finally, it is perhaps well to say something as to the  exact sense in which the term "mysticism" is here  understood. One of the most abused words in the English language, it  has been used in different and often mutually exclusive senses by  religion, poetry, and philosophy: has been claimed as an excuse for  every kind of occultism, for dilute transcendentalism, vapid  symbolism, religious or aesthetic sentimentality, and bad metaphysics.  On the other hand, it has been freely employed as a term of contempt  by those who have criticized these things. It is much to be hoped that  it may be restored sooner or later to its old meaning, as the science  or art of the spiritual life.

[ii-p8]Meanwhile, those who use the term  "Mysticism" are bound in self-defence to explain what they  mean by it. Broadly speaking, I understand it to be the expression of  the innate tendency of the human spirit towards complete harmony with  the transcendental order; whatever be the theological formula under  which that order is understood. This tendency, in great mystics,  gradually captures the whole field of consciousness; it dominates  their life and, in the experience called "mystic union,"  attains its end. Whether that end be called the God of Christianity,  the World-soul of Pantheism, the Absolute of Philosophy, the desire to  attain it and the movement towards it--so long as this is a  genuine [p. xxii] [ii-Page_xxii] life process and not an  intellectual speculation--is the proper subject of mysticism. I  believe this movement to represent the true line of development of the  highest form of human consciousness.

[ii-p9]It is a pleasant duty to offer my heartiest thanks to  the many kind friends and fellow students, of all shades of opinion,  who have given me their help and encouragement. Amongst those to whom  my heaviest debt of gratitude is due are Mr. W. Scott Palmer, for much  valuable, generous, and painstaking assistance, particularly in  respect of the chapter upon Vitalism: and Miss Margaret Robinson, who  in addition to many other kind offices, has made all the translations  from Meister Eckhart and Mechthild of Magdeburg here given.

[ii-p10]Sections of the MS. have been kindly read by the Rev.  Dr. Inge, by Miss May Sinclair, and by Miss Eleanor Gregory; from all  of whom I have received much helpful and expert advice. To Mr. Arthur  Symons my thanks and those of my readers are specially due; since it  is owing to his generous permission that I am able to make full use of  his beautiful translations of the poems of St. John of the Cross.  Others who have given me much help in various directions, and to whom  most grateful acknowledgments are here offered, are Miss Constance  Jones, Miss Ethel Barker, Mr. J. A. Herbert of the British  Museum--who first brought to my notice the newly discovered  "Mirror of Simple Souls"--the Rev. Dr. Arbuthnot  Nairn, Mr. A. E. Waite, and Mr. H. Stuart Moore, F.S.A. The substance  of two chapters--those upon "The Characteristics of  Mysticism" and "Mysticism and Magic"--has  already appeared in the pages of   The Quest    and   The Fortnightly Review.    These sections are here reprinted by kind permission of their  respective editors.

[ii-p11]  Feast of St. John of the Cross    E. U.

[ii-p12]1910

[ii-p13][p. 1] [ii-Page_1]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [iii][iii-p1]"What the world, which truly knows   nothing,    calls 'mysticism' is the science of   ultimates, . . .    the science of self-evident Reality, which cannot be 'reasoned  about,' because it is the object of pure reason or perception.  The Babe sucking its mother's breast, and the Lover returning,  after twenty years' separation, to his home and food in the same  bosom, are the types and princes of Mystics."

[iii-p2]   [iii-p2.1]COVENTRY PATMORE, 

[iii-p3]   [iii-p3.1]"The Rod, the Root, and the   Flower" 

[iii-p4][p. 3] [iii-Page_3]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

I. The Point of Departure

  [iii.i][iii.i-p1]The [iii.i-p1.1]most highly developed branches of the human family have in common one  peculiar characteristic. They tend to produce--sporadically it is  true, and often in the teeth of adverse external circumstances--a  curious and definite type of personality; a type which refuses to be  satisfied with that which other men call experience, and is inclined,  in the words of its enemies, to "deny the world in order that it  may find reality." We meet these persons in the east and the  west; in the ancient, mediaeval, and modern worlds. Their one passion  appears to be the prosecution of a certain spiritual and intangible  quest: the finding of a "way out" or a "way  back" to some desirable state in which alone they can satisfy  their craving for absolute truth. This quest, for them, has  constituted the whole meaning of life. They have made for it without  effort sacrifices which have appeared enormous to other men: and it is  an indirect testimony to its objective actuality, that whatever the  place or period in which they have arisen, their aims, doctrines and  methods have been substantially the same. Their experience, therefore,  forms a body of evidence, curiously self-consistent and often mutually  explanatory, which must be taken into account before we can add up the  sum of the energies and potentialities of the human spirit, or  reasonably speculate on its relations to the unknown world which lies  outside the boundaries of sense.

[iii.i-p2]All men, at one time or another, have fallen in love  with the veiled Isis whom they call Truth. With most, this has been a  passing passion: they have early seen its hopelessness and turned to  more practical things. But others remain all their lives the devout  lovers of reality: though the manner of their love, the [p. 4] [iii.i-Page_4] vision which they make to themselves of the  beloved object varies enormously. Some see Truth as Dante saw  Beatrice: an adorable yet intangible figure, found in this world yet  revealing the next. To others she seems rather an evil but an  irresistible enchantress: enticing, demanding payment and betraying  her lover at the last. Some have seen her in a test tube, and some in  a poet's dream: some before the altar, others in the slime. The  extreme pragmatists have even sought her in the kitchen; declaring  that she may best be recognized by her utility. Last stage of all, the  philosophic sceptic has comforted an unsuccessful courtship by  assuring himself that his mistress is not really there.

[iii.i-p3]Under whatsoever symbols they have objectified their  quest, none of these seekers have ever been able to assure the world  that they have found, seen face to face, the Reality behind the veil.  But if we may trust the reports of the mystics--and they are  reports given with a strange accent of certainty and good  faith--they have succeeded where all these others have failed, in  establishing immediate communication between the spirit of man,  entangled as they declare amongst material things, and that  "only Reality," that immaterial and final Being, which  some philosophers call the Absolute, and most theologians call God.  This, they say--and here many who are not mystics agree with  them--is the hidden Truth which is the object of man's  craving; the only satisfying goal of his quest. Hence, they should  claim from us the same attention that we give to other explorers of  countries in which we are not competent to adventure ourselves; for  the mystics are the pioneers of the spiritual world, and we have no  right to deny validity to their discoveries, merely because we lack  the opportunity or the courage necessary to those who would prosecute  such explorations for themselves.

[iii.i-p4]It is the object of this book to attempt a  description, and also--though this is needless for those who read  that description in good faith--a justification of these  experiences and the conclusions which have been drawn from them. So  remote, however, are these matters from our ordinary habits of  thought, that their investigation entails, in those who would attempt  to understand them, a definite preparation: a purging of the  intellect. As with those who came of old to the Mysteries,  purification is here the gate of knowledge. We must come to this  encounter with minds cleared of prejudice and convention, must  deliberately break with our inveterate habit of taking the  "visible world" for granted; our lazy assumption that  somehow science is "real" and metaphysics is not. We must  pull down our own card houses--descend, as the mystics say,  "into our nothingness"--and examine for ourselves the  foundations of all possible human experience, [p. 5] [iii.i-Page_5] before we are in a position to criticize the  buildings of the visionaries, the poets, and the saints. We must not  begin to talk of the unreal world of these dreamers until we have  discovered--if we can--a real world with which it may be  compared.

[iii.i-p5]Such a criticism of reality is of course the business  of philosophy. I need hardly say that this book is not written by a  philosopher, nor is it addressed to students of that imperial science.  Nevertheless, amateurs though we be, we cannot reach our  starting-point without trespassing to some extent on philosophic  ground. That ground covers the whole area of first principles: and it  is to first principles that we must go, if we would understand the  true significance of the mystic type.

[iii.i-p6]Let us then begin at the beginning: and remind  ourselves of a few of the trite and primary facts which all practical  persons agree to ignore. That beginning, for human thought, is of  course the I, the Ego, the self-conscious subject which is writing  this book, or the other self-conscious subject which is reading it;  and which declares, in the teeth of all arguments, I AM.   [*1]    Here is a point as to which we all feel quite sure. No metaphysician  has yet shaken the ordinary individual's belief in his own  existence. The uncertainties only begin for most of us when we ask  what else   is   .

[iii.i-p8]To this I, this conscious self "imprisoned in  the body like an oyster in his shell,"   [*2]    come, as we know, a constant stream of messages and experiences.  Chief amongst these are the stimulation of the tactile nerves whose  result we call touch, the vibrations taken up by the optic nerve which  we call light, and those taken up by the ear and perceived as  sound.

[iii.i-p10]What do these experiences mean? The first answer of  the unsophisticated Self is, that they indicate the nature of the  external world: it is to the "evidence of her senses" that  she turns, when she is asked what the world is like. From the messages  received through those senses, which pour in on her whether she will  or no, battering upon her gateways at every instant and from every  side, she constructs that "sense-world" which is the  "real and solid world" of normal men. As the impressions  come in--or rather those interpretations of the original  impressions which her nervous system supplies--she pounces on  them, much as players in the spelling game pounce on the separate  letters dealt [p. 6] [iii.i-Page_6] out to them. She sorts,  accepts, rejects, combines: and then triumphantly produces from them a  "concept" which   is,    she says, the external world. With an enviable and amazing simplicity  she attributes her own sensations to the unknown universe. The stars,  she says,   are    bright; the grass   is    green. For her, as for the philosopher Hume, "reality consists  in impressions and ideas."

[iii.i-p11]It is immediately apparent, however, that this  sense-world, this seemingly real external universe--though it may  be useful and valid in other respects--cannot be   the    external world, but only the Self's projected picture of it.   [*3]    It is a work of art, not a scientific fact; and, whilst it may well  possess the profound significance proper to great works of art, is  dangerous if treated as a subject of analysis. Very slight  investigation shows that it is a picture whose relation to reality is  at best symbolic and approximate, and which would have no meaning for  selves whose senses, or channels of communication, happened to be  arranged upon a different plan. The evidence of the senses, then,  cannot be accepted as evidence of the nature of ultimate reality:  useful servants, they are dangerous guides. Nor can their testimony  disconcert those seekers whose reports they appear to contradict.

[iii.i-p13]The conscious self sits, so to speak, at the receiving  end of a telegraph wire. On any other theory than that of mysticism,  it is her one channel of communication with the hypothetical  "external world." The receiving instrument registers  certain messages. She does not know, and--so long as she remains  dependent on that instrument--never can know, the object, the  reality at the other end of the wire, by which those messages are  sent; neither can the messages truly disclose the nature of that  object. But she is justified on the whole in accepting them as  evidence that something exists beyond herself and her receiving  instrument. It is obvious that the structural peculiarities of the  telegraphic instrument will have exerted a modifying effect upon the  message. That which is conveyed as dash and dot, colour and shape, may  have been received in a very different form. Therefore this message,  though it may in a partial sense be relevant to the supposed reality  at the other end, can never be adequate to it. There will be fine  vibrations which it fails to take up, others which it confuses  together. Hence a portion of the message is always lost; or, in [p. 7] [iii.i-Page_7] other language, there are aspects of the world  which we can never know.

[iii.i-p14]The sphere of our possible intellectual knowledge is  thus strictly conditioned by the limits of our own personality. On  this basis, not the ends of the earth, but the external termini of our  own sensory nerves, are the termini of our explorations: and to  "know oneself" is really to know one's universe. We  are locked up with our receiving instruments: we cannot get up and  walk away in the hope of seeing whither the lines lead.  Eckhart's words are still final for us: "the soul can only  approach created things by the voluntary reception of images."  Did some mischievous Demiurge choose to tickle our sensory apparatus  in a new way, we should receive by this act a new universe.

[iii.i-p15]William James once suggested as a useful exercise for  young idealists, a consideration of the changes which would be worked  in our ordinary world if the various branches of our receiving  instruments exchanged duties; if, for instance, we heard all colours  and saw all sounds. Such a remark throws a sudden light on the strange  and apparently insane statement of the visionary Saint-Martin,  "I heard flowers that sounded, and saw notes that shone";  and on the reports of other mystics concerning a rare moment of  consciousness in which the senses are fused into a single and  ineffable act of perception, and colour and sound are known as aspects  of one thing.   [*4] 

[iii.i-p17]Since music is but an interpretation of certain  vibrations undertaken by the ear, and colour an interpretation of  other vibrations performed by the eye, this is less mad than it sounds  and may yet be brought within the radius of physical science. Did such  an alteration of our senses take place the world would still send us  the same messages--that strange unknown world from which, on this  hypothesis, we are hermetically sealed--but we should interpret  them differently. Beauty would still be ours, though speaking another  tongue. The bird's song would then strike our retina as a  pageant of colour: we should see the magical tones of the wind, hear  as a great fugue the repeated and harmonized greens of the forest, the  cadences of stormy skies. Did we realize how slight an adjustment of  our organs is needed to initiate us into such a world, we should  perhaps be less contemptuous of those mystics who tell us that they  apprehended the Absolute as "heavenly music" or  "Uncreated Light": less fanatical in our determination to  make the solid "world of common sense" the only standard  of reality. This "world of common sense" is a conceptual  [p. 8] [iii.i-Page_8] world. It may represent an external  universe: it certainly does represent the activity of the human mind.  Within that mind it is built up: and there most of us are content  "at ease for aye to dwell," like the soul in the Palace of  Art.

[iii.i-p18]A direct encounter with absolute truth, then, appears  to be impossible for normal non-mystical consciousness. We cannot know  the reality, or even prove the existence, of the simplest object:  though this is a limitation which few people realize acutely and most  would deny. But there persists in the race a type of personality which  does realize this limitation: and cannot be content with the sham  realities that furnish the universe of normal men. It is necessary, as  it seems, to the comfort of persons of this type to form for  themselves some image of the Something or Nothing which is at the end  of their telegraph lines: some "conception of being," some  "theory of knowledge." They are tormented by the  Unknowable, ache for first principles, demand some background to the  shadow show of things. In so far as man possesses this temperament, he  hungers for reality, and must satisfy that hunger as best he can:  staving off starvation, though he many not be filled.

[iii.i-p19]It is doubtful whether any two selves have offered  themselves exactly the same image of the truth outside their gates:  for a living metaphysic, like a living religion, is at bottom a  strictly personal affair--a matter, as William James reminded us,  of vision rather than of argument.   [*5]    Nevertheless such a living metaphysic may--and if sound  generally does--escape the stigma of subjectivism by outwardly  attaching itself to a traditional School; as personal religion may and  should outwardly attach itself to a traditional church. Let us then  consider shortly the results arrived at by these traditional  schools--the great classic theories concerning the nature of  reality. In them we see crystallized the best that the human  intellect, left to itself, has been able to achieve.

[iii.i-p21]I. The most obvious and generally accepted explanation  of the world is of course that of   Naturalism,    or naive Realism: the point of view of the plain man. Naturalism  states simply that we see the real world, though we may not see it  very well. What seems to normal healthy people to be there, is  approximately there. It congratulates itself on resting in the  concrete; it accepts material things as real. In other words, our  corrected and correlated sense impressions, raised to their highest  point of efficiency, form for it the only valid material of knowledge:  knowledge itself being the classified results of exact  observation.

[iii.i-p22]Such an attitude as this may be a counsel of prudence,  in view of our ignorance of all that lies beyond: but it can never  satisfy [p. 9] [iii.i-Page_9] our hunger for reality. It says  in effect, "The room in which we find ourselves is fairly  comfortable. Draw the curtains, for the night is dark: and let us  devote ourselves to describing the furniture." Unfortunately,  however, even the furniture refuses to accommodate itself to the  naturalistic view of things. Once we begin to examine it attentively,  we find that it abounds in hints of wonder and mystery: declares aloud  that even chairs and tables are not what they seem.

[iii.i-p23]We have seen that the most elementary criticism,  applied to any ordinary object of perception, tends to invalidate the  simple and comfortable creed of "common sense"; that not  merely faith but gross credulity, is needed by the mind which would  accept the apparent as the real. I say, for instance, that I  "see" a house. I can only mean by this that the part of my  receiving instrument which undertakes the duty called vision is  affected in a certain way, and arouses in my mind the idea  "house." The idea "house" is now treated by me  as a real house, and my further observations will be an unfolding,  enriching, and defining of this image. But what the external reality  is which evoked the image that I call "house," I do not  know and never can know. It is as mysterious, as far beyond my  apprehension, as the constitution of the angelic choirs. Consciousness  shrinks in terror from contact with the mighty verb "to  be." I may of course call in one sense to  "corroborate," as we trustfully say, the evidence of the  other; may approach the house, and touch it. Then the nerves of my  hand will be affected by a sensation which I translate as hardness and  solidity; the eye by a peculiar and wholly incomprehensible sensation  called redness; and from these purely personal changes my mind  constructs and externalizes an idea which it calls red bricks. Science  herself, however, if she be asked to verify the reality of these  perceptions, at once declares that though the material world be real,  the ideas of solidity and colour are but hallucination. They belong to  the human animal, not to the physical universe: pertain to accident  not substance, as scholastic philosophy would say.

[iii.i-p24]"The red brick," says Science, "is a  mere convention. In reality that bit, like all other bits of the  universe, consists, so far as I know at present, of innumerable atoms  whirling and dancing one about the other. It is no more solid than a  snowstorm. Were you to eat of Alice-in-Wonderland's mushroom and  shrink to the dimensions of the infra-world, each atom with its  electrons might seem to you a solar system and the red brick itself a  universe. Moreover, these atoms themselves elude me as I try to grasp  them. They are only manifestations of something else. Could I track  matter to its lair, I might conceivably discover that it has no  extension, and become an idealist in spite of myself. As for redness,  as you [p. 10] [iii.i-Page_10] call it, that is a question of  the relation between your optic nerve and the light waves which it is  unable to absorb. This evening, when the sun slopes, your brick will  probably be purple, a very little deviation from normal vision on your  part would make it green. Even the sense that the object of perception  is outside yourself may be fancy; since you as easily attribute this  external quality to images seen in dreams, and to waking  hallucinations, as you do to those objects which, as you absurdly say,  are   'really there.'" 

[iii.i-p25]Further, there is no trustworthy standard by which we  can separate the "real" from the "unreal"  aspects of phenomena. Such standards as exist are conventional: and  correspond to convenience, not to truth. It is no argument to say that  most men see the world in much the same way, and that this  "way" is the true standard of reality: though for  practical purposes we have agreed that sanity consists in sharing the  hallucinations of our neighbours. Those who are honest with themselves  know that this "sharing" is at best incomplete. By the  voluntary adoption of a new conception of the universe, the fitting of  a new alphabet to the old Morse code--a proceeding which we call  the acquirement of knowledge--we can and do change to a marked  extent our way of seeing things: building up new worlds from old sense  impressions, and transmuting objects more easily and thoroughly than  any magician. "Eyes and ears," said Heracleitus,  "are bad witnesses to those who have barbarian souls": and  even those whose souls are civilized tend to see and hear all things  through a temperament. In one and the same sky the poet may discover  the habitation of angels, whilst the sailor sees only a promise of  dirty weather ahead. Hence, artist and surgeon, Christian and  rationalist, pessimist and optimist, do actually and truly live in  different and mutually exclusive worlds, not only of thought but also  of perception. Only the happy circumstance that our ordinary speech is  conventional, not realistic, permits us to conceal from one another  the unique and lonely world in which each lives. Now and then an  artist is born, terribly articulate, foolishly truthful, who insists  on "Speaking as he saw." Then other men, lapped warmly in  their artificial universe, agree that he is mad: or, at the very best,  an "extraordinarily imaginative fellow."

[iii.i-p26]Moreover, even this unique world of the individual is  not permanent. Each of us, as we grow and change, works incessantly  and involuntarily at the re-making of our sensual universe. We behold  at any specific moment not "that which is," but  "that which we are", and personality undergoes many  readjustments in the course of its passage from birth through maturity  to death. The [p. 11] [iii.i-Page_11] mind which seeks the Real,  then, in this shifting and subjective "natural" world is  of necessity thrown back on itself: on images and concepts which owe  more to the "seer" than to the "seen." But  Reality must be real for all, once they have found it: must exist  "in itself" upon a plane of being unconditioned by the  perceiving mind. Only thus can it satisfy that mind's most vital  instinct, most sacred passion--its "instinct for the  Absolute," its passion for truth.

[iii.i-p27]You are not asked, as a result of these antique and  elementary propositions, to wipe clean the slate of normal human  experience, and cast in your lot with intellectual nihilism. You are  only asked to acknowledge that it is but a slate, and that the white  scratches upon it which the ordinary man calls facts, and the  Scientific Realist calls knowledge, are at best relative and  conventionalized symbols of that aspect of the unknowable reality at  which they hint. This being so, whilst we must all draw a picture of  some kind on our slate and act in relation therewith, we cannot deny  the validity--though we may deny the usefulness--of the  pictures which others produce, however abnormal and impossible they  may seem; since these are sketching an aspect of reality which has not  come within our sensual field, and so does not and cannot form part of  our world. Yet as the theologian claims that the doctrine of the  Trinity veils and reveals not Three but One, so the varied aspects  under which the universe appears to the perceiving consciousness hint  at a final reality, or in Kantian language, a Transcendental Object,  which shall be, not any one, yet all of its manifestations;  transcending yet including the innumerable fragmentary worlds of  individual conception. We begin, then, to ask what can be the nature  of this One; and whence comes the persistent instinct  which--receiving no encouragement from sense  experience--apprehends and desires this unknown unity, this  all-inclusive Absolute, as the only possible satisfaction of its  thirst for truth.

[iii.i-p28]2. The second great conception of Being--  Idealism--   has arrived by a process of elimination at a tentative answer to this  question. It whisks us far from the material universe, with its  interesting array of "things," its machinery, its law,  into the pure, if thin, air of a metaphysical world. Whilst the  naturalist's world is constructed from an observation of the  evidence offered by the senses, the Idealist's world is  constructed from an observation of the processes of thought. There are  but two things, he says in effect, about which we are sure: the  existence of a thinking subject, a conscious Self, and of an object,  an Idea, with which that subject deals. We know, that is to say, both  Mind and Thought. What we call the universe is really a collection of  such thoughts; and [p. 12] [iii.i-Page_12] these, we agree, have  been more or less distorted by the subject, the individual thinker, in  the process of assimilation. Obviously, we do not think all that there  is to be thought, conceive all that there is to be conceived; neither  do we necessarily combine in right order and proportion those ideas  which we are capable of grasping. Reality, says Objective Idealism, is  the complete, undistorted Object, the big thought, of which we pick up  these fragmentary hints: the world of phenomena which we treat as real  being merely its shadow show or "manifestation in space and  time."

[iii.i-p29]According to the form of Objective Idealism here  chosen from amongst many as typical--for almost every Idealist  has his own scheme of metaphysical salvation   [*6]   --we live in a universe which is, in popular language, the Idea,  or Dream of its Creator. We, as Tweedledum explained to Alice in the  most philosophic of all fairy tales, are "just part of the  dream." All life, all phenomena, are the endless modifications  and expressions of the one transcendent Object, the mighty and dynamic  Thought of one Absolute Thinker, in which we are bathed. This Object,  or certain aspects of it--and the place of each individual  consciousness within the Cosmic Thought, or, as we say, our position  in life, largely determines which these aspects shall be--is  interpreted by the senses and conceived by the mind, under limitations  which we are accustomed to call matter, space and time. But we have no  reason to suppose that matter, space, and time are necessarily parts  of reality; of the ultimate Idea. Probability points rather to their  being the pencil and paper with which we sketch it. As our vision, our  idea of things, tends to approximate more and more to that of the  Eternal Idea, so we get nearer and nearer to reality: for the  idealist's reality is simply the Idea, or Thought of God.   This,    he says, is the supreme unity at which all the illusory appearances  that make up the widely differing worlds of "common  sense," of science, of metaphysics, and of art dimly hint. This  is the sense in which it can truly be said that only the supernatural  possesses reality; for that world of appearance which we call natural  is certainly largely made up of preconception and illusion, of the  hints offered by the eternal real world of Idea outside our gates, and  the quaint concepts which we at our receiving instrument manufacture  from them.

[iii.i-p31]There is this to be said for the argument of Idealism:  that in the last resort, the destinies of mankind are invariably  guided, not by the concrete "facts" of the sense world,  but by concepts [p. 13] [iii.i-Page_13] which are acknowledged  by every one to exist only on the mental plane. In the great moments  of existence, when he rises to spiritual freedom, these are the things  which every man feels to be real. It is by these and for these that he  is found willing to live, work suffer, and die. Love, patriotism,  religion, altruism, fame, all belong to the transcendental world.  Hence, they partake more of the nature of reality than any  "fact" could do; and man, dimly recognizing this, has ever  bowed to them as to immortal centres of energy. Religions as a rule  are steeped in idealism: Christianity in particular is a trumpet call  to an idealistic conception of life, Buddhism is little less. Over and  over again, their Scriptures tell us that only materialists will be  damned.

[iii.i-p32]In Idealism we have perhaps the most sublime theory of  Being which has ever been constructed by the human intellect: a theory  so sublime, in fact, that it can hardly have been produced by the  exercise of "pure reason" alone, but must be looked upon  as a manifestation of that natural mysticism, that instinct for the  Absolute, which is latent in man. But, when we ask the idealist how we  are to attain communion with the reality which he describes to us as  "certainly there," his system suddenly breaks down; and  discloses itself as a diagram of the heavens, not a ladder to the  stars. This failure of Idealism to find in practice the reality of  which it thinks so much is due, in the opinion of the mystics, to a  cause which finds epigrammatic expression in the celebrated phrase by  which St. Jerome marked the distinction between religion and  philosophy. "Plato located the soul of man in the head; Christ  located it in the heart." That is to say, Idealism, though just  in its premises, and often daring and honest in their application, is  stultified by the exclusive intellectualism of its own methods: by its  fatal trust in the squirrel-work of the industrious brain instead of  the piercing vision of the desirous heart. It interests man, but does  not involve him in its processes: does not catch him up to the new and  more real life which it describes. Hence the thing that matters, the  living thing, has somehow escaped it; and its observations bear the  same relation to reality as the art of the anatomist does to the  mystery of birth.

[iii.i-p33]3. But there is yet another Theory of Being to be  considered: that which may be loosely defined as   Philosophic Scepticism.    This is the attitude of those who refuse to accept either the  realistic or the idealistic answer to the eternal question: and,  confronted in their turn with the riddle of reality, reply that there  is no riddle to solve. We of course assume for the ordinary purposes  of life that for every sequence a: b: present in our consciousness  there exists a mental or material A: B: in the external universe, and  that the first is a strictly relevant, though probably wholly  inadequate, [p. 14] [iii.i-Page_14] expression of the second.  The bundle of visual and auditory sensations, for instance, whose sum  total I am accustomed to call Mrs. Smith, corresponds with something  that exists in the actual as well as in my phenomenal world. Behind my  Mrs. Smith, behind the very different Mrs. Smith which the X rays  would exhibit, there is, contends the Objective Idealist, a  transcendental, or in the Platonic sense an ideal Mrs. Smith, at whose  qualities I cannot even guess; but whose existence is quite  independent of my apprehension of it. But though we do and must act on  this hypothesis, it remains only a hypothesis; and it is one which  philosophic scepticism will not let pass.

[iii.i-p34]The external world, say the sceptical schools,  is--so far as I know it--a concept present in my mind. If my  mind ceased to exist, so far as I know the concept which I call the  world would cease to exist too. The one thing which for me indubitably    is,    isthe self's experience, its whole consciousness. Outside this  circle of consciousness I have no authority to indulge in guesses as  to what may or may not Be. Hence, for me, the Absolute is a  meaningless diagram, a superfluous complication of thought: since the  mind, wholly cut off from contact with external reality, has no reason  to suppose that such a reality exists except in its own ideas. Every  effort made by philosophy to go forth in search of it is merely the  metaphysical squirrel running round the conceptual cage. In the  completion and perfect unfolding of the set of ideas with which our  consciousness is furnished, lies the only reality which we can ever  hope to know. Far better to stay here and make ourselves at home: only  this, for us, truly is.

[iii.i-p35]This purely subjective conception of Being has found  representatives in every school of thought: even including by a  curious paradox, that of mystical philosophy--its one effective  antagonist. Thus Delacroix, after an exhaustive and even sympathetic  analysis of St. Teresa's progress towards union with the  Absolute, ends upon the assumption that the God with whom she was  united was the content of her own subconscious mind.   [*7]    Such a mysticism is that of a kitten running after its own tail: a  different path indeed from that which the great seekers for reality  have pursued. The   reductio ad absurdum    of this doctrine is found in the so-called "philosophy"  of New Thought, which begs its disciples to "try quietly to  realize that the Infinite is really You."   [*8]    By its utter denial not merely of a knowable, but of a logically  conceivable Transcendent, it drives us in the end to the conclusion of  extreme pragmatism; that Truth, for us, is not an immutable reality,  but merely that idea which happens to work out as true and useful  [p. 15] [iii.i-Page_15] in any given experience. There is no  reality behind appearance; therefore all faiths, all figments with  which we people that nothingness are equally true, provided they be  comfortable and good to live by.

[iii.i-p38]Logically carried out, this conception of Being would  permit each man to regard other men as non-existent except within his  own consciousness: the only place where a strict scepticism will allow  that anything exists. Even the mind which conceives consciousness  exists for us only in our own conception of it; we no more know what  we are than we know what we shall be. Man is left a conscious  Something in the midst, so far as he knows, of Nothing: with no  resources save the exploring of his own consciousness.

[iii.i-p39]Philosophic scepticism is particularly interesting to  our present inquiry, because it shows us the position in which  "pure reason," if left to itself, is bound to end. It is  utterly logical; and though we may feel it to be absurd, we can never  prove it to be so. Those who are temperamentally inclined to credulity  may become naturalists, and persuade themselves to believe in the  reality of the sense world. Those with a certain instinct for the  Absolute may adopt the more reasonable faith of idealism. But the true  intellectualist, who concedes nothing to instinct or emotion, is  obliged in the end to adopt some form of sceptical philosophy. The  horrors of nihilism, in fact, can only be escaped by the exercise of  faith, by a trust in man's innate but strictly irrational  instinct for that Real "above all reason, beyond all  thought" towards which at its best moments his spirit tends. If  the metaphysician be true to his own postulates, he must acknowledge  in the end that we are all forced to live, to think, and at last to  die, in an unknown and unknowable world: fed arbitrarily and  diligently, yet how we know not, by ideas and suggestions whose truth  we cannot test but whose pressure we cannot resist. It is not by sight  but by faith--faith in a supposed external order which we can  never prove to exist, and in the approximate truthfulness and  constancy of the vague messages which we receive from it--that  ordinary men must live and move. We must put our trust in "laws  of nature" which have been devised by the human mind as a  convenient epitome of its own observations of phenomena, must, for the  purposes of daily life, accept these phenomena at their face value: an  act of faith beside which the grossest superstitions of the Neapolitan  peasant are hardly noticeable.

[iii.i-p40]The intellectual quest of Reality, then, leads us down  one of three blind alleys: (1) To an acceptance of the symbolic world  of appearance as the real; (2) to the elaboration of a theory also of  necessity symbolic--which, beautiful in itself, cannot help us  [p. 16] [iii.i-Page_16] to attain the Absolute which it  describes; (3) to a hopeless but strictly logical skepticism.

[iii.i-p41]In answer to the "Why? Why?" of the  bewildered and eternal child in us, philosophy, though always ready to  postulate the unknown if she can, is bound to reply only,   "Nescio! Nescio!"    In spite of all her busy map-making, she cannot reach the goal which  she points out to us, cannot explain the curious conditions under  which we imagine that we know; cannot even divide with a sure hand the  subject and object of thought. Science, whose business is with  phenomena and our knowledge of them, though she too is an idealist at  heart, has been accustomed to explain that all our ideas and  instincts, the pictured world that we take so seriously, the oddly  limited and illusory nature of our experience, appear to minister to  one great end: the preservation of life, and consequent fulfilment of  that highly mystical hypothesis, the Cosmic Idea. Each perception, she  assures us, serves a useful purpose in this evolutionary scheme: a  scheme, by the way, which has been invented--we know not  why--by the human mind, and imposed upon an obedient  universe.

[iii.i-p42]By vision, hearing, smell, and touch, says Science, we  find our way about, are warned of danger, obtain our food. The male  perceives beauty in the female in order that the species may be  propagated. It is true that this primitive instinct has given birth to  higher and purer emotions; but these too fulfil a social purpose and  are not so useless as they seem. Man must eat to live, therefore many  foods give us agreeable sensations. If he overeats, he dies; therefore  indigestion is an unpleasant pain. Certain facts of which too keen a  perception would act detrimentally to the life-force are, for most  men, impossible of realization:   i.e.   , the uncertainty of life, the decay of the body, the vanity of all  things under the sun. When we are in good health, we all feel very  real, solid, and permanent; and this is of all our illusions the most  ridiculous, and also the most obviously useful from the point of view  of the efficiency and preservation of the race.

[iii.i-p43]But when we look closer, we see that this brisk  generalization does not cover all the ground--not even that  little tract of ground of which our senses make us free; indeed, that  it is more remarkable for its omissions than for its inclusions.  Recejac has well said that "from the moment in which  man is no longer content to devise things useful for his existence  under the exclusive action of the will-to-live, the principle of  (physical) evolution has been violated."   [*9]    Nothing can be more certain than that man is not so content. He has  been called by utilitarian philosophers a tool-making animal--the  highest praise they knew how to bestow. [p. 17] [iii.i-Page_17] More surely  he is a vision-making animal;   [*10]    a creature of perverse and unpractical ideals, dominated by dreams no  less than by appetites--dreams which can only be justified upon  the theory that he moves towards some other goal than that of physical  perfection or intellectual supremacy, is controlled by some higher and  more vital reality than that of the determinists. We are driven to the  conclusion that if the theory of evolution is to include or explain  the facts of artistic and spiritual experience--and it cannot be  accepted by any serious thinker if these great tracts of consciousness  remain outside its range--it must be rebuilt on a mental rather  than a physical basis.

[iii.i-p46]Even the most ordinary human life includes in its  range fundamental experiences--violent and unforgettable  sensations--forced on us as it were against our will, for which  science finds it hard to account. These experiences and sensations,  and the hours of exalted emotion which they bring with  them--often recognized by us as the greatest, most significant  hours of our lives--fulfil no office in relation to her pet  "functions of nutrition and reproduction." It is true that  they are far-reaching in their effects on character; but they do  little or nothing to assist that character in its struggle for  physical life. To the unprejudiced eye many of them seem hopelessly  out of place in a universe constructed on strictly physico-chemical  lines--look almost as though nature, left to herself, tended to  contradict her own beautifully logical laws. Their presence, more, the  large place which they fill in the human world of appearance, is a  puzzling circumstance for deterministic philosophers; who can only  escape from the dilemma here presented to them by calling these things  illusions, and dignifying their own more manageable illusions with the  title of facts.

[iii.i-p47]Amongst the more intractable of these groups of  perceptions and experiences are those which we connect with religion,  with pain and with beauty. All three, for those selves which are  capable of receiving their messages, possess a mysterious authority  far in excess of those feelings, arguments, or appearances which they  may happen to contradict. All three, were the universe of the  naturalists true, would be absurd; all three have ever been treated  with the reverence due to vital matters by the best minds of the  race.

[iii.i-p48]A. I need not point out the hopelessly irrational  character of all great religions: which rest, one and all, on a  primary assumption that can never be intellectually demonstrated, much  less [p. 18] [iii.i-Page_18] proved--the assumption that  the supra-sensible is somehow important and real, and is intimately  connected with the life of man. This fact has been incessantly dwelt  upon by their critics, and has provoked many a misplaced exercise of  ingenuity on the part of their intelligent friends. Yet  religion--emphasizing and pushing to extremes that general  dependence on faith which we saw to be an inevitable condition of our  lives--is one of the most universal and ineradicable functions of  man, and this although it constantly acts detrimentally to the  interests of his merely physical existence, opposes "the  exclusive action of the will-to-live," except in so far as that  will aspires to eternal life. Strictly utilitarian, almost logical in  the savage, religion becomes more and more transcendental with the  upward progress of the race. It begins as black magic; it ends as Pure  Love. Why did the Cosmic Idea elaborate this religious instinct, if  the construction put upon its intentions by the determinists be  true?

[iii.i-p49]B. Consider again the whole group of phenomena which  are known as "the problem of suffering": the mental  anguish and physical pain which appear to be the inevitable result of  the steady operation of "natural law" and its voluntary  assistants, the cruelty, greed, and injustice of man. Here, it is  true, the naturalist seems at first sight to make a little headway,  and can point to some amongst the cruder forms of suffering which are  clearly useful to the race: punishing us for past follies, spurring to  new efforts, warning against future infringements of  "law." But he forgets the many others which refuse to be  resumed under this simple formula: forgets to explain how it is that  the Cosmic Idea involves the long torments of the incurable, the  tortures of the innocent, the deep anguish of the bereaved, the  existence of so many gratuitously agonizing forms of death. He  forgets, too, the strange fact that man's capacity for suffering  tends to increase in depth and subtlety with the increase of culture  and civilization; ignores the still more mysterious, perhaps most  significant circumstance that the highest types have accepted it  eagerly and willingly, have found in Pain the grave but kindly teacher  of immortal secrets, the conferrer of liberty, even the initiator into  amazing joys.

[iii.i-p50]Those who "explain" suffering as the  result of nature's immense fecundity--a by-product of that  overcrowding and stress through which the fittest tend to  survive--forget that even were this demonstration valid and  complete it would leave the real problem untouched. The question is  not, whence come those conditions which provoke in the self the  experiences called sorrow, anxiety, pain: but, why do these conditions    hurt    the self? The pain is mental; a little chloroform, and though the  conditions continue [p. 19] [iii.i-Page_19] unabated the  suffering is gone. Why does full consciousness always include the  mysterious capacity for misery as well as for happiness--a  capacity which seems at first sight to invalidate any conception of  the Absolute as Beautiful and Good? Why does evolution, as we ascend  the ladder of life, foster instead of diminishing the capacity for  useless mental anguish, for long, dull torment, bitter grief? Why,  when so much lies outside our limited powers of perception, when so  many of our own most vital functions are unperceived by consciousness,  does suffering of some sort form an integral part of the experience of  man? For utilitarian purposes acute discomfort would be quite enough;  the Cosmic Idea, as the determinists explain it, did not really need  an apparatus which felt all the throes of cancer, the horrors of  neurasthenia, the pangs of birth. Still less did it need the torments  of impotent sympathy for other people's irremediable pain the  dreadful power of feeling the world's woe. We are hopelessly  over-sensitized for the part science calls us to play.

[iii.i-p51]Pain, however we may look at it, indicates a profound  disharmony between the sense-world and the human self. If it is to be  vanquished, either the disharmony must be resolved by a deliberate and  careful adjustment of the self to the world of sense, or, that self  must turn from the sense-world to some other with which it is in tune.   [*11]    Pessimist and optimist here join hands. But whilst the pessimist,  resting in appearance, only sees "nature red in tooth and  claw" offering him little hope of escape, the optimist thinks  that pain and anguish--which may in their lower forms be  life's harsh guides on the path of physical evolution--in  their higher and apparently "useless" developments are her  leaders and teachers in the upper school of Supra-sensible Reality. He  believes that they press the self towards another world, still  "natural" for him, though "supernatural" for  his antagonist, in which it will be more at home. Watching life, he  sees in Pain the complement of Love: and is inclined to call these the  wings on which man's spirit can best take flight towards the  Absolute. Hence he can say with A Kempis, "Gloriari in  tribulatione non est grave amanti,"   [*12]    and needs not to speak of morbid folly when he sees the Christian  saints run eagerly and merrily to the Cross.   [*13] 

[iii.i-p55]He calls suffering the "gymnastic of  eternity," the "terrible [p. 20] [iii.i-Page_20] initiative  caress of God"; recognizing in it a quality for which the  disagreeable rearrangement of nerve molecules cannot account.  Sometimes, in the excess of his optimism, he puts to the test of  practice this theory with all its implications. Refusing to be deluded  by the pleasures of the sense world, he accepts instead of avoiding  pain, and becomes an ascetic; a puzzling type for the convinced  naturalist, who, falling back upon contempt--that favourite  resource of the frustrated reason--can only regard him as  diseased.

[iii.i-p56]Pain, then, which plunges like a sword through  creation, leaving on the one side cringing and degraded animals and on  the other side heroes and saints, is one of those facts of universal  experience which are peculiarly intractable from the point of view of  a merely materialistic philosophy.

[iii.i-p57]C. From this same point of view the existence of music  and poetry, the qualities of beauty and of rhythm, the evoked  sensations of awe, reverence, and rapture, are almost as difficult to  account for. The question   why    an apparent corrugation of the Earth's surface, called for  convenience' sake an Alp, coated with congealed water, and  perceived by us as a snowy peak, should produce in certain natures  acute sensations of ecstasy and adoration, why the skylark's  song should catch us up to heaven, and wonder and mystery speak to us  alike in "the little speedwell's darling blue" and  in the cadence of the wind, is a problem that seems to be merely  absurd, until it is seen to be insoluble. Here Madam How and Lady Why  alike are silent. With all our busy seeking, we have not found the  sorting house where loveliness is extracted from the flux of things.  We know not why "great" poetry should move us to  unspeakable emotion, or a stream of notes, arranged in a peculiar  sequence, catch us up to heightened levels of vitality: nor can we  guess how a passionate admiration for that which we call  "best" in art or letters can possibly contribute to the  physical evolution of the race. In spite of many lengthy disquisitions  on Esthetics, Beauty's secret is still her own. A shadowy  companion, half seen, half guessed at, she keeps step with the upward  march of life: and we receive her message and respond to it, not  because we understand it but because we   must   .

[iii.i-p58]Here it is that we approach that attitude of the self,  that point of view, which is loosely and generally called   mystical.    Here, instead of those broad blind alleys which philosophy showed us,  a certain type of mind has always discerned three strait and narrow  ways going out towards the Absolute. In religion, in pain, and in  beauty--and not only in these, but in many other apparently  useless peculiarities of the empirical world and of the perceiving  consciousness--these persons insist that they recognize at least  [p. 21] [iii.i-Page_21] the fringe of the real. Down these three  paths, as well as by many another secret way, they claim that news  comes to the self concerning levels of reality which in their  wholeness are inaccessible to the senses: worlds wondrous and  immortal, whose existence is not conditioned by the  "given" world which those senses report.  "Beauty," said Hegel, who, though he was no mystic, had a  touch of that mystical intuition which no philosopher can afford to be  without, "is merely the Spiritual making itself known  sensuously."   [*14]    In the good, the beautiful, the true," says Rudolph Eucken,  "we see Reality revealing its personal character. They are parts  of a coherent and substantial spiritual world."   [*15]    Here, some of the veils of that substantial world are stripped off:  Reality peeps through and is recognized, dimly or acutely, by the  imprisoned self.

[iii.i-p61]Recejac only develops this idea when he  says,   [*16]    "If the mind penetrates deeply into the facts of aesthetics, it  will find more and more, that these facts are based upon an ideal  identity between the mind itself and things. At a certain point the  harmony becomes so complete, and the finality so close that it gives  us actual emotion. The Beautiful then becomes the sublime; brief  apparition, by which the soul is caught up into the true mystic state,  and touches the Absolute. It is scarcely possible to persist in this  Esthetic perception without feeling lifted up by it above things and  above ourselves, in an ontological vision which closely resembles the  Absolute of the Mystics." It was of this underlying  reality--this truth of things--that St. Augustine cried in a  moment of lucid vision, "Oh, Beauty so old and so new, too late  have I loved thee!"   [*17]    It is in this sense also that "beauty is truth, truth  beauty": and as regards the knowledge of ultimate things which  is possible to ordinary men, it may well be that

   [iii.i-p63.1] "That is all
   Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know."
  [iii.i-p64]"Of Beauty," says Plato in an  immortal passage, "I repeat again that we saw her there shining  in company with the celestial forms; and coming to earth we find her  here too, shining in clearness through the clearest aperture of sense.  For sight is the most piercing of our bodily senses: though not by  that is wisdom seen; her loveliness would have been transporting if  there had been a visible image of her, and the other ideas, if they  had visible counterparts, would be equally lovely. But this is the  privilege of Beauty, that being the loveliest she is also the most  palpable to sight. Now [p. 22] [iii.i-Page_22] he who is not  newly initiated, or who has been corrupted, does not easily rise out  of this world to the sight of true beauty in the other. . . . But he  whose initiation is recent, and who has been the spectator of many  glories in the other world, is amazed when he sees anyone having a  godlike face or form, which is the expression of Divine Beauty; and at  first a shudder runs through him, and again the old awe steals over  him. . . ."   [*18] 

[iii.i-p66]Most men in the course of their lives have known such  Platonic hours of initiation, when the sense of beauty has risen from  a pleasant feeling to a passion, and an element of strangeness and  terror has been mingled with their joy. In those hours the world has  seemed charged with a new vitality; with a splendour which does not  belong to it but is poured through it, as light through a coloured  window, grace through a sacrament, from that Perfect Beauty which  "shines in company with the celestial forms" beyond the  pale of appearance. In such moods of heightened consciousness each  blade of grass seems fierce with meaning, and becomes a well of  wondrous light: a "little emerald set in the City of God."  The seeing self is indeed an initiate thrust suddenly into the  sanctuary of the mysteries: and feels the "old awe and  amazement" with which man encounters the Real. In such  experiences, a new factor of the eternal calculus appears to be thrust  in on us, a factor which no honest seeker for truth can afford to  neglect; since, if it be dangerous to say that any two systems of  knowledge are mutually exclusive, it is still more dangerous to give  uncritical priority to any one system. We are bound, then, to examine  this path to reality as closely and seriously as we should investigate  the most neatly finished safety-ladder of solid ash which offered a   salita alle stelle. 

[iii.i-p67]Why, after all, take as our standard a material world  whose existence is affirmed by nothing more trustworthy than the  sense-impressions of "normal men"; those imperfect and  easily cheated channels of communication? The mystics, those  adventurers of whom we spoke upon the first page of this book, have  always declared, implicitly or explicitly, their distrust in these  channels of communication. They have never been deceived by phenomena,  nor by the careful logic of the industrious intellect. One after  another, with extraordinary unanimity, they have rejected that appeal  to the unreal world of appearance which is the standard of [p. 23] [iii.i-Page_23] sensible men: affirming that there is another  way, another secret, by which the conscious self may reach the  actuality which it seeks. More complete in their grasp of experience  than the votaries of intellect or of sense, they accept as central for  life those spiritual messages which are mediated by religion, by  beauty, and by pain. More reasonable than the rationalists, they find  in that very hunger for reality which is the mother of all  metaphysics, an implicit proof that such reality exists; that there is  something else, some final satisfaction, beyond the ceaseless stream  of sensation which besieges consciousness. "In that thou hast  sought me, thou hast already found me," says the voice of  Absolute Truth in their ears. This is the first doctrine of mysticism.  Its next is that only in so far as the self is real can it hope to  know Reality: like to like: [iii.i-p67.1]Cot ad cot  loquitur. Upon the propositions implicit in these two  laws the whole claim and practice of the mystic life depends.

[iii.i-p68]"Finite as we are," they say--and  here they speak not for themselves, but for the race--"lost  though we seem to be in the woods or in the wide air's  wilderness, in this world of time and of chance, we have still, like  the strayed animals or like the migrating birds, our homing instinct.  . . . We seek. That is a fact. We seek a city still out of sight. In  the contrast with this goal, we live. But if this be so, then already  we possess something of Being even in our finite seeking. For the  readiness to seek is already something of an attainment, even if a  poor one."   [*19] 

[iii.i-p70]Further, in this seeking we are not wholly dependent  on that homing instinct. For some, who have climbed to the hill-tops,  that city is not really out of sight. The mystics see it and report to  us concerning it. Science and metaphysics may do their best and their  worst: but these pathfinders of the spirit never falter in their  statements concerning that independent spiritual world which is the  only goal of "pilgrim man." They say that messages come to  him from that spiritual world, that complete reality which we call  Absolute: that we are not, after all, hermetically sealed from it. To  all who will receive it, news comes of a world of Absolute Life,  Absolute Beauty, Absolute Truth, beyond the bourne of time and place:  news that most of us translate--and inevitably distort in the  process--into the language of religion, of beauty, of love, or of  pain.

[iii.i-p71]Of all those forms of life and thought with which  humanity has fed its craving for truth, mysticism alone postulates,  and in the persons of its great initiates proves, not only the  existence of the Absolute, but also this link: this possibility first  of knowing, finally of attaining it. It denies that possible knowledge  is to be limited (a) to sense impressions, (b) to   any process of intellection, [p. 24] [iii.i-Page_24] (c) to the   unfolding of the content of normal consciousness. Such  diagrams of experience, it says, are hopelessly incomplete. The  mystics find the basis of their method not in logic but in life: in  the existence of a discoverable "real," a spark of true  being, within the seeking subject, which can, in that ineffable  experience which they call the "act of union," fuse itself  with and thus apprehend the reality of the sought Object. In  theological language, their theory of knowledge is that the spirit of  man, itself essentially divine, is capable of immediate communion with  God, the One Reality.   [*20] 

[iii.i-p73]In mysticism that love of truth which we saw as the  beginning of all philosophy leaves the merely intellectual sphere, and  takes on the assured aspect of a personal passion. Where the  philosopher guesses and argues, the mystic lives and looks; and  speaks, consequently, the disconcerting language of first-hand  experience, not the neat dialectic of the schools. Hence whilst the  Absolute of the metaphysicians remains a diagram--impersonal and  unattainable--the Absolute of the mystics is lovable, attainable,  alive.

[iii.i-p74]"Oh, taste and see!" they cry, in accents  of astounding certainty and joy. "Ours is an experimental  science. We can but communicate our system, never its result. We come  to you not as thinkers, but as doers. Leave your deep and absurd trust  in the senses, with their language of dot and dash, which may possibly  report fact but can never communicate personality. If philosophy has  taught you anything, she has surely taught you the length of her  tether, and the impossibility of attaining to the doubtless admirable  grazing land which lies beyond it. One after another, idealists have  arisen who, straining frantically at the rope, have announced to the  world their approaching liberty; only to be flung back at last into  the little circle of sensation. But here we are, a small family, it is  true, yet one that refuses to die out, assuring you that we have  slipped the knot and are free of those grazing grounds. This is  evidence which you are bound to bring into account before you can add  up the sum total of possible knowledge; for you will find it  impossible to prove that the world as seen by the mystics,  'unimaginable, formless, dark with excess of bright,' is  less real than that which is expounded by the youngest and most  promising demonstrator of a physicochemical universe. We will be quite  candid with you. Examine us as much as you like: our machinery, our  veracity, our results. We cannot promise that you shall see what we  have seen, for here each man must adventure for himself; [p. 25] [iii.i-Page_25] but we defy you to stigmatize our experiences  as impossible or invalid. Is your world of experience so well and  logically founded that you dare make of it a standard? Philosophy  tells you that it is founded on nothing better than the reports of  your sensory apparatus and the traditional concepts of the race.  Certainly it is imperfect, probably it is illusion in any event, it  never touches the foundation of things. Whereas 'what the world,  which truly knows nothing, calls "mysticism" is the  science of ultimates, . . . the science of self-evident Reality, which  cannot be "reasoned about," because it is the object of  pure reason or perception.'"   [*21] 

[iii.i-p76][p. 26] [iii.i-Page_26]

Footnotes

^5:1 [iii.i-p6.1][iii.i-p7]         Even this I AM, which has seemed safe ground to most metaphysicians,    is of course combated by certain schools of philosophy. "The    word     Sum     ," said Eckhart long ago, "can be spoken by no creature    but by God only: for it becomes the creature to testify of itself     Non Sum     ." In a less mystical strain Lotze, and after him Bradley and    other modern writers, have devoted much destructive criticism to the    concept of the Ego as the starting-point of philosophy: looking upon    it as a large, and logically unwarrantable, assumption.

^5:2 [iii.i-p8.1][iii.i-p9]         Plato, "Phaedrus,"  section 250.

^6:3 [iii.i-p11.1][iii.i-p12]         Thus Eckhart, "Every time that the powers of the soul come    into contact with created things, they receive the     create      images and likenesses from the created thing and absorb them. In    this way arises the soul's knowledge of created things.    Created things cannot come nearer to the soul than this, and the    soul can only approach created things by the voluntary reception of    images. And it is through the presence of the image that the soul    approaches the created world: for     the          image is a Thing, which the soul creates      with her own powers. Does the soul want to know the nature of a    stone--horse--a man? She forms an    image."---Meister Eckhart, Pred. i. ("Mystische    Schriften," p. 15).

^7:4 [iii.i-p15.1][iii.i-p16]         Thus Edward Carpenter says of his own experience of the mystical    consciousness, "The perception seems to be one in which all    the senses unite into one sense" (quoted in Bucke's    "Cosmic Consciousness," p. 198).

^8:5 [iii.i-p19.1][iii.i-p20]         "A Pluralistic Universe," p. 10.

^12:6 [iii.i-p29.1][iii.i-p30]         There are four main groups of such schemes: (1) Subjective; (2)    Objective; (3) Transcendental (Kantian); (4) Absolute (Hegelian). To    this last belongs by descent the Immanental Idealism of Croce and    Gentile.

^14:7 [iii.i-p35.1][iii.i-p36]         Delacroix, "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 62.

^14:8 [iii.i-p36.1][iii.i-p37]         E. Towne, "Just how to Wake the Solar Plexus," p.    25.

^16:9 [iii.i-p43.1][iii.i-p44]         "Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 15.

^17:10 [iii.i-p44.1][iii.i-p45]         Or, as Aristotle, and after him St. Thomas Aquinas, suggest, a    contemplative animal, since "this act alone in man is proper    to him, and is in no way shared by any other being in this    world" ("Summa Contra Gentiles," 1. iii, cap.    xxxvii., Rickaby's translation).

^19:11 [iii.i-p51.1][iii.i-p52]         All the healing arts, from Aesculapius and Galen to Metchnikoff and    Mrs. Eddy, have virtually accepted and worked upon these two    principles.

^19:12 [iii.i-p52.1][iii.i-p53]         "De Imitatione Christi." I. ii. cap. vi.

^19:13 [iii.i-p53.1][iii.i-p54]         "Such as these, I say, as if enamoured by My honour and    famished for the food of souls, run to the table of the Most holy    Cross, willing to suffer pain. . . . To these, My most dear sons,    trouble is a pleasure, and pleasure and every consolation that the    world would offer them are a toil" (St. Catherine ofSiena,    Dialogo, cap. xxviii.). Here and throughout I have used    Thorold's translation.

^21:14 [iii.i-p58.1][iii.i-p59]         "Philosophy of Religion," vol. ii. p. 8.

^21:15 [iii.i-p59.1][iii.i-p60]         "Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 148.

^21:16 [iii.i-p61.1][iii.i-p62]         "Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 74.

^21:17 [iii.i-p62.1][iii.i-p63]         Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxvii.

^22:18 [iii.i-p64.1][iii.i-p65]         "Phaedrus,"  section 250 (Jowett's translation). The    reference in the phrase "he whose initiation is recent"    is to the rite of admission into the Orphic Mysteries. It is    believed by some authorities that the neophyte may have been cast    into an hypnotic sleep by his "initiator," and whilst in    this condition a vision of the "glories of the other    world" suggested to him. The main phenomena of    "conversion" would thus be artificially produced: but    the point of attack being the mind rather than the heart, the    results, as would appear from the context, were usually    transient.

^23:19 [iii.i-p68.1][iii.i-p69]         Royce, "The World and the Individual," vol. i. p.    181.

^24:20 [iii.i-p71.1][iii.i-p72]         The idea of Divine Union as man's true end is of course of    great antiquity. Its first definite appearance in the religious    consciousness of Europe seems to coincide with the establishment of    the Orphic Mysteries in Greece and Southern Italy in the sixth    century B.C. See Rohde: "Psyche," cap. 10, and Adam,    "The Religious Teachers of Greece," p. 92.

^25:21 [iii.i-p74.1][iii.i-p75]         Coventry Patmore, "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,"    "Aurea Dicta," cxxviii.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

II. Mysticism and   Vitalism

 [iii.ii][iii.ii-p1]We[iii.ii-p1.1] glanced, at the beginning of this inquiry, at the universes which  result from the various forms of credulity practised by the  materialist, the idealist, and the sceptic. We saw the mystic denying  by word and act the validity of the foundations on which those  universes are built: substituting his living experience for their  conceptual schemes. But there is another way of seeing reality or,  more correctly, one aspect of reality. This scheme of things possesses  the merit of accepting and harmonizing many different forms of  experience; even those supreme experiences and intuitions peculiar to  the mystics. The first distinct contribution of the twentieth century  to man's quest of the Real, it entered the philosophic arena  from several different directions; penetrating and modifying current  conceptions not only of philosophy but of religion, science, art and  practical life. It was applied by Driesch   [*22]    and other biologists in the sphere of organic life. Bergson,   [*23]    starting from psychology, developed its intellectual and metaphysical  implications; whilst Rudolph Eucken   [*24]    constructed from, or beside it, a philosophy of the Spirit, of  man's relations to the Real. [p. 27] [iii.ii-Page_27]

[iii.ii-p5]In all these we find the same principle; the principle  of a free spontaneous and creative life as the essence of Reality. Not  law but aliveness, incalculable and indomitable, is their  subject-matter: not human logic, but actual living experience is their  criterion of truth. Vitalists, whether the sphere of their  explorations be biology, psychology or ethics, see the whole Cosmos,  the physical and spiritual worlds, as instinct with initiative and  spontaneity: as above all things free. For them, nature, though  conditioned by the matter with which she works, is stronger than her  chains. Pushing out from within, ever seeking expression, she buds and  breaks forth into original creation.   [*25]    The iron "laws" of the determinists are merely her  observed habits, not her fetters: and man, seeing nature in the terms  of "cause and effect," has been the dupe of his own  limitations and prejudices.

[iii.ii-p7]Bergson, Nietzsche, Eucken, differing in their opinion  as to life's meaning, are alike in this vision: in the stress  which they lay on the supreme importance and value of life--a  great Cosmic life transcending and including our own. This is  materialism inside out: for here what we call the universe is  presented as an expression of life, not life as an expression or  by-product of the universe. The strange passionate philosophy of  Nietzsche is really built upon an intense belief in this supernal  nature and value of Life, Action and Strength: and spoilt by the  one-sided individualism which prevented him from holding a just  balance between the great and significant life of the Ego and the  greater and more significant life of the All.

[iii.ii-p8]Obviously, the merit of vitalistic philosophy lies in  its ability to satisfy so many different thinkers, starting from such  diverse points in our common experience. On the phenomenal side it can  accept and transfigure the statements of physical science. In its  metaphysical aspect it leaves place for those ontological speculations  which seem to take their rise in psychology. It is friendly to those  who demand an important place for moral and spiritual activity in the  universe. Finally--though here we must be content with deduction  rather than declaration--it leaves in the hands of the mystics  that power of attaining to Absolute Reality which they have always  claimed: shows them as the true possessors of freedom, the  torch-bearers of the race.

[iii.ii-p9]Did it acknowledge its ancestors with that reverence  which is their due, Vitalism would identify itself with the mystic  philosopher, [p. 28] [iii.ii-Page_28] Heracleitus; who, in the  fifth century B.C., introduced its central idea to the European world   [*26]   : for his "Logos" or Energizing Fire is but another symbol  for that free and living Spirit of Becoming, that indwelling creative  power, which Vitalism acknowledges as the very soul or immanent  reality of things. It is in essence both a Hellenic and a Christian  system of thought. In its view of the proper function of the intellect  it has some unexpected affinities with Aristotle, and after him with  St. Thomas Aquinas; regarding it as a departmental affair, not the  organ of ultimate knowledge. Its theory of knowledge is close to that  of the mystics: or would be, if those gazers on reality had interested  themselves in any psychological theory of their own experiences.

[iii.ii-p11]A philosophy which can harmonize such diverse elements  as these, and make its influence felt in so many fields of thought,  may be useful in our present attempt towards an understanding of  mysticism: for it illustrates certain aspects of perceived reality  which other systems ignore. It has the further recommendation of  involving not a mere diagram of metaphysical possibilities, but a  genuine theory of knowledge. Its scope includes psychology as well as  philosophy: the consideration, not only of the nature of Reality but  also of the self's power of knowing it--the machinery of  contact between the mind and the flux of things. Thus it has an  inclusive quality lacking in the tidy ring-fenced systems of other  schools of thought. It has no edges, and if it be true to itself  should have no negations. It is a vision, not a map.

[iii.ii-p12]The primary difference between Vitalism and the  classic philosophic schools is this. Its focal point is not Being but  Becoming.   [*27]    Translated into Platonic language, not the changeless One, the  Absolute, transcending all succession, but rather His energizing  Thought--the Son, the Creative Logos--is the supreme reality  which it proposes as accessible to human consciousness.

[iii.ii-p14]"All things," said Heracleitus, "are  in a state of flux." "Everything happens through  strife." "Reality is a condition of unrest."   [*28]    Such is also the opinion of Bergson and Alexander; who, agreeing in  this with the conclusions of physical science, look upon the Real as  dynamic rather than static, as   becoming    rather than   being    [p. 29] [iii.ii-Page_29] perfect, and invite us to see in  Time--the precession or flux of things--the very stuff of  reality--

   [iii.ii-p15.1] "From the fixed lull of Heaven she saw
   Time like a pulse shake fierce
   Through all the worlds"--   [*29]  
  [iii.ii-p17]said Rossetti of the Blessed Damozel. So Bergson,  while ignoring if he does not deny the existence of the "fixed  lull," the still Eternity, the point of rest, finds everywhere  the pulse of Time, the vast unending storm of life and love. Reality,  says Bergson, is pure creative Life; a definition which excludes those  ideas of perfection and finality involved in the idealist's  concept of Pure Being as the Absolute and Unchanging One.   [*30]    This life, as he sees it, is fed from within rather than upheld from  without. It evolves by means of its own inherent and spontaneous  creative power. The biologist's Nature "so careful of the  type"; the theologian's Creator transcending His universe,  and "holding all things in the hollow of His hand": these  are gone, and in their place we have a universe teeming with free  individuals, each self-creative, each evolving eternally, yet towards  no term.

[iii.ii-p19]Here, then, the deep instinct of the human mind that  there must be a unity, an orderly plan in the universe, that the  strung-along beads of experience do really form a rosary, though it be  one which we cannot repeat, is deliberately thwarted. Creation,  Activity, Movement; this, says Vitalism, rather than any merely  apparent law and order, any wholeness, is the essential quality of the  Realms the Real: and life is an eternal Becoming, a ceaseless  changefulness. At its highest it may be conceived as "the  universe flowering into deity,"   [*31]    As the Hermetic philosophers found in the principle of analogy,  [iii.ii-p20.1]  "Quod inferius sicut quod superius,"       [*32]   the Key of Creation, so we are invited to see in that uninterrupted  change which is the condition of our normal consciousness, a true  image, a microcosm of the living universe as a part of which that  consciousness has been evolved.

[iii.ii-p22]If we accept this theory, we must then impute to life  in its fullness--the huge, many levelled, many coloured life, the  innumerable worlds which escape the rhythm of our senses; not merely  that patch of physical life which those senses perceive--a  divinity, a greatness of destiny far beyond that with which it is  credited by those who hold to a physico-chemical theory of the [p. 30] [iii.ii-Page_30] universe. We must perceive in it, as some  mystics have done, "the beating of the Heart of God"; and  agree with Heracleitus that "there is but one wisdom, to  understand the knowledge by which all things are steered through the  All."   [*33]    Union with reality--apprehension of it--will upon this  hypothesis be union with life at its most intense point: in its most  dynamic aspect. It will be a deliberate harmony set up with the Logos  which that same philosopher described as "man's most  constant companion."   Ergo,    says the mystic, union with a Personal and Conscious spiritual  existence, immanent in the world--one form, one half of the union  which I have always sought, since this is clearly life in its highest  manifestation. Beauty, Goodness, Splendour, Love, all those shining  words which exhilarate the soul, are but the names of aspects or  qualities picked out by human intuition as characteristic of this  intense and eternal Life in which is the life of men.

[iii.ii-p24]How, then, may we knew this Life, this creative and  original soul of things, in which we are bathed; in which, as in a  river, swept along? Not, says Bergson bluntly, by any intellectual  means. The mind which thinks it knows Reality because it has made a  diagram of Reality, is merely the dupe of its own categories. The  intellect is a specialized aspect of the self, a form of  consciousness: but specialized for very different purposes than those  of metaphysical speculation. Life has evolved it in the interests of  life; has made it capable of dealing with "solids," with  concrete things. With these it is at home. Outside of them it becomes  dazed, uncertain of itself; for it is no longer doing its natural  work, which is to   help    life, not to   know    it. In the interests of experience, and in order to grasp  perceptions, the intellect breaks up experience, which is in reality a  continuous stream, an incessant process of change and response with no  separate parts, into purely conventional "moments,"  "periods," or psychic "states." It picks out  from the flow of reality those bits which are significant for human  life; which "interest" it, catch its attention. From these  it makes up a mechanical world in which it dwells, and which seems  quite real until it is subjected to criticism. It does, says Bergson,  the work of a cinematograph: takes snapshots of something which is  always moving, and by means of these successive static  representations--none of which are real, because Life, the object  photographed, never was at rest--it recreates a picture of life,  of motion. This rather jerky representation of divine harmony, from  which innumerable moments are left out, is useful for practical  purposes: but it is not reality, because it is not alive.   [*34]    [p. 31] [iii.ii-Page_31]

[iii.ii-p26]This "real world," then, is the result of  your selective activity, and the nature of your selection is largely  outside your control. Your cinematograph machine goes at a certain  pace, takes its snapshots at certain intervals. Anything which goes  too quickly for these intervals, it either fails to catch, or merges  with preceding and succeeding movements to form a picture with which  it can deal. Thus we treat, for instance, the storm of vibrations  which we convert into "sound" and "light."  Slacken or accelerate its clock-time, change its rhythmic activity,  and at once you take a different series of snapshots, and have as a  result a different picture of the world. Thanks to the time at which  the normal human machine is set, it registers for us what we call, in  our simple way, "the natural world." A slight accession of  humility or common sense might teach us that a better title would be  "  our    natural world."

[iii.ii-p27]Let human consciousness change or transcend its  rhythm, and any other aspect of any other world may be ours as a  result. Hence the mystics' claim that in their ecstasies they  change the conditions of consciousness, and apprehend a deeper reality  which is unrelated to human speech, cannot be dismissed as  unreasonable. Do not then confuse that surface-consciousness which man  has trained to be an organ of utility and nothing more--and which  therefore can only deal adequately with the "given" world  of sense--with that mysterious something in you, that ground of  personality, inarticulate but inextinguishable, by which you are aware  that a greater truth exists. This truth, whose neighbourhood you feel,  and for which you long, is Life. You are in it all the while,  "like a fish in the sea, like a bird in the air," as St.  Mechthild of Hackborn said many centuries ago.   [*35] 

[iii.ii-p29]Give yourself, then, to this divine and infinite life,  this mysterious Cosmic activity in which you are immersed, of which  you are born. Trust it. Let it surge in on you. Cast off, as the  mystics are always begging you to do, the fetters of the senses, the  "remora of desire"; and making your interests identical  with those of the All, rise to freedom, to that spontaneous, creative  life which, inherent in every individual self, is our share of the  life of the Universe. You are yourself   vital   --a free centre of energy--did you but know it. You can move  to higher levels, to greater reality, truer self-fulfilment, if you  will. Though you be, as Plato said, like an oyster in your shell, you  can open that shell to the living waters without, draw from the  "Immortal Vitality." Thus only--by contact with the  real--shall you   know    reality. [iii.ii-p29.1]  Cot ad cot loquitur.   

[iii.ii-p30]The Indian mystics declare substantially the same  truth when they say that the illusion of finitude is only to be  escaped by [p. 32] [iii.ii-Page_32] relapsing into the  substantial and universal life, abolishing individuality. So too, by a  deliberate self-abandonment to that which Plato calls the  "saving madness" of ecstasy, did the initiates of Dionysus  "draw near to God." So their Christian cousins assert that  "self-surrender" is the only way: that they must die to  live, must lose to find: that knowing implies being: that the method  and secret which they have always practiced consists merely in a meek  and loving union--the synthesis of passion and  self-sacrifice--with that divine and unseparated life, that  larger consciousness in which the soul is grounded, and which they  hold to be an aspect of the life of God. In their hours of  contemplation, they deliberately empty themselves of the false images  of the intellect, neglect the cinematograph of sense. Then only are  they capable of transcending the merely intellectual levels of  consciousness, and perceiving that Reality which "hath no  image."

[iii.ii-p31]"Pilgrimage to the place of the wise,"  said Jalalu 'ddin, "is to find escape from the flame of  separation." It is the mystics' secret in a nutshell.  "When I stand empty   in    God's will and empty   of    God's will and of all His works and of God Himself,"  cries Eckhart with his usual violence of language,   "then    am I above all creatures and am neither God nor creature, but I am  what I was and evermore shall be."   [*36]    He attains, that is to say, by this escape from a narrow selfhood,  not to identity with God--that were only conceivable upon a basis  of pantheism--but to an identity with his own substantial life,  and through it with the life of a real and living universe; in  symbolic language, with "the thought of the Divine Mind"  whereby union with that Mind in the essence or ground of the soul  becomes possible. The first great message of Vitalistic philosophy is  then seen to be--Cease to identify your intellect and your self:  a primary lesson which none who purpose the study of mysticism may  neglect. Become at least aware of, if you cannot "know,"  the larger, truer self: that root and depth of spirit, as St.  Francois de Sales calls it, from which intellect and feeling grow  as fingers from the palm of the hand--that free creative self  which constitutes your true life, as distinguished from the scrap of  consciousness which is its servant.

[iii.ii-p33]How then, asks the small consciously-seeking  personality of the normal man, am I to become aware of this, my larger  self, and of the free, eternal, spiritual life which it lives?

[iii.ii-p34]Here philosophy, emerging from the water-tight  compartment in which metaphysics have lived too long retired, calls in  psychology; and tells us that in intuition, in a bold reliance on  contact between the totality of the self and the external  world--perhaps too in those strange states of lucidity which  accompany [p. 33] [iii.ii-Page_33] great emotion and defy  analysis--lies the normal man's best chance of attaining,  as it were, a swift and sidelong knowledge of this real. Smothered in  daily life by the fretful activities of our surface-mind, reality  emerges in our great moments; and, seeing ourselves in its radiance,  we know, for good or evil, what we are. "We are not pure  intellects . . . around our conceptional and logical thought there  remains a vague, nebulous Somewhat, the substance at whose expense the  luminous nucleus we call the intellect is formed."   [*37]    In this aura, this diffused sensitiveness, we are asked to find  man's medium of communication with the Universal Life.

[iii.ii-p36]Such fragmentary, dim and unverifiable perceptions of  the Real, however, such "excursions into the Absolute,"  cannot be looked upon as a satisfaction of man's hunger for  Truth. He does not want to peep, but to live. Hence he cannot be  satisfied with anything less than a total and permanent adjustment of  his being to the greater life of reality. This alone can resolve the  disharmonies between the self and the world, and give meaning and  value to human life.   [*38]    The possibility of this adjustment--of union between man's  life and that "independent spiritual life" which is the  stuff of reality--is the theme alike of mysticism and of  Eucken's spiritual vitalism or Activistic Philosophy.   [*39]    Reality, says Eucken, is an independent spiritual world,  unconditioned by the apparent world of sense. To know it and to live  in it is man's true destiny. His point of contact with it is  personality: the inward fount of his being: his heart, not his head.  Man is real, and in the deepest sense alive, in virtue of this free  personal life-principle within him; but he is bound and blinded by the  ties set up between his surface-intelligence and the sense-world. The  struggle for reality must be a struggle on man's part to  transcend the sense-world, escape its bondage. He must renounce it,  and be "re-born" to a higher level of consciousness;  shifting his centre of interest from the natural to the spiritual  plane. According to the thoroughness with which he does this, will be  the amount of real life he enjoys. The initial break with the  "world," the refusal to spend one's life communing  with one's own cinematograph picture, is essential [p. 34] [iii.ii-Page_34] if the freedom of the infinite is to be  attained. We are amphibious creatures: our life moves upon two levels  at once--the natural and the spiritual. The key to the puzzle of  man lies in the fact that he is "the meeting point of various  stages of Reality."   [*40]    All his difficulties and triumphs are grounded in this. The whole  question for him is, which world shall be central for him--the  real, vital, all-embracing life we call spirit, or the lower life of  sense? Shall "Existence," the superficial obvious thing,  or "Substance," the underlying verity, be his home? Shall  he remain the slave of the senses with their habits and customs, or  rise to a plane of consciousness, of heroic endeavour, in  which--participating in the life of spirit--he knows reality  because he is real?

[iii.ii-p40]The mystics, one and all, have answered this question  in the same sense, and proved in their own experience that the  premises of "Activism" are true. This application of the  vitalistic idea to the transcendental world, does in fact fit the  observed facts of mysticism far more closely even than it fits the  observed facts of man's ordinary mental life.

[iii.ii-p41](1) The primary break with the sense-world. (2) The  "new" birth and development of the spiritual consciousness  on high levels--in Eucken's eyes an essential factor in the  attainment of reality. (3) That ever closer and deeper dependence on  and appropriation of the fullness of the Divine Life; a conscious  participation, and active union with the infinite and eternal. These  three imperatives, as we shall see later, form an exact description of  the psychological process through which the mystics pass. If then this  transcendence is the highest destiny of the race, mysticism becomes  the crown of man's ascent towards Reality; the orderly  completion of the universal plan.

[iii.ii-p42]The mystics show us this independent spiritual life,  this fruition of the Absolute, enjoyed with a fullness to which others  cannot attain. They are the heroic examples of the life of spirit; as  the great artists, the great discoverers, are the heroic examples of  the life of beauty and the life of truth. Directly participating, like  all artists, in the Divine Life, they are usually persons of great  vitality: but this vitality expresses itself in unusual forms, hard of  understanding for ordinary men. When we see a picture or a poem, hear  a musical composition, we accept it as an expression of life, an  earnest of the power which brought it forth. But the deep  contemplations of the great mystic, his visionary reconstructions of  reality, and the fragments of them which he is able to report, do not  seem to us--as they are--the equivalents, or more often the  superiors of the artistic and scientific achievements of other great  men. [p. 35] [iii.ii-Page_35]

[iii.ii-p43]Mysticism, then, offers us the history, as old as  civilization, of a race of adventurers who have carried to its term  the process of a deliberate and active return to the divine fount of  things. They have surrendered themselves to the life-movement of the  universe, hence have lived with an intenser life than other men can  ever know; have transcended the "sense-world" in order to  live on high levels the spiritual life. Therefore they witness to all  that our latent spiritual consciousness, which shows itself in the  "hunger for the Absolute," can be made to mean to us if we  develop it; and have in this respect a unique importance for the race.  It is the mystics, too, who have perfected that method of intuition,  that knowledge by union, the existence of which philosophy has been  driven to acknowledge. But where the metaphysician obtains at best a  sidelong glance at that Being "unchanging yet elusive,"  whom he has so often defined but never discovered, the artist a brief  and dazzling vision of the Beauty which is Truth, they gaze with  confidence into the very eyes of the Beloved.

[iii.ii-p44]The mystics, again, are, by their very constitution,  acutely conscious of the free and active "World of  Becoming," the Divine Immanence and its travail. It is in them  and they are in it: or, as they put it in their blunt theological way,  "the Spirit of God is within you." But they are not  satisfied with this statement and this knowledge; and here it is that  they part company with vitalism. It is, they think, but half a truth.  To know Reality in this way, to know it in its dynamic aspect, enter  into "the great life of the All": this is indeed, in the  last resort, to know it supremely from the point of view of  man--to liberate from selfhood the human consciousness--but  it is not to know it from the point of view of God. There are planes  of being beyond this; countries dark to the intellect, deeps into  which only the very greatest contemplatives have looked. These, coming  forth, have declared with Ruysbroeck that "God according to the  Persons is Eternal Work, but according to the Essence and Its  perpetual stillness He is Eternal Rest."   [*41] 

[iii.ii-p46]The full spiritual consciousness of the true mystic is  developed not in one, but in two apparently opposite but really  complementary directions:--

   [iii.ii-p46.1] ". . . io vidi
   Ambo le corte del ciel manifeste."   [*42]  
  [iii.ii-p48]On the one hand he is intensely aware of, and knows  himself to be at one with that active World of Becoming, that immanent  Life, from which his own life takes its rise. Hence, though he has  broken [p. 36] [iii.ii-Page_36] for ever with the bondage of the  senses, he perceives in every manifestation of life a sacramental  meaning; a loveliness, a wonder, a heightened significance, which is  hidden from other men. He may, with St. Francis, call the Sun and the  Moon, Water and Fire, his brothers and his sisters: or receive, with  Blake, the message of the trees. Because of his cultivation of  disinterested love, because his outlook is not conditioned by  "the exclusive action of the will-to-live," he has  attained the power of communion with the living reality of the  universe; and in this respect can truly say that he finds "God  in all and all in God." Thus, the skilled spiritual vision of  Lady Julian, transcending the limitations of human perception,  entering into harmony with a larger world whose rhythms cannot be  received by common men,   saw    the all-enfolding Divine Life, the mesh of reality. "For as the  body is clad in the cloth," she said, "and the flesh in  the skin and the bones in the flesh and the heart in the whole, so are  we, soul and body, clad in the Goodness of God and enclosed. Yea, and  more homely: for all these may waste and wear away, but the Goodness  of God is ever whole."   [*43]    Many mystical poets and pantheistic mystics never pass beyond this  degree of lucidity.

[iii.ii-p50]On the other hand, the full mystic consciousness also  attains to what is, I think, its really characteristic quality. It  develops the power of apprehending the Absolute, Pure Being, the  utterly Transcendent: or, as its possessor would say, can experience  "passive union with God." This all-round expansion of  consciousness, with its dual power of knowing by communion the  temporal and eternal, immanent and transcendent aspects of  reality--the life of the All, vivid, flowing and changing, and  the changeless, conditionless life of the One--is the peculiar  mark, the [iii.ii-p50.1]  ultimo sigillo     of the great mystic, and must never be forgotten in  studying his life and work.

[iii.ii-p51]As the ordinary man is the meeting-place between two  stages of reality--the sense-world and the world of spiritual  life--so the mystic, standing head and shoulders above ordinary  men, is again the meeting-place between two orders. Or, if you like it  better, he is able to perceive and react to reality under two modes.  On the one hand he knows, and rests in, the eternal world of Pure  Being, the "Sea Pacific" of the Godhead, indubitably  present to him in his ecstasies, attained by him in the union of love.  On the other, he knows--and works in--that "stormy  sea," the vital World of Becoming which is the expression of Its  will. "Illuminated men," says Ruysbroeck, "are  caught up, above the reason, into naked vision. There the Divine Unity  dwells and calls them. Hence their bare vision, cleansed and free,  penetrates the activity [p. 37] [iii.ii-Page_37] of all created  things, and pursues it to search it out even to its height."   [*44] 

[iii.ii-p53]Though philosophy has striven since thought  began--and striven in vain--to resolve the paradox of Being  and Becoming, of Eternity and Time, she has failed strangely enough to  perceive that a certain type of personality has substituted experience  for her guesses at truth; and achieved its solution, not by the  dubious processes of thought, but by direct perception. To the great  mystic the "problem of the Absolute" presents itself in  terms of life, not in terms of dialectic. He solves it in terms of  life: by a change or growth of consciousness which--thanks to his  peculiar genius--enables him to apprehend that two-fold Vision of  Reality which eludes the perceptive powers of other men. It is  extraordinary that this fact of experience a central fact for the  understanding of the contemplative type--has received so little  attention from writers upon mysticism. As we proceed with our inquiry,  its importance, its far-reaching implications in the domains of  psychology, of theology, of action, will become more and more evident.  It provides the reason why the mystics could never accept the diagram  of the Vitalists or Evolutionists as a complete statement of the  nature of Reality. "Whatever be the limits of your knowledge, we  know"--they would say--"that the world has  another aspect than this: the aspect which is present to the Mind of  God." "Tranquillity according to His essence, activity  according to His nature: perfect stillness, perfect fecundity,"   [*45]    says Ruysbroeck again, this is the two-fold character of the  Absolute. That which to us is action, to Him, they declare, is rest,  "His very peace and stillness coming from the brimming fullness  of His infinite life."   [*46]    That which to us is Many, to that Transcendent Knower is One. Our  World of Becoming rests on the bosom of that Pure Being which has ever  been the final Object of man's quest: the "river in which  we cannot bathe twice" is the stormy flood of life flowing  toward that divine sea. "How glorious," says the Voice of  the Eternal to St. Catherine of Siena, "is that soul which has  indeed been able to pass from the stormy ocean to Me, the Sea Pacific,  and in that Sea, which is Myself, to fill the pitcher of her  heart."   [*47] 

[iii.ii-p57]The evolution of the mystic consciousness, then,  brings its possessors to this transcendent point of view: their secret  is this unity in diversity, this stillness in strife. Here they are in  harmony with Heracleitus rather than with his modern interpreters.  That [p. 38] [iii.ii-Page_38] most mystical of philosophers  discerned a hidden unity beneath the battle, transcending all created  opposites, and taught his disciples that "Having hearkened not  unto me but unto the Logos, it is wise to confess that all things are   one."    [*48]   This is the secret at which the idealists' and concept of Pure  Being has tried, so timidly, to hint: and which the Vitalists'  more intimate, more actual concept of Becoming has tried, so  unnecessarily, to destroy. We shall see the glorious raiment in which  the Christian mystics deck it when we come to consider their  theological map of the quest.

[iii.ii-p59]If it be objected--and this objection has been  made by advocates of each school of thought--that the existence  of the idealists' and mystics' "Absolute" is  utterly inconsistent with the deeply alive, striving life which the  Vitalists identify with reality, I reply that both concepts at bottom  are but symbols of realities which the human mind can never reach: and  that the idea of stillness, unity and peace is and has ever been  humanity's best translation of its intuition of the achieved  Perfection of God. "'In the midst of silence a hidden word  was spoken to me.' Where is this Silence, and where is the place  in which this word is spoken? It is in the purest that the soul can  produce, in her noblest part, in the Ground, even the Being of the  Soul."   [*49]    So Eckhart: and here he does but subscribe to a universal tradition.  The mystics have always insisted that "Be still, be still, and   know   " is the condition of man's purest and most direct  apprehensions of reality: that he experiences in quiet the truest and  deepest activity: and Christianity when she formulated her philosophy  made haste to adopt and express this paradox.

[iii.ii-p61][iii.ii-p61.1]  "Quid es ergo, Deus meus?"     said St. Augustine, and gave an answer in which the  vision of the mystic, the genius of the philosopher, combined to hint  something at least of the paradox of intimacy and majesty in that  all-embracing, all-transcending One. "Summe, optime,  potentissime, omnipotentissime, misericordissime et justissime,  secretissime et presentissime, pulcherrime et fortissime; stabilis et  incomprehensibilis; immutabilis, mutans omnia. Numquam novus, nunquam  vetus. . . . Semper agens, semper quietus: colligens et non egens:  portans et implens et protegens; creans et nutriens et perficiens:  quaerens cum nihil desit tibi. . . . Quid dicimus, Deus meus, vita  mea, dulcedo mea sancta? Aut quid dicit aliquis, cum de te  dicit?"   [*50]    [p. 39] [iii.ii-Page_39]

[iii.ii-p63]It has been said that "Whatever we may do, our  hunger for the Absolute will never cease." This  hunger--that innate craving for, and intuition of, a final Unity,  an unchanging good--will go on, however heartily we may feed on  those fashionable systems which offer us a dynamic or empirical  universe. If, now, we admit in all living creatures--as Vitalists  must do--an instinct of self-preservation, a free directive force  which may be trusted and which makes for life: is it just to deny such  an instinct to the human soul? The "entelechy" of the  Vitalists, the "hidden steersman," drives the phenomenal  world on and up. What about that other sure instinct embedded in the  race, breaking out again and again, which drives the spirit on and up;  spurs it eternally towards an end which it feels to be definite yet  cannot define? Shall we distrust this instinct for the Absolute, as  living and ineradicable as any other of our powers, merely because  philosophy finds it difficult to accommodate and to describe?

[iii.ii-p64]"We must," says Plato in the  "Timaeus," "make a distinction of the two great  forms of being, and ask, 'What is that which Is and has no  Becoming, and what is that which is always becoming and never  Is?'"   [*51]    Without necessarily subscribing to the Platonic answer to this  question, we may surely acknowledge that the question itself is sound  and worth asking; that it expresses a perennial demand of human  nature; and that the analogy of man's other instincts and  cravings assures us that these his fundamental demands always indicate  the existence of a supply.   [*52]    The great defect of Vitalism, considered as a system, is that it only  answers half the question; the half which Absolute Idealism disdained  to answer at all.

[iii.ii-p67]We have seen that the mystical experience, the fullest  all-round experience in regard to the transcendental world which  humanity has attained, declares that there are two aspects, two planes  of discoverable Reality. We have seen also that hints of these two  planes--often clear statements concerning them--abound in  mystical literature of the personal first-hand type.   [*53]    Pure Being, [p. 40] [iii.ii-Page_40] says Boutroux in the course  of his exposition of Boehme,   [*54]    has two characteristic manifestations. It shows itself to us as  Power, by means of strife, of the struggle and opposition of its own  qualities. But it shows itself to us as Reality, in harmonizing and  reconciling within itself these discordant opposites.

[iii.ii-p70]Its manifestation as Power, then, is for us in the  dynamic World of Becoming, amidst the thud and surge of that life  which is compounded of paradox, of good and evil, joy and sorrow, life  and death. Here, Boehme declares that the Absolute God is voluntarily  self-revealing. But each revelation has as its condition the  appearance of its opposite: light can only be recognized at the price  of knowing darkness, life needs death, love needs wrath. Hence if Pure  Being--the Good, Beautiful and True--is to reveal itself, it  must do so by evoking and opposing its contrary: as in the Hegelian  dialectic no idea is complete without its negative. Such a revelation  by strife, however, is rightly felt by man to be incomplete. Absolute  Reality, the Player whose sublime music is expressed at the cost of  this everlasting friction between bow and lyre, is present, it is  true, in His music. But He is best known in that "light  behind," that unity where all these opposites are lifted up into  harmony, into a higher synthesis; and the melody is perceived, not as  a difficult progress of sound, but as a whole.

[iii.ii-p71]We have, then, (  a   ) The achieved Reality which the Greeks, and every one after them,  meant by that seemingly chill abstraction which they called Pure  Being: that Absolute One, unconditioned and undiscoverable, in Whom  all is resumed. In the undifferentiated Godhead of Eckhart, the  Transcendent Father of orthodox Christian theology, we see the  mind's attempt to conceive that "wholly other"  Reality, unchanging yet changer of all. It is the great contribution  of the mystics to humanity's knowledge of the real that they  find in this Absolute, in defiance of the metaphysicians, a personal  object of love, the goal of their quest, a "Living One who lives  first and lives perfectly, and Who, touching me, the inferior,  derivative life, can cause me to live by Him and for His sake"   [*55]   .

[iii.ii-p73](  b   ) But, contradicting the nihilism of Eastern contemplatives, they see  also a reality in the dynamic side of things: in the seething pot of  appearance. They are aware of an eternal Becoming, a striving, free,  evolving life; not merely as a shadow-show, but as an implicit of  their Cosmos felt also in the travail of their own  souls--God's manifestation or showing, in which He is  immanent, in which His Spirit truly works and strives. It is in   this    plane of [p. 41] [iii.ii-Page_41] reality that all individual  life is immersed: this is the stream which set out from the Heart of  God and "turns again home."

[iii.ii-p74]The mystic knows his task to be the attainment of  Being, Eternal Life, union with the One, the "return to the  Father's heart": for the parable of the Prodigal Son is to  him the history of the universe. This union is to be attained, first  by cooperation in that Life which bears him up, in which he is  immersed. He must become conscious of this "great life of the  All," merge himself in it, if he would find his way back whence  he came. [iii.ii-p74.1]   Vae soli       .    Hence there are really two distinct acts of "divine  union," two distinct kinds of illumination involved in the  Mystic Way: the dual character of the spiritual consciousness brings a  dual responsibility in its train. First, there is the union with Life,  with the World of Becoming: and parallel with it, the illumination by  which the mystic "gazes upon a more veritable world."  Secondly, there is the union with Being, with the One: and that final,  ineffable illumination of pure love which is called the  "knowledge of God." It is through the development of the  third factor, the free, creative "spirit," the scrap of  Absolute Life which is the ground of his soul, that the mystic can (a)  conceive and (b) accomplish these transcendent acts. Only Being can  know Being: we "behold that which we are, and are that which we  behold." But there is a spark in man's soul, say the  mystics, which is real--which in fact is--and by its  cultivation we may know reality. "Thus," says Von  Hugel "a real succession, real efforts, and the continuous  sense of limitation and inadequacy are the very means in and through  which man apprehends increasingly (if only he thus loves and wills)  the contrasting yet sustaining Simultaneity, Spontaneity, Infinity,  and pure action of the Eternal Life of God."   [*56] 

[iii.ii-p76]Over and over again--as Being and Becoming, as  Eternity and Time, as Transcendence and Immanence, Reality and  Appearance, the One and the Many--these two dominant ideas,  demands, imperious instincts of man's self will reappear; the  warp and woof of his completed universe. On the one hand is his  intuition of a remote, unchanging Somewhat calling him: on the other  there is his longing for and as clear intuition of an intimate,  adorable Somewhat, companioning him. Man's true Real, his only  adequate God, must be great enough to embrace this sublime paradox, to  take up these apparent negations into a higher synthesis. Neither the  utter transcendence of extreme Absolutism, nor the utter immanence of  the Vitalists will do. Both these, taken alone, are declared by the  mystics to be incomplete. They conceive that Absolute Being who is the  goal of their quest as manifesting Himself in a World of Becoming:  working in it, at one with it [p. 42] [iii.ii-Page_42] yet though  [iii.ii-p76.1]  semper agens,     also [iii.ii-p76.2]  semper quietus    .The Divine spirit which they know to be immanent in  the heart and in the universe comes forth from and returns to the  Transcendent One; and this division of persons in unity of substance  completes the "Eternal Circle, from Goodness, through Goodness,  to Goodness."

[iii.ii-p77]Absolute Being and Becoming, the All and the One, are  found to be alike inadequate to their definition of this discovered  Real; the "triple star of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty."  Speaking always from experience--the most complete experience  achieved by man--they assure us of an Absolute which overpasses  and includes the Absolute of philosophy, far transcends that Cosmic  life which it fills and sustains, and is best defined in terms of  Transcendent Personality; which because of its unspeakable richness  and of the poverty of human speech, they have sometimes been driven to  define only by negations. At once static and dynamic, above life and  in it, "all love yet all law," eternal in essence though  working in time, this vision resolves the contraries which tease those  who study it from without, and swallows up whilst it kindles to life  all the partial interpretations of metaphysics and of science.

[iii.ii-p78]Here then stands the mystic. By the help of two types  of philosophy, eked out by the resources of symbolic expression and  suggestion, he has contrived to tell us something of his vision and  his claim. Confronted by that vision--that sublime intuition of  eternity--we may surely ask, indeed are bound to ask, "What  is the machinery by which this self, akin to the imprisoned and  sense-fed self of our daily experience, has contrived to slip its  fetters and rise to those levels of spiritual perception on which  alone such vision can be possible to man? How has it brought within  the field of consciousness those deep intuitions which fringe upon  Absolute Life; how developed powers by which it is enabled to arrive  at this amazing, this superhuman concept of the nature of  Reality?" Psychology will do something, perhaps, to help us to  an answer to this question; and it is her evidence which we must  examine next. But for the fullest and most satisfying answer we must  go to the mystics; and they reply to our questions, when we ask them,  in the direct and uncompromising terms of action, not in the refined  and elusive periods of speculative thought.

[iii.ii-p79]"Come with us," they say to the bewildered  and entangled self, craving for finality and peace, "and we will  show you a way out that shall not only be an issue from your prison,  but also a pathway to your Home. True, you are immersed, fold upon  fold, in the World of Becoming; worse, you are besieged on all sides  by the persistent illusions of sense. But you too are a child of the  Absolute. You bear within you the earnest of your inheritance. At the  apex of [p. 43] [iii.ii-Page_43] your spirit there is a little  door, so high up that only by hard climbing can you reach it. There  the Object of your craving stands and knocks; thence came those  persistent messages--faint echoes from the Truth eternally  hammering at your gates--which disturbed the comfortable life of  sense. Come up then by this pathway, to those higher levels of reality  to which, in virtue of the eternal spark in you, you belong. Leave  your ignoble ease, your clever prattle, your absurd attempts to solve  the apparent contradictions of a Whole too great for your useful  little mind to grasp. Trust your deep instincts: use your latent  powers. Appropriate that divine, creative life which is the very  substance of your being. Remake yourself in its interest, if you would  know its beauty and its truth. You can only behold that which you   are.    Only the Real can know Reality."

   

[iii.ii-p79.1]NOTE TO THE TWELFTH EDITION

[iii.ii-p80]THE changed philosophic outlook since this chapter was  first written, eighteen years ago, has now given to it a somewhat  old-fashioned air. The ideas of Bergson and Eucken no longer occupy  the intellectual foreground. Were I now writing it for the first time,  my examples would be chosen from other philosophers, and especially  from those who are bringing back into modern thought the critical  realism of the scholastics. But the position which is here  defended--that a limited dualism, a "Two-step  philosophy," is the only type of metaphysic adequate to the  facts of mystical experience remains in my own mind as true as before.  Now that mysticism enjoys the patronage of many pious monists and  philosophic naturalists, this view seems more than ever in need of  strong and definite statement.

[iii.ii-p81][p. 44] [iii.ii-Page_44]

Footnotes

^26:22 [iii.ii-p1.2][iii.ii-p2]         "The Science and Philosophy of Organism," Gifford    Lectures. 1907-8.

^26:23 [iii.ii-p2.1][iii.ii-p3]         "Les Donnees Immediates de la Conscience"    (1889), "Matiere et Memoire" (1896),    "L'Evolution Creatrice" (1907).

^26:24 [iii.ii-p3.1][iii.ii-p4]         "Der Kampf um einen geistigen Lebensinhalt" (1896),    "Der Sinn und Wert den Lebens" (1908), &c.ee    Bibliography.

^27:25 [iii.ii-p5.1][iii.ii-p6]         The researches of Driesch (    op. cit     .) and of de Pries ("The Mutation Theory," 1910) have    done much to establish the truth of this contention upon the    scientific plane. Now particularly Driesch's account of the    spontaneous responsive changes in the embryo sea-urchin, and de    Vries' extraordinary description of the escaped stock of    evening primrose, varying now this way, now that, "as if    swayed by a restless internal tide."

^28:26 [iii.ii-p9.1][iii.ii-p10]         The debt to Heracleitus is acknowledged by Schiller. See    "Studies in Humanism," pp. 39, 40.

^28:27 [iii.ii-p12.1][iii.ii-p13]         See, for the substance of this and the following pages, the works of    Henri Bergson already mentioned. I am here also much indebted to the    personal help of my friend "William Scott Palmer," whose    interpretations have done much towards familiarizing English readers    with Bergson's philosophy; and to Prof. Willdon Carr's    paper on "Bergson's Theory of Knowledge, read before the    Aristotelian Society, December 1908.

^28:28 [iii.ii-p14.1][iii.ii-p15]         Heracleitus, Fragments, 46, 84.

^29:29 [iii.ii-p15.5][iii.ii-p16]         First edition, canto x.

^29:30 [iii.ii-p17.1][iii.ii-p18]         E.g. St. Augustine's "That alone is truly real    whichabides unchanged" (Conf., bk. vii. cap. 10), and among    modern thinkers F. von Hugel: "An absolute Abidingness,    pure Simultaneity, Eternity, in God . . . stand out, in man's    deepest consciousness, with even painful contrast, against all mere    Succession, all sheer flux and change." ("Eternal    Life," p. 365.)

^29:31 [iii.ii-p19.1][iii.ii-p20]         S. Alexander, "Space, Time and Deity," vol. ii, p.    410.

^29:32 [iii.ii-p20.2][iii.ii-p21]         See below, Pt. I. Cap. VII.

^30:33 [iii.ii-p22.1][iii.ii-p23]         Heracleitus,     op. cit     .

^30:34 [iii.ii-p24.1][iii.ii-p25]         On the complete and undivided nature of our experience in its    wholeness," and the sad work our analytic brains make of it    when they come to pull it to pieces, Bradley has some valuable    contributory remarks in ho "Oxford Lectures on Poetry,"    p. 15.

^31:35 [iii.ii-p27.1][iii.ii-p28]         "Liber Specialis Gratiae," I. ii. cap. xxvi.

^32:36 [iii.ii-p31.1][iii.ii-p32]         Meister Eckhart, Pred. lxxxvii.

^33:37 [iii.ii-p34.1][iii.ii-p35]         Willdon Carr,     op. cit     .

^33:38 [iii.ii-p36.1][iii.ii-p37]         "It seems as if man could never escape from himself, and yet,    when shut in to the monotony of his own sphere, he is overwhelmed    with a sense of emptiness. The only remedy here is radically to    alter the conception of man himself, to distinguish within him the    narrower and the larger life, the life that is straitened and finite    and can never transcend itself, and an infinite life through which    he enjoys communion with the immensity and the truth of the    universe. Can man rise to this spiritual level? On the possibility    of his doing so rests all our hope of supplying any meaning or value    to life" ("Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p.    81).

^33:39 [iii.ii-p37.1][iii.ii-p38]         The essentials of Eucken's teaching will be found conveniently    summarized in "Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens."

^34:40 [iii.ii-p38.1][iii.ii-p39]         "Der Sinn und Wert den Lebens," p. 121.

^35:41 [iii.ii-p44.1][iii.ii-p45]         "De Septem Gradibus Amoral" cap. xiv.

^35:42 [iii.ii-p46.4][iii.ii-p47]         Par. xxx. 95.

^36:43 [iii.ii-p48.1][iii.ii-p49]         "Revelations of Divine Love." cap. vi.

^37:44 [iii.ii-p51.1][iii.ii-p52]         Ruysbroeck, "Samuel," cap. viii.

^37:45 [iii.ii-p53.1][iii.ii-p54]         Ibid.,      "De Vera Contemplatione," cap. xii.

^37:46 [iii.ii-p54.1][iii.ii-p55]         Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol.    ii. p. 132.

^37:47 [iii.ii-p55.1][iii.ii-p56]         St. Catherine of Siena, Dialogo, cap. lxxxix.

^38:48 [iii.ii-p57.1][iii.ii-p58]         Heracleitus,     op. cit     .

^38:49 [iii.ii-p59.1][iii.ii-p60]         Meister Eckhart, Pred. i.

^38:50 [iii.ii-p61.2][iii.ii-p62]         Aug. Conf., bk. i. cap. iv. "What art Thou, then, my God? . .    . Highest, best, most potent [    i.e.     , dynamic], most omnipotent [    i.e,      transcendent], most merciful and most just, most deeply hid and yet    most near. Fairest, yet strongest: steadfast, yet unseizable;    unchangeable yet changing all things: never new, yet never old. . .    . Ever busy, yet ever at rest; gathering yet needing not: bearing,    filling, guarding: creating, nourishing and perfecting; seeking    though Thou hast no wants. . . . What can I say, my God, my life, my    holy joy? or what can any say who speaks of Thee?" Compare the    strikingly similar Sufi definition of the Nature of God, as given in    Palmer's "Oriental Mysticism," pp. 22,23.    "First and last, End and Limit of all things, incomparable and    unchangeable, always near yet always far," &c.his    probably owes something to Platonic influence.

^39:51 [iii.ii-p64.1][iii.ii-p65]         "Timaeus,"  section 27.

^39:52 [iii.ii-p65.1][iii.ii-p66]         "A natural craving," said Aquinas, "cannot be in    vain." Philosophy is creeping back to this    "mediaeval' point of view. Compare "Summa Contra    Gentiles," I. ii. cap. lxxix.

^39:53 [iii.ii-p67.1][iii.ii-p68]         Compare Dante's vision in Par. xxx., where he sees Reality    first as the streaming River of Light, the flux of things; and then,    when his sight has been purged, as achieved Perfection, the    Sempiternal Rose.

^40:54 [iii.ii-p68.1][iii.ii-p69]         E. Boutroux, "Le Philosophe Allemand, Jacob Boehme." p.    18.

^40:55 [iii.ii-p71.1][iii.ii-p72]         F. von Hugel: "Eternal Life, p. 385.

^41:56 [iii.ii-p74.2][iii.ii-p75]         Op. Cit     ., p. 387.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

III. Mysticism and   Psychology

 [iii.iii][iii.iii-p1]We[iii.iii-p1.1] come now to consider the mental apparatus which is at the disposal of  the self: to ask what it can tell us of the method by which she may  escape from the prison of the sense-world, transcend its rhythm, and  attain knowledge of--or conscious contact with--a  supra-sensible Reality. We have seen the normal self shut within that  prison, and making, by the help of science and of philosophy, a survey  of the premises and furniture: testing the thickness of the walls and  speculating on the possibility of trustworthy news from without  penetrating to her cell. Shut with her in that cell, two forces, the  desire to know more and the desire to love more, are ceaselessly at  work. Where the first of these cravings predominates, we call the  result a philosophical or a scientific temperament; where it is  overpowered by the ardour of unsatisfied love, the self's  reaction upon things becomes poetic, artistic, and  characteristically--though not always  explicitly--religious.

[iii.iii-p2]We have seen further that a certain number of persons  declare that they have escaped from the prison. Have they done so, it  can only be in order to satisfy these two hungry desires, for these,  and these only, make that a prison which might otherwise be a  comfortable hotel; and since, in varying degrees, these desires are in  all of us, active or latent, it is clearly worth while to discover, if  we can, the weak point in the walls, and method of achieving this one  possible way of escape. [p. 45] [iii.iii-Page_45]

[iii.iii-p3]Before we try to define in psychological language the  way in which the mystic slips the fetters of sense, sets out upon his  journey towards home, it seems well to examine the machinery which is  at the disposal of the normal, conscious self: the creature, or part  of a creature, which we recognize as "ourselves." The  older psychologists were accustomed to say that the messages from the  outer world awaken in that self three main forms of activity. (1) They  arouse movements of attraction or repulsion, of desire or distaste;  which vary in intensity from the semi-conscious cravings of the hungry  infant to the passions of the lover, artist, or fanatic. (2) They  stimulate a sort of digestive process, in which she combines and  cogitates upon the material presented to her; finally absorbing a  certain number of the resulting concepts and making them part of  herself or of her world, (3) The movements of desire, or the action of  reason, or both in varying combinations, awaken in her a determination  by which percept and concept issue in action; bodily, mental, or  spiritual. Hence, the main aspects of the self were classified as  Emotion, Intellect, and Will: and the individual temperament was  regarded as emotional, intellectual, or volitional, according to  whether feeling, thought, or will assumed the reins.

[iii.iii-p4]Modern psychologists have moved away from this  diagrammatic conception, and incline more and more to dwell upon the  unity of the psyche--that hypothetical self which none have ever  seen--and on some aspect of its energetic desire, its   libido,    or "hormic drive" as the ruling factor of its life. These  conceptions are useful to the student of mysticism, though they cannot  be accepted uncritically or regarded as complete.

[iii.iii-p5]Now the unsatisfied psyche in her emotional aspect  wants, as we have said, to love more; her curious intellect wants to  know more. The awakened human creature suspects that both appetites  are being kept on a low diet; that there really is more to love, and  more to know, somewhere in the mysterious world without, and further  that its powers of affection and understanding are worthy of some  greater and more durable objective than that provided by the illusions  of sense. Urged therefore by the cravings of feeling or of thought,  consciousness is always trying to run out to the encounter of the  Absolute, and always being forced to return. The neat philosophical  system, the diagrams of science, the "sunset-touch," are  tried in turn. Art and life, the accidents of our humanity, may foster  an emotional outlook; till the moment in which the neglected intellect  arises and pronounces such an outlook to have no validity. Metaphysics  and science seem to offer to the intellect an open window towards  truth; till the heart looks out and declares this landscape to be a  chill desert in which [p. 46] [iii.iii-Page_46] she can find no  nourishment. These diverse aspects of things must be either fused or  transcended if the whole self is to be satisfied; for the reality  which she seeks has got to meet both claims and pay in full.

[iii.iii-p6]When Dionysius the Areopagite divided those angels who  stand nearest God into the Seraphs who are aflame with perfect love,  and the Cherubs who are filled with perfect knowledge, he only gave  expression to the two most intense aspirations of the human soul, and  described under an image the two-fold condition of that Beatific  Vision which is her goal.   [*57] 

[iii.iii-p8]There is a sense in which it may be said, that the  desire of knowledge is a part of the desire of perfect love: since one  aspect of that all inclusive passion is clearly a longing to know, in  the deepest, fullest, closest sense, the thing adored. Love's  characteristic activity--for Love, all wings, is inherently  active, and "cannot be lazy," as the mystics say--is  a quest, an outgoing towards an object desired, which only when  possessed will be fully known, and only when fully known can be  perfectly adored.   [*58]    Intimate communion, no less than worship, is of its essence. Joyous  fruition is its proper end. This is true of all Love's quests,  whether the Beloved be human or divine--the bride, the Grail, the  Mystic Rose, the Plenitude of God. But there is no sense in which it  can be said that the desire of love is merely a part of the desire of  perfect knowledge: for that strictly intellectual ambition includes no  adoration, no self-spending, no reciprocity of feeling between Knower  and Known. Mere knowledge, taken alone, is a matter of receiving, not  of acting: of eyes, not wings: a dead alive business at the best.  There is thus a sharp distinction to be drawn between these two great  expressions of life: the energetic love, the passive knowledge. One is  related to the eager, outgoing activity, the dynamic impulse to   do    somewhat, physical, mental, or spiritual, which is inherent in all  living things and which psychologists call   conation:    the other to the indwelling consciousness, the passive knowing  somewhat, which they call   cognition. 

[iii.iii-p10]Now "conation" is almost wholly the  business of will, but of will stimulated by emotion: for wilful action  of every kind, however intellectual it may seem, is always the result  of interest, and [p. 47] [iii.iii-Page_47] interest involves  feeling. We act because we feel we want to; feel we must. Whether the  inspiring force be a mere preference or an overwhelming urge, our  impulse to "do" is a synthesis of determination and  desire. All man's achievements are the result of conation, never  of mere thought. "The intellect by itself moves nothing,"  said Aristotle, and modern psychology has but affirmed this law. Hence  his quest of Reality is never caused, though it may be greatly  assisted, by the intellectual aspect of his consciousness; for the  reasoning powers as such have little initiative. Their province is  analytic, not exploratory. They stay at home, dissecting and arranging  matter that comes to hand; and do not adventure beyond their own  region in search of food. Thought does not penetrate far into an  object in which the self feels no interest--  i.e.   , towards which she does not experience a "conative"  movement of attraction, of desire--for interest is the only  method known to us of arousing the will, and securing the fixity of  attention necessary to any intellectual process. None think for long  about anything for which they do not care; that is to say, which does  not touch some aspect of their emotional life. They may hate it, love  it, fear it, want it; but they must have some feeling about it.  Feeling is the tentacle we stretch out to the world of things.

[iii.iii-p11]Here the lesson of psychology is the same as that  which Dante brought back from his pilgrimage; the supreme importance  and harmonious movement of [iii.iii-p11.1]  il desiro     and   [iii.iii-p11.2] il velle. Si come rota  ch'egualmente e mossa ,    [*59]   these move together to fulfil the Cosmic Plan. In all human life, in  so far as it is not merely a condition of passive  "awareness," the law which he found implicit in the  universe is the law of the individual mind. Not logic, not  "common sense,"but   [iii.iii-p12.1] l'amor che move il sole e le altre  stelle   the motive force of the spirit of man: in the  inventors, the philosophers, and the artists, no less than in the  heroes and in the saints.

[iii.iii-p13]The vindication of the importance of feeling in our  life, and in particular its primacy over reason in all that has to do  with man's contact with the transcendental world, has been one  of the great achievements of modern psychology. In the sphere of  religion it is now acknowledged that "God known of the  heart" gives a better account of the character of our spiritual  experience than "God guessed at by the brain"; that the  loving intuition is more fruitful and more trustworthy than the  dialectic proof. One by one the commonplaces of mysticism are thus  rediscovered by official science, and given their proper place in the  psychology of the spiritual life. Thus Leuba, hardly a friendly  witness, is found to agree with the Fourth Evangelist that  "Life, more life, a larger, richer, more satisfying life, is in  the last analysis the end of [p. 48] [iii.iii-Page_48]  religion,"   [*60]    and we have seen that life, as we know it, has the character of a  purposive striving, more directly dependent on will and feeling then  on thought. Of this drive, this urge, thought indeed is but the  servant; a skilled and often arrogant servant, with a constant  tendency to usurpation. Some form of feeling--interest, desire,  fear, appetite--must supply the motive power. Without this, the  will would be dormant, and the intellect lapse into a calculating  machine.

[iii.iii-p15]Further, "the heart has its reasons which the  mind knows not of." It is a matter of experience that in our  moments of deep emotion, transitory though they be, we plunge deeper  into the reality of things than we can hope to do in hours of the most  brilliant argument. At the touch of passion doors fly open which logic  has battered on in vain: for passion rouses to activity not merely the  mind, but the whole vitality of man. It is the lover, the poet, the  mourner, the convert, who shares for a moment the mystic's  privilege of lifting that Veil of Isis which science handles so  helplessly, leaving only her dirty fingermarks behind. The heart,  eager and restless, goes out into the unknown, and brings home,  literally and actually, "fresh food for thought." Hence  those who "feel to think" are likely to possess a richer,  more real, if less orderly, experience than those who "think to  feel."

[iii.iii-p16]This psychological law, easily proved in regard to  earthly matters, holds good also upon the supersensual plane. It was  expressed once for all by the author of "The Cloud of  Unknowing" when he said of God, "By love He may be gotten  and holden, but by thought of understanding, never."   [*61]    That exalted feeling, that "secret blind love pressing,"  not the neat deductions of logic, the apologist's  "proofs" of the existence of the Absolute, unseals the  eyes to things unseen before. "Therefore," says the same  mystic "what time that thou purposest thee to this work, and  feelest by grace that thou art called of God, lift then up thine heart  unto God with a meek stirring of love; and mean God that made thee and  bought thee, and that graciously hath called thee to thy degree and  receive none other thought of God. And yet not all these but if thou  list; for it sufficeth thee enough, a naked intent direct unto God  without any other cause than Himself."   [*62]    Here we see emotion at its proper work; the movement of desire  passing over at once into the act of concentration, the gathering up  of all the powers of the self into a state of determined attention,  which is the business of the Will. "This driving and  drawing," says Ruysbroeck, "we feel in the heart and in  the unity of all our bodily powers, and especially in the desirous  powers."   [*63]    This act of perfect concentration, [p. 49] [iii.iii-Page_49] the  passionate focussing of the self upon one point, when it is applied  "with a naked intent" to real and transcendental things,  constitutes in the technical language of mysticism the state of  recollection:   [*64]    a condition which is peculiarly characteristic of the mystical  consciousness, and is the necessary prelude of pure contemplation,  that state in which the mystic enters into communion with Reality.

[iii.iii-p21]We have then arrived so far in our description of the  mechanism of the mystic. Possessed like other men of powers of  feeling, thought, and will, it is essential that his love and his  determination, even more than his thought, should be set upon  Transcendent Reality. He must feel a strong emotional attraction  toward the supersensual Object of his quest: that love which  scholastic philosophy defined as the force or power which causes every  creature to follow out the trend of its own nature. Of this must be  born the will to attain communion with that Absolute Object. This  will, this burning and active desire, must crystallize into and  express itself by that definite and conscious concentration of the  whole self upon the Object, which precedes the contemplative state. We  see already how far astray are those who look upon the mystical  temperament as passive in type.

[iii.iii-p22]Our next concern, then, would seem to be with this  condition of contemplation: what it does and whither it leads. What is  (a) its psychological explanation and (b) its empirical value? Now, in  dealing with this, and other rare mental conditions, we are of course  trying to describe from without that which can only adequately be  described from within; which is as much as to say that only mystics  can really write about mysticism. Fortunately, many mystics have so  written; and we, from their experiences and from the explorations of  psychology upon another plane, are able to make certain elementary  deductions. It appears generally from these that the act of  contemplation is for the mystic a psychic gateway; a method of going  from one level of consciousness to another. In technical language it  is the condition under which he shifts his "field of  perception" and obtains his characteristic outlook on the  universe. That there is such a characteristic outlook, peculiar to no  creed or race, is proved by the history of mysticism; which  demonstrates plainly enough that in some men another sort of  consciousness, another "sense," may be liberated beyond  the normal powers we have discussed. This "sense" has  attachments at each point to emotion, to intellect, and to will. It  can express itself under each of the aspects which these terms  connote. Yet it differs from and transcends the emotional,  intellectual, and volitional life of ordinary men. It was recognized  by [p. 50] [iii.iii-Page_50] Plato as that consciousness which  could apprehend the real world of the Ideas. Its development is the  final object of that education which his "Republic"  describes. It is called by Plotinus "Another intellect,  different from that which reasons and is denominated rational."   [*65]    Its business, he says, is the perception of the  supersensual--or, in Neoplatonic language, the   intelligible    world. It is the sense which, in the words of the "Theologia  Germanica," has "the power of seeing into eternity,"   [*66]    the "mysterious eye of the soul" by which St. Augustine  saw "the light that never changes."   [*67]    It is, says Al Ghazzali, a Persian mystic of the eleventh century,  "like an immediate perception, as if one touched its object with  one's hand."   [*68]    In the words of his great Christian successor, St. Bernard, "it  may be defined as the soul's true unerring intuition, the  unhesitating apprehension of truth":   [*69]    which "simple vision of truth," says St. Thomas Aquinas,  "ends in a movement of desire."   [*70] 

[iii.iii-p29]It is infused with burning love, for it seems to its  possessors to be primarily a movement of the heart: with intellectual  subtlety, for its ardour is wholly spent upon the most sublime object  of thought: with unflinching will, for its adventures are undertaken  in the teeth of the natural doubts, prejudices, languors, and  self-indulgence of man. These adventures, looked upon by those who  stay at home as a form of the Higher Laziness, are in reality the last  and most arduous labours which the human spirit is called to perform.  They are the only known methods by which we can come into conscious  possession of all our powers; and, rising from the lower to the higher  levels of consciousness, become aware of that larger life in which we  are immersed, attain communion with the transcendent Personality in  Whom that life is resumed.

[iii.iii-p30]Mary has chosen the better, not the idler part; for  her gaze is directed towards those First Principles without which the  activity of Martha would have no meaning at all. In vain does sardonic  common sense, confronted with the contemplative type, reiterate the  sneer of Mucius, "Encore sont-ils heureux que la pauvre Marthe  leur fasse la cuisine." It remains a paradox of the mystics that  the passivity at which they appear to aim is really a state of the  most intense activity: more, that where it is wholly absent no great  creative action can take place. In it, the superficial self compels  itself to be still, in order that it may liberate another [p. 51] [iii.iii-Page_51] more deep-seated power which is, in the ecstasy  of the contemplative genius, raised to the highest pitch of  efficiency.

[iii.iii-p31]"This restful travail," said Walter  Hilton, "is full far from fleshly idleness and from blind  security. It is full of ghostly work but it is called rest, for grace  looseth the heavy yoke of fleshly love from the soul and maketh it  mighty and free through the gift of the holy ghostly love for to work  gladly, softly, and delectably. . . . Therefore is it called an holy  idleness and a rest most busy; and so is it in   stillness    from the great crying and the beastly noise of fleshly  desires."   [*71] 

[iii.iii-p33]If those who have cultivated this latent power be  correct in their statements, the self was mistaken in supposing  herself to be entirely shut off from the true external universe. She  has, it seems certain tentacles which, once she learns to uncurl them,  will stretch sensitive fingers far beyond that limiting envelope in  which her normal consciousness is contained, and give her news of a  higher reality than that which can be deduced from the reports of the  senses. The fully developed and completely conscious human soul can  open as an anemone does, and   know    the ocean in which she is bathed. This act, this condition of  consciousness, in which barriers are obliterated, the Absolute flows  in on us, and we, rushing out to its embrace, "find and feel the  Infinite above all reason and above all knowledge,"   [*72]    is the true "mystical state." The value of contemplation  is that it tends to produce this state, release this transcendental  sense; and so turns the "lower servitude" in which the  natural man lives under the sway of his earthly environment to the  "higher servitude" of fully conscious dependence on that  Reality "in Whom we live and move and have our being."

[iii.iii-p35]What then, we ask, is the nature of this special  sense--this transcendental consciousness--and how does  contemplation liberate it?

[iii.iii-p36]Any attempt to answer this question brings upon the  scene another aspect of man's psychic life: an aspect of  paramount importance to the student of the mystic type. We have  reviewed the chief ways in which our surface consciousness reacts upon  experience: a surface consciousness which has been trained through  long ages to deal with the universe of sense. We know, however, that  the personality of man is a far deeper and more mysterious thing than  the sum of his conscious feeling, thought and will: that this  superficial self--this Ego of which each of us is  aware--hardly counts in comparison with the deeps of being which  it hides. "There is a root or depth in thee," says Law,  "from whence all these faculties come forth as lines from a  centre, [p. 52] [iii.iii-Page_52] or as branches from the body of  a tree. This depth is called the centre, the fund, or bottom, of the  soul. This depth is the unity, the Eternity, I had almost said the  infinity of thy soul, for it is so infinite that nothing can satisfy  it, or give it any rest, but the infinity of God."   [*73] 

[iii.iii-p38]Since normal man is utterly unable to set up relations  with spiritual reality by means of his feeling, thought, and will, it  is clearly in this depth of being--in these unplumbed levels of  personality--that we must search, if we would find the organ, the  power, by which he is to achieve the mystic quest. That alteration of  consciousness which takes place in contemplation can only mean the  emergence from this "fund or bottom of the soul" of some  faculty which diurnal life keeps hidden "in the  deeps."

[iii.iii-p39]Modern psychology, in its doctrine of the unconscious  or subliminal personality, has acknowledged this fact of a range of  psychic life lying below and beyond the conscious field. Indeed, it  has so dwelt upon and defined this shadowy region--which is  really less a "region" than a useful name--that it  sometimes seems to know more about the unconscious than about the  conscious life of man. There it finds, side by side, the sources of  his most animal instincts, his least explicable powers, his most  spiritual intuitions: the "ape and tiger," and the  "soul." Genius and prophecy, insomnia and infatuation,  clairvoyance, hypnotism, hysteria, and "Christian"  science--all are explained by the "unconscious mind."  In his destructive moods the psychologist has little apparent  difficulty in reducing the chief phenomena of religious and mystical  experience to activities of the "unconscious," seeking an  oblique satisfaction of repressed desires. Where he undertakes the  more dangerous duties of apologetic, he explains the same phenomena by  saying that "God speaks to man in the subconsciousness,"   [*74]    by which he can only mean that our apprehensions of the eternal have  the character of intuition rather than of thought. Yet the  "unconscious" after all is merely a convenient name for  the aggregate of those powers, parts, or qualities of the whole self  which at any given moment are not conscious, or that the Ego is not  conscious of. Included in the unconscious region of an average healthy  man are all those automatic activities by which the life of the body  is carried on: all those "uncivilized" instincts and  vices, those remains of the ancestral savage, which education has  [p. 53] [iii.iii-Page_53] forced out of the stream of  consciousness and which now only send their messages to the surface in  a carefully disguised form. There too work in the hiddenness those  longings for which the busy life of the world leaves no place; and  there lies that deep pool, that heart of personality, from which in  moments of lucidity a message may reach the conscious field. Hence in  normal men the best and worst, most savage and most spiritual parts of  character, are bottled up "below the threshold." Often the  partisans of the "unconscious" forget to mention this.

[iii.iii-p41]It follows, then, that whilst we may find it  convenient and indeed necessary to avail ourselves of the symbols and  diagrams of psychology in tracking out the mystic way, we must not  forget the large and vague significance which attaches to these  symbols, and the hypothetical character of many of the entities they  represent. Nor must we allow ourselves to use the  "unconscious" as the equivalent of man's  transcendental sense. Here the mystics have surely displayed a more  scientific spirit, a more delicate power of analysis, than the  psychologists. They, too, were aware that in normal men the spiritual  sense lies below the threshold of consciousness. Though they had not  at their command the spatial metaphors of the modern school, and could  not describe man's ascent toward God in those picturesque terms  of levels and uprushes, margins and fields, projection, repression,  and sublimation, which now come so naturally to investigators of the  spiritual life, they leave us in no doubt as to their view of the  facts. Further, man's spiritual history primarily meant for  them, as it means for us, the emergence of this transcendental sense;  its capture of the field of consciousness, and the opening up of those  paths which permit the inflow of a larger spiritual life, the  perception of a higher reality. This, in so far as it was an isolated  act, was "contemplation." When it was part of the general  life process, and had permanent results, they called it the New Birth,  which "maketh alive." The faculty or personality concerned  in the "New Birth"--the "spiritual man,"  capable of the spiritual vision and life, which was dissociated from  the "earthly man" adapted only to the natural  life--was always sharply distinguished by them from the total  personality, conscious or unconscious. It was something definite; a  bit or spot of man which, belonging not to Time but to Eternity, was  different in kind from the rest of his human nature, framed in all  respects to meet the demands of the merely natural world.   [*75]    The business of the mystic in the eyes of these old specialists was  to remake, transmute, his total personality in the interest [p. 54] [iii.iii-Page_54] of his spiritual self; to bring it out of the  hiddenness, and unify himself about it as a centre, thus  "putting on divine humanity."

[iii.iii-p43]The divine nucleus, the point of contact between  man's life and the divine life in which it is immersed and  sustained, has been given many names in course of the development of  mystical doctrine. All clearly mean the same thing, though emphasizing  different aspects of its life. Sometimes it is called the Synteresis,   [*76]    the keeper or preserver of his being: sometimes the Spark of the  Soul, the [iii.iii-p44.1]  Funklein     of the German mystics: sometimes its Apex the point  at which it touches the heavens. Then, with a sudden flight to the  other end of the symbolic scale, and in order to emphasize its  participation in pure Being, rather than its difference from mere  nature, it is called the Ground of the Soul, the foundation or basal  stuff indwelt by God, whence springs all spiritual life. Clearly all  these guesses and suggestions aim at one goal and are all to be  understood in a symbolic sense; for, as Malaval observed in answer to  his disciples' anxious inquiries on this subject, "since  the soul of man is a spiritual thing and thus cannot have divisions or  parts, consequently it cannot have height or depth, summit or surface.  But because we judge spiritual things by the help of material things,  since we know these better and they are more familiar to us, we call  the highest of all forms of conception the summit, and the easier way  of comprehending things the surface, of the understanding."   [*77] 

[iii.iii-p46]Here at any rate, whatever name we may choose to give  it, is the organ of man's spiritual consciousness; the place  where he meets the Absolute, the germ of his real life. Here is the  seat of that deep "Transcendental Feeling," the  "beginning and end of metaphysics" which is, says  Professor Stewart, "at once the solemn sense of Timeless  Being--of 'That which was and is and ever shall be'  overshadowing us--and the conviction that Life is good."  "I hold," says the same writer, "that it is in  Transcendental Feeling, manifested normally as Faith in the Value of  Life, and ecstatically as sense of Timeless Being, and not in Thought  proceeding by way of speculative construction, that Consciousness  comes nearest to the object of metaphysics, Ultimate Reality."   [*78]    [p. 55] [iii.iii-Page_55]

[iii.iii-p48]The existence of such a "sense," such an  integral part or function of the complete human being, has been  affirmed and dwelt upon not only by the mystics, but by seers and  teachers of all times and creeds: by Egypt, Greece, and India, the  poets, the fakirs, the philosophers, and the saints. A belief in its  actuality is the pivot of the Christian position; indeed of every  religion worthy of the name. It is the justification of mysticism,  asceticism, the whole machinery of the self-renouncing life. That  there is an extreme point at which man's nature touches the  Absolute: that his ground, or substance, his true being, is penetrated  by the Divine Life which constitutes the underlying reality of things;  this is the basis on which the whole mystic claim of possible union  with God must rest. Here, they say, is our link with reality; and in  this place alone can be celebrated the "marriage from which the  Lord comes."   [*79] 

[iii.iii-p50]To use another of their diagrams, it is thanks to the  existence within him of this immortal spark from the central fire,  that man is implicitly a "child of the infinite." The  mystic way must therefore be a life, a discipline, which will so alter  the constituents of his mental life as to include this spark within  the conscious field; bring it out of the hiddenness, from those deep  levels where it sustains and guides his normal existence, and make it  the dominant element round which his personality is arranged.

[iii.iii-p51]It is clear that under ordinary conditions, and save  for sudden gusts of "Transcendental Feeling" induced by  some saving madness such as Religion, Art, or Love, the superficial  self knows nothing of the attitude of this silent watcher--this  "Dweller in the Innermost"--towards the incoming  messages of the external world: nor of the activities which they awake  in it. Concentrated on the sense-world, and the messages she receives  from it, she knows nothing of the relations which exist between this  subject and the unattainable Object of all thought. But by a  deliberate inattention to the messages of the senses, such as that  which is induced by contemplation, the mystic can bring the ground of  the soul, the seat of "Transcendental Feeling," within the  area of consciousness: making it amenable to the activity of the will.  Thus becoming unaware of his usual and largely fictitious  "external world," another and more substantial set of  perceptions, which never have their chance under normal conditions,  rise to the surface. Sometimes these unite with the normal reasoning  faculties. More often, they supersede them. Some such exchange, such  "losing to find," appears to be necessary, if man's  transcendental powers are to have their full chance.

[iii.iii-p52]"The two eyes of the soul of man," says  the "Theologia [p. 56] [iii.iii-Page_56] Germanica," here  developing a profound Platonic image, "cannot both perform their  work at once: but if the soul shall see with the right eye into  eternity, then the left eye must close itself and refrain from  working, and be as though it were dead. For if the left eye be  fulfilling its office toward outward things, that is holding converse  with time and the creatures; then must the right eye be hindered in  its working; that is, in its contemplation. Therefore, whosoever will  have the one must let the other go; for 'no man can serve two  masters.'"   [*80] 

[iii.iii-p54]There is within us an immense capacity for perception,  for the receiving of messages from outside; and a very little  consciousness which deals with them. It is as if one telegraph  operator were placed in charge of a multitude of lines: all may be in  action, but he can only attend to one at a time. In popular language,  there is not enough consciousness to go round. Even upon the sensual  plane, no one can be aware of more than a few things at once. These  fill the centre of our field of consciousness: as the object on which  we happen to have focussed our vision dominates our field of sight.  The other matters within that field retreat to the margin. We know,  dimly, that they are there; but we pay them no attention and should  hardly miss them if they ceased to exist.

[iii.iii-p55]Transcendental matters are, for most of us, always  beyond the margin; because most of us have given up our whole  consciousness to the occupation of the senses, and permitted them to  construct there a universe in which we are contented to remain. Only  in certain states--recollection, contemplation, ecstasy and their  allied conditions--does the self contrive to turn out the usual  tenants, shut the "gateways of the flesh," and let those  submerged powers which are capable of picking up messages from another  plane of being have their turn. Then it is the sense-world which  retreats beyond the margin, and another landscape that rushes in. At  last, then, we begin to see something of what contemplation does for  its initiates. It is one of the many names applied to that chain of  processes which have for their object this alteration of the mental  equilibrium: the putting to sleep of that "Normal Self"  which usually wakes, and the awakening of that "Transcendental  Self" which usually sleeps. To man, "meeting-point of  various stages of reality," is given--though he seldom  considers it--this unique power of choosing his universe.

[iii.iii-p56]The phenomenon known as double or disintegrated  personality may perhaps give us a hint as to the mechanical nature of  the change which contemplation effects. In this psychic malady the  total character of the patient is split up; a certain group of  qualities [p. 57] [iii.iii-Page_57] are, as it were, abstracted  from the surface-consciousness and so closely associated as to form in  themselves a complete "character" or  "personality"--necessarily poles asunder from the  "character" which the self usually shows to the world,  since it consists exclusively of those elements which are omitted from  it. Thus in the classical case of Miss Beauchamp, the investigator,  Dr. Morton Prince, called the three chief "personalities,"  from their ruling characteristics, "the Saint," "the  Woman," and "the Devil."   [*81]    The totality of character which composed the "real Miss  Beauchamp" had split up into these contrasting types; each of  which was excessive, because withdrawn from the control of the rest.  When, voluntarily or involuntarily, the personality which had  possession of the field of consciousness was lulled to sleep, one of  the others emerged. Hypnotism was one of the means which most easily  effected this change.

[iii.iii-p58]Now in persons of mystical genius, the qualities which  the stress of normal life tends to keep below the threshold of  consciousness are of enormous strength. In these natural explorers of  Eternity the "transcendental faculty," the "eye of  the soul," is not merely present in embryo, but is highly  developed; and is combined with great emotional and volitional power.  The result of the segregation of such qualities below the threshold of  consciousness is to remove from them the friction of those  counterbalancing traits in the surface mind with which they might  collide. They are "in the hiddenness," as Jacob Boehme  would say. There they develop unchecked, until a point is reached at  which their strength is such that they break their bounds and emerge  into the conscious field: either temporarily dominating the subject as  in ecstasy, or permanently transmuting the old self, as in the  "unitive life." The attainment of this point may be  accelerated by processes which have always been known and valued by  the mystics; and which tend to produce a state of consciousness  classed by psychologists with dreams, reverie, and the results of  hypnosis. In all these the normal surface-consciousness is  deliberately or involuntarily lulled, the images and ideas connected  with normal life are excluded, and images or faculties from  "beyond the threshold" are able to take their place.

[iii.iii-p59]Of course these images or faculties may or may not be  more valuable than those already present in the surface-consciousness.  In the ordinary subject, often enough, they are but the odds and ends  for which the superficial mind has found no use. In the mystic, they  are of a very different order: and this fact justifies the means which  he instinctively employs to secure their emergence. Indian mysticism  founds its external system almost wholly [p. 58] [iii.iii-Page_58]  on (  a   ) Asceticism, the domination of the senses, and (  b   ) the deliberate practice of self-hypnotization; either by fixing the  eyes on a near object, or by the rhythmic repetition of the   mantra    or sacred word. By these complementary forms of discipline, the pull  of the phenomenal world is diminished and the mind is placed at the  disposal of the subconscious powers. Dancing, music, and other  exaggerations of natural rhythm have been pressed into the same  service by the Greek initiates of Dionysus, by the Gnostics, by  innumerable other mystic cults. That these proceedings do effect a  remarkable change in the human consciousness is proved by experience:  though how and why they do it is as yet little understood. Such  artificial and deliberate production of ecstasy is against the whole  instinct of the Christian contemplatives; but here and there amongst  them also we find instances in which ecstatic trance or lucidity, the  liberation of the "transcendental sense," was  inadvertently produced by purely physical means. Thus Jacob Boehme,  the "Teutonic theosopher," having one day as he sat in his  room "gazed fixedly upon a burnished pewter dish which reflected  the sunshine with great brilliance," fell into an inward  ecstasy, and it seemed to him as if he could look into the principles  and deepest foundations of things.   [*82]    The contemplation of running water had the same effect on St.  Ignatius Loyola. Sitting on the bank of a river one day, and facing  the stream, which was running deep, "the eyes of his mind were  opened, not so as to see any kind of vision, but so as to understand  and comprehend spiritual things . . . and this with such clearness  that for him all these things were made new."   [*83]    This method of attaining to mental lucidity by a narrowing and  simplification of the conscious field, finds an apt parallel in the  practice of Immanuel Kant, who "found that he could better  engage in philosophical thought while   gazing steadily    at a neighbouring church steeple."   [*84] 

[iii.iii-p63]It need hardly be said that rationalistic writers,  ignoring the parallels offered by the artistic and philosophic  temperaments, have seized eagerly upon the evidence afforded by such  instances of apparent mono-ideism and self-hypnotization in the lives  of the mystics, and by the physical disturbances which accompany the  ecstatic trance, and sought by its application to attribute all the  abnormal perceptions of contemplative genius to hysteria or other  disease. They have not hesitated to call St. Paul an epileptic. St.  Teresa the "patron saint of hysterics"; and have found  room for most of their spiritual kindred in various departments of the  pathological museum. They have been helped in this grateful task by  the acknowledged fact that the great contemplatives, though [p. 59] [iii.iii-Page_59] almost always persons of robust intelligence  and marked practical or intellectual ability--Plotinus, St.  Bernard, the two Ss. Catherine, St. Teresa, St. John of the Cross, and  the Sufi poets Jami and Jalalu 'ddin are cases in  point--have often suffered from bad physical health. More, their  mystical activities have generally reacted upon their bodies in a  definite and special way; producing in several cases a particular kind  of illness and of physical disability, accompanied by pains and  functional disturbances for which no organic cause could be  discovered, unless that cause were the immense strain which exalted  spirit puts upon a body which is adapted to a very different form of  life.

[iii.iii-p64]It is certain that the abnormal and highly sensitized  type of mind which we call mystical does frequently, but not always,  produce or accompany strange and inexplicable modifications of the  physical organism with which it is linked. The supernatural is not  here in question, except in so far as we are inclined to give that  name to natural phenomena which we do not understand. Such instances  of psycho-physical parallelism as the stigmatizations of the  saints--and indeed of other suggestible subjects hardly to be  ranked as saints--will occur to anyone.   [*85]    I here offer to the reader another less discussed and more  extraordinary example of the modifying influence of the spirit on the  supposed "laws" of bodily life.

[iii.iii-p66]We know, as a historical fact, unusually well attested  by contemporary evidence and quite outside the sphere of hagiographic  romance, that both St. Catherine of Siena and her namesake St.  Catherine of Genoa--active women as well as ecstatics, the first  a philanthropist, reformer, and politician, the second an original  theologian and for many years the highly efficient matron of a large  hospital--lived, in the first case for years, in the second for  constantly repeated periods of many weeks, without other food than the  consecrated Host which they received at Holy Communion. They did this,  not by way of difficult obedience to a pious vow, but because they  could not live in any other way. Whilst fasting, they were well and  active, capable of dealing with the innumerable responsibilities which  filled their lives. But the attempt to eat even a few  mouthfuls--and this attempt was constantly repeated, for, like  all true saints, they detested eccentricity   [*86]   --at once made them ill and had to be abandoned as useless.   [*87]    [p. 60] [iii.iii-Page_60]

[iii.iii-p69]In spite of the researches of Murisier,   [*88]    Janet,   [*89]    Ribot,   [*90]    and other psychologists, and their persevering attempts to find a  pathological explanation which will fit all mystic facts, this and  other marked physical peculiarities which accompany the mystical  temperament belong as yet to the unsolved problems of humanity. They  need to be removed both from the sphere of marvel and from that of  disease--into which enthusiastic friends and foes force them by  turn--to the sphere of pure psychology; and there studied  dispassionately with the attention which we so willingly bestow on the  less interesting eccentricities of degeneracy and vice. Their  existence no more discredits the sanity of mysticism or the validity  of its results than the unstable nervous condition usually noticed in  artists--who share to some extent the mystic's apprehension  of the Real--discredits art. "In such cases as Kant and  Beethoven," says Von Hugel justly, "a classifier of  humanity according to its psycho-physical phenomena alone would put  these great discoverers and creators, without hesitation, amongst  hopeless and useless hypochondriacs."   [*91] 

[iii.iii-p74]In the case of the mystics the disease of hysteria,  with its astounding variety of mental symptoms, its strange power of  disintegrating, rearranging and enhancing the elements of  consciousness, its tendencies to automatism and ecstasy, has been most  often invoked to provide an explanation of the observed phenomena.  This is as if one sought the source of the genius of Taglioni in the  symptoms of St. Vitus's dance. Both the art and the disease have  to do with bodily movements. So too both mysticism and hysteria have  to do with the domination of consciousness by one fixed and intense  idea or intuition, which rules the life and is able to produce amazing  physical and psychical results. In the hysteric patient this idea is  often trivial or morbid   [*92]    but has become--thanks to the self's unstable mental  condition--an obsession. In the mystic the dominant idea is a  great one: so great in fact, that when it is received in its  completeness by the human consciousness, almost of necessity it ousts  all else. It is nothing less than the idea or perception of the  transcendent reality and presence of God. Hence the mono-ideism of the  mystic is rational, whilst that of the hysteric patient is invariably  irrational.

[iii.iii-p76]On the whole then, whilst psycho-physical relations  remain so little understood, it would seem more prudent, and certainly  more scientific, to withhold our judgment on the meaning of the  psychophysical [p. 61] [iii.iii-Page_61] phenomena which accompany  the mystic life; instead of basing destructive criticism on facts  which are avowedly mysterious and at least capable of more than one  interpretation. To deduce the nature of a compound from the character  of its byproducts is notoriously unsafe.

[iii.iii-p77]Our bodies are animal things, made for animal  activities. When a spirit of unusual ardour insists on using its  nerve-cells for other activities, they kick against the pricks; and  inflict, as the mystics themselves acknowledge, the penalty of  "mystical ill-health." "Believe me, children,"  says Tauler, "one who would know much about these high matters  would often have to keep his bed, for his bodily frame could not  support it."   [*93]    "I cause thee extreme pain of body," says the voice of  Love to Mechthild of Magdeburg. "If I gave myself to thee as  often as thou wouldst have me, I should deprive myself of the sweet  shelter I have of thee in this world, for a thousand bodies could not  protect a loving soul from her desire. Therefore the higher the love  the greater the pain."   [*94] 

[iii.iii-p80]On the other hand the exalted personality of the  mystic--his self-discipline, his heroic acceptance of labour and  suffering, and his inflexible will--raises to a higher term that  normal power of mind over body which all possess. Also the  contemplative state--like the hypnotic state in a healthy  person--seems to enhance life by throwing open deeper levels of  personality. The self then drinks at a fountain which is fed by the  Universal Life. True ecstasy is notoriously life-enhancing. In it a  bracing contact with Reality seems to take place, and as a result the  subject is himself more real. Often, says St. Teresa, even the sick  come forth from ecstasy healthy and with new strength; for something  great is then given to the soul.   [*95]    Contact has been set up with levels of being which the daily routine  of existence leaves untouched. Hence the extraordinary powers of  endurance, and independence of external conditions, which the great  ecstatics so often display.

[iii.iii-p82]If we see in the mystics, as some have done, the  sporadic beginning of a power, a higher consciousness, towards which  the race slowly tends; then it seems likely enough that where it  appears nerves and organs should suffer under a stress to which they  have not yet become adapted, and that a spirit more highly organized  than its bodily home should be able to impose strange conditions on  the flesh. When man first stood upright, a body long accustomed to go  on all fours, legs which had adjusted themselves to bearing but half  his weight, must have rebelled against this [p. 62] [iii.iii-Page_62] unnatural proceeding; inflicting upon its  author much pain and discomfort if not absolute illness. It is at  least permissible to look upon the strange  "psycho-physical" state common amongst the mystics as just  such a rebellion on the part of a normal nervous and vascular system  against the exigencies of a way of life to which it has not yet  adjusted itself.   [*96] 

[iii.iii-p84]In spite of such rebellion, and of the tortures to  which it has subjected them, the mystics, oddly enough, are a  long-lived race: an awkward fact for critics of the physiological  school. To take only a few instances from amongst marked ecstatics,  St. Hildegarde lived to be eighty-one, Mechthild of Magdeburg to  eighty-seven, Ruysbroeck to eighty-eight, Suso to seventy, St. Teresa  to sixty-seven, St. Catherine of Genoa and St. Peter of Alcantara to  sixty-three. It seems as though that enhanced life which is the reward  of mystical surrender enabled them to triumph over their bodily  disabilities: and to live and do the work demanded of them under  conditions which would have incapacitated ordinary men.

[iii.iii-p85]Such triumphs, which take heroic rank in the history  of the human mind, have been accomplished as a rule in the same way.  Like all intuitive persons, all possessors of genius, all potential  artists--with whom in fact they are closely related--the  mystics have, in psychological language, "thresholds of  exceptional mobility." That is to say, a slight effort, a slight  departure from normal conditions, will permit their latent or  "subliminal" powers to emerge and occupy the mental field.  A "mobile threshold" may make a man a genius, a lunatic,  or a saint. All depends upon the character of the emerging powers. In  the great mystic, these powers, these tracts of personality lying  below the level of normal consciousness, are of unusual richness; and  cannot be accounted for in terms of pathology. "If it be  true," says Delacroix, "that the great mystics have not  wholly escaped those nervous blemishes which mark nearly all  exceptional organizations, there is in them a vital and creative  power, a constructive logic, an extended scale of realization--in  a word, a genius--which is, in truth, their essential quality. .  . . The great mystics, creators and inventors who have found a new  form of life and have justified it . . . join, upon the highest  summits of the human spirit, the great simplifiers of the  world."   [*97] 

[iii.iii-p87]The truth, then, so far as we know it at present,  seems to be [p. 63] [iii.iii-Page_63] that those powers which are  in contact with the Transcendental Order, and which constitute at the  lowest estimate half the self, are dormant in ordinary men; whose time  and interest are wholly occupied in responding to the stimuli of the  world of sense. With those latent powers sleeps the landscape which  they alone can apprehend. In mystics none of the self is always  dormant. They have roused the Dweller in the Innermost from its  slumbers, and round it have unified their life. Heart, Reason, Will  are there in full action, drawing their incentive not from the  shadow-show of sense, but from the deeps of true Being; where a lamp  is lit, and a consciousness awake, of which the sleepy crowd remains  oblivious. He who says the mystic is but half a man, states the exact  opposite of the truth. Only the mystic can be called a whole man,  since in others half the powers of the self always sleep. This  wholeness of experience is much insisted on by the mystics. Thus the  Divine Voice says to St. Catherine of Siena, "I have also shown  thee the Bridge and the three general steps, placed there for the  three powers of the soul; and I have told thee how no one can attain  to the life of grace unless he has mounted all three steps, that is,  gathered together all the three powers of the soul in My Name."   [*98] 

[iii.iii-p89]In those abnormal types of personality to which we  give the name of genius, we seem to detect a hint of the relations  which may exist between these deep levels of being and the crust of  consciousness. In the poet, the musician, the great mathematician or  inventor, powers lying below the threshold, and hardly controllable by  their owner's conscious will, clearly take a major part in the  business of perception and conception. In all creative acts, the  larger share of the work is done subconsciously: its emergence is in a  sense automatic. This is equally true of mystics, artists,  philosophers, discoverers, and rulers of men. The great religion,  invention, work of art, always owes its inception to some sudden  uprush of intuitions or ideas for which the superficial self cannot  account; its execution to powers so far beyond the control of that  self, that they seem, as their owner sometimes says, to "come  from beyond." This is "inspiration"; the opening of  the sluices, so that those waters of truth in which all life is bathed  may rise to the level of consciousness.

[iii.iii-p90]The great teacher, poet, artist, inventor, never aims  deliberately at his effects. He obtains them he knows not how: perhaps  from a contact of which he is unconscious with that creative plane of  being which the Sufis call the Constructive Spirit, and the Kabalists  Yesod, and which both postulate as lying next behind the world of  sense. "Sometimes," said the great Alexandrian Jew Philo,  [p. 64] [iii.iii-Page_64] "when I have come to my work  empty, I have suddenly become full; ideas being in an invisible manner  showered upon me, and implanted in me from on high; so that through  the influence of divine inspiration, I have become greatly excited,  and have known neither the place in which I was, nor those who were  present, nor myself, nor what I was saying, nor what I was writing;  for then I have been conscious of a richness of interpretation, an  enjoyment of light, a most penetrating insight, a most manifest energy  in all that was to be done; having such an effect on my mind as the  clearest ocular demonstration would have on the eyes."   [*99]    This is a true creative ecstasy, strictly parallel to the state in  which the mystic performs his mighty works.

[iii.iii-p92]To let oneself go, be quiet, receptive, appears to be  the condition under which such contact with the Cosmic Life may be  obtained. "I have noticed that when one paints one should think  of nothing: everything then comes better," says the young  Raphael to Leonardo da Vinci.   [*100]    The superficial self must here acknowledge its own insufficiency,  must become the humble servant of a more profound and vital  consciousness. The mystics are of the same opinion. "Let the  will quietly and wisely understand," says St. Teresa,  "that it is not by dint of labour on our part that we can  converse to any good purpose with God."   [*101]    "The best and noblest way in which thou mayst come into this  Life," says Eckhart, "is by keeping silence and letting  God work and speak. Where all the powers are withdrawn from their work  and images, there is this word spoken . . . the more thou canst draw  in all thy powers and forget the creature the nearer art thou to this,  and the more receptive."   [*102] 

[iii.iii-p96]Thus Boehme says to the neophyte,   [*103]    "When both thy intellect and will are quiet and passive to the  expressions of the eternal Word and Spirit, and when thy soul is  winged up above that which is temporal, the outward senses and the  imagination being locked up by holy abstraction,   then    the eternal Hearing, Seeing, and Speaking will be revealed in thee.  Blessed art thou therefore if thou canst stand still from self  thinking and self willing, and canst stop the wheel of thy imagination  and senses." Then, the conscious mind being passive, the more  divine mind below the threshold--organ of our free creative  life--can emerge and present its reports. In the words of an  older mystic, "The soul, leaving all things and forgetting  herself, is immersed in the ocean [p. 65] [iii.iii-Page_65] of  Divine Splendour, and illuminated by the Sublime Abyss of the  Unfathomable Wisdom."   [*104] 

[iii.iii-p99]The "passivity" of contemplation, then, is  a necessary preliminary of spiritual energy: an essential clearing of  the ground. It withdraws the tide of consciousness from the shores of  sense, stops the "wheel of the imagination." "The  Soul," says Eckhart again, "is created in a place between  Time and Eternity: with its highest powers it touches Eternity, with  its lower Time."   [*105]    These, the worlds of Being and Becoming, are the two "stages of  reality" which meet in the spirit of man. By cutting us off from  the temporal plane, the lower kind of reality, Contemplation gives the  eternal plane, and the powers which can communicate with that plane,  their chance. In the born mystic these powers are great, and lie very  near the normal threshold of consciousness. He has a genius for  transcendental--or as he would say, divine--discovery in  much the same way as his cousins, the born musician and poet, have a  genius for musical or poetic discovery. In all three cases, the  emergence of these higher powers is mysterious, and not least so to  those who experience it. Psychology on the one hand, theology on the  other, may offer us diagrams and theories of this proceeding: of the  strange oscillations of the developing consciousness, the fitful  visitations of a lucidity and creative power over which the self has  little or no control, the raptures and griefs of a vision by turns  granted and withdrawn. But the secret of genius still eludes us, as  the secret of life eludes the biologist.

[iii.iii-p101]The utmost we can say of such persons is, that reality  presents itself to them under abnormal conditions and in abnormal  terms, and that subject to these conditions and in these terms they  are bound to deal with it. Thanks to their peculiar mental make up,  one aspect of the universe is for them focussed so sharply that in  comparison with it all other images are blurred, vague, and unreal.  Hence the sacrifice which men of genius--mystics, artists,  inventors--make of their whole lives to this one Object, this one  vision of truth, is not self-denial, but rather self-fulfilment. They  gather themselves up from the unreal, in order to concentrate on the  real. The whole personality then absorbs or enters into communion with  certain rhythms or harmonies existent in the universe, which the  receiving apparatus of other selves cannot take up. "Here is the  finger of God, a flash of the Will that can!" exclaims Abt  Vogler, as the sounds grow under his hand. "The numbers [p. 66] [iii.iii-Page_66]   came!"    says the poet. He knows not how, certainly not by deliberate  intellection.

[iii.iii-p102]So it is with the mystic. Madame Guyon states in her  autobiography, that when she was composing her works she would  experience a sudden and irresistible inclination to take up her pen;  though feeling wholly incapable of literary composition, and not even  knowing the subject on which she would be impelled to write. If she  resisted this impulse it was at the cost of the most intense  discomfort. She would then begin to write with extraordinary  swiftness; words, elaborate arguments, and appropriate quotations  coming to her without reflection, and so quickly that one of her  longest books was written in one and a half days. "In writing I  saw that I was writing of things which I had never seen: and during  the time of this manifestation, I was given light to perceive that I  had in me treasures of knowledge and understanding which I did not  know that I possessed."   [*106] 

[iii.iii-p104]Similar statements are made of St. Teresa, who  declared that in writing her books she was powerless to set down  anything but that which her Master put into her mind.   [*107]    So Blake said of "Milton" and "Jerusalem,"  "I have written the poems from immediate dictation, twelve or  sometimes twenty or thirty lines at a time, without premeditation and  even against my will. The time it has taken in writing was thus  rendered non-existent, and an immense poem exists which seems to be  the labour of a long life, all produced without labour or  study."   [*108] 

[iii.iii-p107]These are, of course, extreme forms of that strange  power of automatic composition, in which words and characters arrive  and arrange themselves in defiance of their authors' will, of  which most poets and novelists possess a trace. Such composition is  probably related to the automatic writing of "mediums" and  other sensitives; in which the often disorderly and incoherent  subliminal mind seizes upon this channel of expression. The subliminal  mind of the great mystic, however, is not disorderly. It is abnormally  sensitive, richly endowed and keenly observant--a treasure house,  not a lumber room--and becomes in the course of its education, a  highly disciplined and skilled instrument of knowledge. When,  therefore, its contents emerge, and are presented to the normal  consciousness in the form of lucidity, "auditions,"  visions, automatic writing, or any other translations of the  supersensible [p. 67] [iii.iii-Page_67] into the terms of sensible  perception, they cannot be discredited because the worthless  unconscious region of feebler natures sometimes manifests itself in  the same way. Idiots are often voluble: but many orators are sane.

[iii.iii-p108]Now, to sum up: what are the chief characteristics  which we have found to concern us in this sketch-map of the mental  life of man?

[iii.iii-p109](1) We have divided that life, arbitrarily enough,  along the fluctuating line which psychologists call the  "threshold of his consciousness" into the surface life and  the unconscious deeps.

[iii.iii-p110](2) In the surface life, though we recognized its  essential wholeness, we distinguished three outstanding and  ever-present aspects: the Trinity in Unity of feeling, thought, and  will. Amongst these we were obliged to give the primacy to feeling, as  the power which set the machinery of thought and will to work.

[iii.iii-p111](3) We have seen that the expression of this life  takes the two complementary forms of   conation,    or outgoing action and   cognition,    or indwelling knowledge; and that the first, which is dynamic in  type, is largely the work of the will stimulated by the emotions;  whilst the second, which is passive in type, is the business of the  intellect. They answer to the two main aspects which man discerns in  the universal life: Being and Becoming.

[iii.iii-p112](4) Neither conation nor cognition--action nor  thought--as performed by this surface mind, concerned as it is  with natural existence and dominated by spatial conceptions, is able  to set up any relations with the Absolute or transcendental world.  Such action and thought deal wholly with material supplied directly or  indirectly by the world of sense. The testimony of the mystics,  however, and of all persons possessing an "instinct for the  Absolute," points to the existence of a further  faculty--indeed, a deeper self--in man; a self which the  circumstances of diurnal life usually keep "below the  threshold" of his consciousness, and which thus becomes one of  the factors of his "subliminal life." This hidden self is  the primary agent of mysticism, and lives a "substantial"  life in touch with the real or transcendental world.   [*109] 

[iii.iii-p114](5) Certain processes, of which contemplation has been  taken as a type, can so alter the state of consciousness as to permit  the emergence of this deeper self; which, according as it enters more  or less into the conscious life, makes man more or less a mystic.  [p. 68] [iii.iii-Page_68]

[iii.iii-p115]The mystic life, therefore, involves the emergence  from deep levels of man's transcendental self; its capture of  the field of consciousness; and the "conversion" or  rearrangement of his feeling, thought, and will--his  character--about this new centre of life.

[iii.iii-p116]We state, then, as the conclusion of this chapter,  that the object of the mystic's adventure, seen from within, is  the apprehension of, or direct communion with, that transcendental  Reality which we tried in the last section to define from without.  Here, as in the fulfilment of the highest earthly love, knowledge and  communion are the same thing; we must be "oned with bliss"  if we are to be aware of it. That aspect of our being by which we may  attain this communion--that "marrow of the Soul," as  Ruysbroeck calls it--usually lies below the threshold of our  consciousness; but in certain natures of abnormal richness and  vitality, and under certain favourable conditions, it may be liberated  by various devices, such as contemplation. Once it has emerged,  however, it takes up, to help it in the work, aspects of the conscious  self. The surface must co-operate with the deeps, and at last merge  with those deeps to produce that unification of consciousness upon  high levels which alone can put a term to man's unrest. The  heart that longs for the All, the mind that conceives it, the will  that concentrates the whole self upon it, must all be called into  play. The self must be surrendered: but it must not be annihilated, as  some Quietists have supposed. It only dies that it may live again.  Supreme success,--the permanent assurance of the mystic that  "we are more verily in heaven than in earth,"--says  the Lady Julian, in a passage which anticipates the classification of  modern psychology, "cometh of the natural Love of our soul, and  of the clear light of our Reason, and of the steadfast Mind."   [*110] 

[iii.iii-p118]But what is the order of precedence which these three  activities are to assume in the work which is   one   ?All, as we have seen, must do their part; for we are concerned with  the response of man in his wholeness to the overwhelming attraction of  God. But which shall predominate? The ultimate nature of the  self's experience of reality will depend on the answer she gives  to this question. What, here, are the relative values of Mind and  Heart? Which will bring her closest to the Thought of God; the real  life in which she is bathed? Which, fostered and made dominant, is  most likely to put her in harmony with the Absolute? The Love of God,  which is ever in the heart and often on the lips of the Saints, is the  passionate desire for this harmony; the "malady of  thought" is its intellectual equivalent. Though we may seem to  escape God, we cannot escape some form of this craving; except at the  price of utter stagnation. [p. 69] [iii.iii-Page_69] We go back,  therefore, to the statement with which this chapter opened: that of  the two governing desires which share the prison of the self. We see  them now as representing the cravings of the intellect and the  emotions for the only end of all quests. The disciplined  will--the "conative power"--with all the dormant  faculties which it can wake and utilize, can come to the assistance of  one of them. Which? The question is a crucial one, for the destiny of  the self depends on the partner which the will selects.

   [p. 70] [iii.iii-Page_70]

Footnotes

^46:57 [iii.iii-p6.1][iii.iii-p7]         The wise Cherubs, according to the beautiful imagery of Dionysius,    are "all eyes," but the loving Seraphs are "all    wings." Whilst the Seraphs, the figure of intensest Love,    "    move      perpetually towards things divine," ardour and energy being    their characteristics, the characteristic of the Cherubs is    receptiveness their power of absorbing the rays of the Supernal    Light. (Dionysius the Areopagite, "De Caelesti    Ierarchia," vi. 2, and vii. 1.)

^46:58 [iii.iii-p8.1][iii.iii-p9]         So Recejac says of the mystics, they desire to know, only    that they may love; and their desire for union with the principle of    things in God, Who is the sum of them all, is founded on a feeling    which is neither curiosity nor self-interest"    ("Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 50).

^47:59 [iii.iii-p11.3][iii.iii-p12]         Par. xxxiii. 143.

^48:60 [iii.iii-p13.1][iii.iii-p14]         The     Monist     , July, 1901, p. 572.

^48:61 [iii.iii-p16.1][iii.iii-p17]         "The Cloud of Unknowing," cap. vi.

^48:62 [iii.iii-p17.1][iii.iii-p18]         Op. cit.,      cap. vii.

^48:63 [iii.iii-p18.1][iii.iii-p19]         "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii. cap. v.

^49:64 [iii.iii-p19.1][iii.iii-p20]         See below, Pt. II. Cap. VI.

^50:65 [iii.iii-p22.1][iii.iii-p23]         Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

^50:66 [iii.iii-p23.1][iii.iii-p24]         "Theologia Germanica," cap. vii. (trans. Winkworth).

^50:67 [iii.iii-p24.1][iii.iii-p25]         Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

^50:68 [iii.iii-p25.1][iii.iii-p26]         A. Schmolders, "Essai sur les Ecoles Philosophique    chez les Arabes," p. 68.

^50:69 [iii.iii-p26.1][iii.iii-p27]         "De Consideration," bk. ii. cap. ii.

^50:70 [iii.iii-p27.1][iii.iii-p28]         "Summa Theologica," ii. ii. q. clxxx, art. 3. eds. 1 and    3.

^51:71 [iii.iii-p31.1][iii.iii-p32]         Walter Hilton, "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap.    xl.

^51:72 [iii.iii-p33.1][iii.iii-p34]         Ruysbroeck, "De Septem Gradibus Amoris," cap. xiv.

^52:73 [iii.iii-p36.1][iii.iii-p37]         "The Spirit of Prayer" ("Liberal and Mystical    Writings of William Law," p, 14). So too St. Francois de    Sales says: "This root is the depth of the spirit,     Mens     , which others call the Kingdom of God." The same doctrine    appears, under various symbols, in all the Christian Mystics.

^52:74 [iii.iii-p39.1][iii.iii-p40]         Cutten, "Psychological Phenomena of Christianity," p.    18. James, "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 155.    For a temperate and balanced discussion, see Pratt: "The    Religious Consciousness."

^53:75 [iii.iii-p41.1][iii.iii-p42]         Note to the 12th Edition.      During the eighteen years which have elapsed since this chapter was    written, much work has been done on the psychology of mysticism.    After suffering severely at the hands of the "new    psychologists" the contemplative faculty is once more taken    seriously; and there is even some disposition to accept or restate    the account of it given by the mystics. Thus Bremond    ("Priere et Poesie" and "Introduction    a la Philosophie de la Priere") insists on the    capital distinction between the surface-mind, capable of rational    knowledge, and the deeper mind, organ of mystical knowledge, and    operative in varying degrees in religion poetic, and Esthetic    apprehensions.

^54:76 [iii.iii-p43.1][iii.iii-p44]         An interesting discussion of the term "Synteresis" will    be found in Dr. Inge's "Christian Mysticism,"    Appendix C, pp. 359, 360.

^54:77 [iii.iii-p44.2][iii.iii-p45]         "La Pratique de la Vraye Theologie Mystique," vol. 1. p.    204.

^54:78 [iii.iii-p46.1][iii.iii-p47]         J. A. Stewart, '*The Myths of Plato," pp. 41, 43.    Perhaps I may point out that this Transcendental Feeling--the    ultimate material alike of prayer and of poetry--has, like the    mystic consciousness, a dual perception of Reality: static being and    dynamic life. See above, p. 42.

^55:79 [iii.iii-p48.1][iii.iii-p49]         Tauler, Sermon on St. Augustine ("The Inner Way," p.    162).

^56:80 [iii.iii-p52.1][iii.iii-p53]         "Theologia Germanica," cap. vii. Compare "De    Imitatione Christi," 1. iii. cap. 38.

^57:81 [iii.iii-p56.1][iii.iii-p57]         Morton Prince, "The Dissociation of a Personality," p.    16.

^58:82 [iii.iii-p59.1][iii.iii-p60]         Martensen, "Jacob Boehme," p. 7.

^58:83 [iii.iii-p60.1][iii.iii-p61]         Testament, cap. iii.

^58:84 [iii.iii-p61.1][iii.iii-p62]         Starbuck, "The Psychology of Religion," p. 388.

^59:85 [iii.iii-p64.1][iii.iii-p65]         See, for instances, Cutten, 'The Psychological Phenomena of    Christianity," cap. viii.

^59:86 [iii.iii-p66.1][iii.iii-p67]         "Singularity," says Gertrude More, "is a vice    which Thou extremely hatest." ('The Spiritual Exercises    of the most vertuous and religious Dame Gertrude More," p.    40). All the best and sanest of the mystics are of the same    opinion.

^59:87 [iii.iii-p67.1][iii.iii-p68]         See E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," pp. 12and 48;    and E. von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of    Religion," vol. i. p. 135.

^60:88 [iii.iii-p69.1][iii.iii-p70]         "Les Maladies des Sentiments Religieux."

^60:89 [iii.iii-p70.1][iii.iii-p71]         "L'Etat Mentale des Hysteriques," and    "Une Extatique" (    Bulletin de l'Institut Psychologique     , 1901).

^60:90 [iii.iii-p71.1][iii.iii-p72]         "La Psychologie des Sentiment," 1896.

^60:91 [iii.iii-p72.1][iii.iii-p73]         Op. cit     ., vol. ii. p. 42.

^60:92 [iii.iii-p74.1][iii.iii-p75]         For examples consult Pierre Janet,     op. cit. 

^61:93 [iii.iii-p77.1][iii.iii-p78]         Sermon for First Sunday after Easter (Winkworth, p. 302).

^61:94 [iii.iii-p78.1][iii.iii-p79]         "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. ii. cap.    xxv.

^61:95 [iii.iii-p80.1][iii.iii-p81]         Vida, cap. xx. sect. 29.

^62:96 [iii.iii-p82.1][iii.iii-p83]         Boyce Gibson ("God with Us," cap. iii.) has drawn a    striking parallel between the ferment and "interior    uproar" of adolescence and the profound disturbances which    mark man's entry into a conscious spiritual life. His remarks    are even more applicable to the drastic rearrangement of personality    which takes place in the case of the mystic, whose spiritual life is    more intense than that of other men.

^62:97 [iii.iii-p85.1][iii.iii-p86]         Delacroix, "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. iii.

^63:98 [iii.iii-p87.1][iii.iii-p88]         Dialogo, cap. lxxxvi.

^64:99 [iii.iii-p90.1][iii.iii-p91]         Quoted by James ("Varieties of Religious Experience," p.    481) from Clissold's "The Prophetic Spirit in Genius and    Madness," p. 67.

^64:100 [iii.iii-p92.1][iii.iii-p93]         "Merejkowsky, "Le Roman do Leonard de Vinci,"    p. 638.

^64:101 [iii.iii-p93.1][iii.iii-p94]         Vida, cap. xv. 9.

^64:102 [iii.iii-p94.1][iii.iii-p95]         Meister Eckhart, Pred. i. ("Mystische Schriften," p.    18).

^64:103 [iii.iii-p96.1][iii.iii-p97]         "Three Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p. 14.

^65:104 [iii.iii-p97.1][iii.iii-p98]         Dionysius the Areopagite, "De Divinis Nominibus," vii.    3.

^65:105 [iii.iii-p99.1][iii.iii-p100]         Pred. xxiii. Eckhart obtained this image from St. Thomas Aquinas,    "Summa Contra Gentiles," I. iii. cap. lxi. "The    intellectual soul is created on the confines of eternity and    time."

^66:106 [iii.iii-p102.1][iii.iii-p103]         Vie, t. ii. pp. 120, 223, 229. It might reasonably be objected that    Madame Guyon does not rank high among the mystics and her later    history includes some unfortunate incidents. This is true.    Nevertheless she exhibit such a profusion of mystical phenomena and    is so candid in her self-disclosures, that she provides much    valuable material for the student.

^66:107 [iii.iii-p104.1][iii.iii-p105]         G. Cunninghame Graham, "Santa Teresa," vol. i. p.    202.

^66:108 [iii.iii-p105.1][iii.iii-p106]         "Letters of William Blake," April 25, 1803.

^67:109 [iii.iii-p112.1][iii.iii-p113]         This insistence on the twofold character of human personality is    implicit in the mystics. "It is" says Bremond,    "the fundamental dogma of mystical psychology--the    distinction between the two selves:     Animus,      the surface self;     Anima     , the deep self;     Animus     , rational knowledge; and     Anima     , mystical or poetic knowledge . . . the I, who feeds on notions and    words, and enchants himself by doing so; the Me, who is united to    realities" (Bremond "Priere et Poesie,"    cap. xii.).

^68:110 [iii.iii-p116.1][iii.iii-p117]         Julian of Norwich, "Revelations of Divine Love," cap,    lv.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

IV. The Characteristics of   Mysticism

 [iii.iv][iii.iv-p1]The[iii.iv-p1.1] spiritual history of man reveals two distinct and fundamental  attitudes towards the unseen; and two methods whereby he has sought to  get in touch with it. For our present purpose I will call these  methods the "way of magic" and the "way of  mysticism." Having said this, we must at once add that although  in their extreme forms these methods are sharply contrasted, their  frontiers are far from being clearly defined: that, starting from the  same point, they often confuse the inquirer by using the same  language, instruments, and methods. Hence, much which is really magic  is loosely and popularly described as mysticism. They represent as a  matter of fact the opposite poles of the same thing: the  transcendental consciousness of humanity. Between them lie the great  religions, which might be described under this metaphor as  representing the ordinarily habitable regions of that consciousness.  Thus, at one end of the scale, pure mysticism "shades off"  into religion--from some points of view seems to grow out of it.  No deeply religious man is without a touch of mysticism; and no mystic  can be other than religious, in the psychological if not in the  theological sense of the word. At the other end of the scale, as we  shall see later, religion, no less surely, shades off into magic.

[iii.iv-p2]The fundamental difference between the two is this:  magic wants to get, mysticism wants to give--immortal and  antagonistic attitudes, which turn up under one disguise or another in  [p. 71] [iii.iv-Page_71] every age of thought. Both magic and  mysticism in their full development bring the whole mental machinery,  conscious and unconscious, to bear on their undertaking: both claim  that they give their initiates powers unknown to ordinary men. But the  centre round which that machinery is grouped, the reasons of that  undertaking, and the ends to which those powers are applied differ  enormously. In mysticism the will is united with the emotions in an  impassioned desire to transcend the sense-world, in order that the  self may be joined by love to the one eternal and ultimate Object of  love; whose existence is intuitively perceived by that which we used  to call the soul, but now find it easier to refer to as the  "cosmic" or "transcendental" sense. This is  the poetic and religious temperament acting upon the plane of reality.  In magic, the will unites with the intellect in an impassioned desire  for supersensible knowledge. This is the intellectual, aggressive, and  scientific temperament trying to extend its field of consciousness,  until it includes the supersensual world: obviously the antithesis of  mysticism, though often adopting its title and style.

[iii.iv-p3]It will be our business later to consider in more  detail the characteristics and significance of magic. Now it is enough  to say that we may class broadly as magical all forms of self-seeking  transcendentalism. It matters little whether the apparatus which they  use be the incantations of the old magicians, the congregational  prayer for rain of orthodox Churchmen, or the consciously  self-hypnotizing devices of "New Thought": whether the end  proposed be the evocation of an angel, the power of transcending  circumstance, or the healing of disease. The object is always the  same: the deliberate exaltation of the will, till it transcends its  usual limitations and obtains for the self or group of selves  something which it or they did not previously possess. It is an  individualistic and acquisitive science: in all its forms an activity  of the intellect, seeking Reality for its own purposes, or for those  of humanity at large.

[iii.iv-p4]Mysticism, whose great name is too often given to  these supersensual activities, has nothing in common with this. It is  non-individualistic. It implies, indeed, the abolition of  individuality; of that hard separateness, that "I, Me,  Mine" which makes of man a finite isolated thing. It is  essentially a movement of the heart, seeking to transcend the  limitations of the individual standpoint and to surrender itself to  ultimate Reality; for no personal gain, to satisfy no transcendental  curiosity, to obtain no other-worldly joys, but purely from an  instinct of love. By the word   heart,    of course we here mean not merely "the seat of the  affections," "the organ of tender emotion," and the  like: but rather the inmost sanctuary of personal being, the deep root  of [p. 72] [iii.iv-Page_72] its love and will, the very source of  its energy and life. The mystic is "in love with the  Absolute" not in any idle or sentimental manner, but in that  vital sense which presses at all costs and through all dangers towards  union with the object beloved. Hence, whilst the practice of  magic--like the practice of science--does not necessarily  entail passionate emotion, though of course it does and must entail  interest of some kind, mysticism, like art, cannot exist without it.  We must feel, and feel acutely, before we want to act on this hard and  heroic scale.

[iii.iv-p5]We see, then, that these two activities correspond to  the two eternal passions of the self, the desire of love and the  desire of knowledge: severally representing the hunger of heart and  intellect for ultimate truth. The third attitude towards the  supersensual world, that of transcendental philosophy, hardly comes  within the scope of the present inquiry; since it is purely academic,  whilst both magic and mysticism are practical and empirical. Such  philosophy is often wrongly called mysticism, because it tries to make  maps of the countries which the mystic explores. Its performances are  useful, as diagrams are useful, so long as they do not ape finality;  remembering that the only final thing is personal experience--the  personal and costly exploration of the exalted and truth-loving  soul.

[iii.iv-p6]What then do we really mean by mysticism? A word which  is impartially applied to the performances of mediums and the  ecstasies of the saints, to "menticulture" and sorcery,  dreamy poetry and mediaeval art, to prayer and palmistry, the  doctrinal excesses of Gnosticism, and the tepid speculations of the  Cambridge Platonists--even, according to William James, to the  higher branches of intoxication   [*111]   --soon ceases to have any useful meaning. Its employment merely  confuses the inexperienced student, who ends with a vague idea that  every kind of supersensual theory and practice is somehow  "mystical." Hence the need of fixing, if possible, its  true characteristics: and restating the fact that Mysticism, in its  pure form, is the science of ultimates, the science of union with the  Absolute, and nothing else, and that the mystic is the person who  attains to this union, not the person who talks about it. Not to   know about    but to   Be,    is the mark of the real initiate.

[iii.iv-p8]The difficulty lies in determining the point at which  supersensual experience ceases to be merely a practical and  interesting extension of sensual experience--an enlarging, so to  speak, of the boundaries of existence--and passes over into that  boundless life where Subject and Object, desirous and desired, are   one.    No [p. 73] [iii.iv-Page_73] sharp line, but rather an infinite  series of gradations separate the two states. Hence we must look  carefully at all the pilgrims on the road; discover, if we can, the  motive of their travels, the maps which they use, the luggage which  they take, the end which they attain.

[iii.iv-p9]Now we have said that the end which the mystic sets  before him is conscious union with a living Absolute. That Divine  Dark, that Abyss of the Godhead, of which he sometimes speaks as the  goal of his quest, is just this Absolute, the Uncreated Light in which  the Universe is bathed, and which--transcending, as it does, all  human powers of expression--he can only describe to us as   dark.    But there is--must be--contact "in an intelligible  where" between every individual self and this Supreme Self, this  Ultimate. In the mystic this union is conscious, personal, and  complete. "He enjoys," says St. John of the Cross,  "a certain contact of the soul with the Divinity; and it is God  Himself who is then felt and tasted."   [*112]    More or less according to his measure, he has touched--or  better, been touched by--the substantial Being of Deity, not  merely its manifestation in life. This it is which distinguishes him  from the best and most brilliant of other men, and makes his science,  in Patmore's words, "the science of self-evident  Reality." Gazing with him into that unsearchable ground whence  the World of Becoming comes forth "eternally generated in an  eternal Now," we may see only the icy darkness of perpetual  negations: but he, beyond the coincidence of opposites, looks upon the  face of Perfect Love.

[iii.iv-p11]As genius in any of the arts is--humanly  speaking--the final term of a power of which each individual  possesses the rudiments, so mysticism may be looked upon as the final  term, the active expression, of a power latent in the whole race: the  power, that is to say, of so perceiving transcendent reality. Few  people pass through life without knowing what it is to be at least  touched by this mystical feeling. He who falls in love with a woman  and perceives--as the lover really does perceive--that the  categorical term "girl" veils a wondrous and unspeakable  reality: he who, falling in love with nature, sees the landscape  "touched with light divine,"--a charming phrase to  those who have not seen it, but a scientific statement to the  rest--he who falls in love with the Holy, or as we say  "undergoes conversion": all these have truly known for an  instant something of the secret of the world.   [*113] 

   [iii.iv-p12.1] ". . . Ever and anon a trumpet sounds
   From the hid battlement of Eternity,
   Those shaken mists a space unsettle, then
   Round the half-glimpsed turrets slowly wash  again."
  [iii.iv-p13][p. 74] [iii.iv-Page_74] At such moments  "Transcendental Feeling, welling up from another 'Part of  the Soul' whispers to Understanding and Sense that they are  leaving out something. What? Nothing less than the secret plan of the  Universe. And what is that secret plan? The other 'Part of the  Soul' indeed comprehends it in silence as it is, but can explain  it to the Understanding only in the symbolical language of the  interpreter, Imagination--in Vision."   [*114] 

[iii.iv-p15]Here, in this spark or "part of the soul"  where the spirit, as religion says, "rests in God who made  it," is the fountain alike of the creative imagination and the  mystic life. Now and again something stings it into consciousness, and  man is caught up to the spiritual level, catches a glimpse of the  "secret plan." Then hints of a marvellous truth, a unity  whose note is ineffable peace, shine in created things; awakening in  the self a sentiment of love, adoration, and awe. Its life is  enhanced, the barrier of personality is broken, man escapes the  sense-world, ascends to the apex of his spirit, and enters for a brief  period into the more extended life of the All.

[iii.iv-p16]This intuition of the Real lying at the root of the  visible world and sustaining its life, is present in a modified form  in the arts: perhaps it were better to say,   must    be present if these arts are so justify themselves as heightened  forms of experience. It is this which gives to them that peculiar  vitality, that strange power of communicating a poignant emotion, half  torment and half joy, which baffle their more rational interpreters.  We know that the picture which is "like a photograph," the  building which is at once handsome and commodious, the novel which is  a perfect transcript of life, fail to satisfy us. It is difficult to  say why this should be so, unless it were because these things have  neglected their true business; which was not to reproduce the  illusions of ordinary men but to catch and translate for us something  of that "secret plan," that reality which the artistic  consciousness is able, in a measure, to perceive. "Painting as  well as music and poetry exists and exults in immortal  thoughts," says Blake.   [*115]    That "life-enhancing power" which has been recognized as  the supreme quality of good painting,   [*116]    has its origin in this contact of the artistic mind with the  archetypal--or, if you like, the transcendental--world: the  underlying verity of things.

[iii.iv-p19]A critic, in whom poetic genius has brought about the  unusual alliance of intuition with scholarship, testifies to this same  truth when he says of the ideals which governed early Chinese  painting, "In this theory every work of art is thought of as an  incarnation [p. 75] [iii.iv-Page_75] of the genius of rhythm,  manifesting the living spirit of things with a clearer beauty and  intenser power than the gross impediments of complex matter allow to  be transmitted to, our senses in the visible world around us. A  picture is conceived as a   sort of apparition from a more real world of essential  life."    [*117] 

[iii.iv-p21]That "more real world of essential life"  is the world in which the "free soul" of the great mystic  dwells; hovering like the six-winged seraph before the face of the  Absolute.   [*118]    The artist too may cross its boundaries in his brief moments of  creation: but he cannot stay. He comes back to us, bearing its  tidings, with Dante's cry upon his lips--

   [iii.iv-p22.1] ". . . Non eran da  cio le proprie penne
   se non che la mia mente fu percossa
   da un fulgore, in che sua voglia  venne."   [*119]  
  [iii.iv-p24]The mystic may say--is indeed bound to  say--with St. Bernard, "My secret to myself." Try how  he will, his stammering and awestruck reports can hardly be understood  but by those who are already in the way. But the artist cannot act  thus. On him has been laid the duty of expressing something of that  which he perceives. He is bound to tell his love. In his worship of  Perfect Beauty faith must be balanced by works. By means of veils and  symbols he must interpret his free vision, his glimpse of the burning  bush, to other men. He is the mediator between his brethren and the  divine, for art is the link between appearance and reality.   [*120] 

[iii.iv-p26]But we do not call every one who has these partial and  artistic intuitions of reality a mystic, any more than we call every  one a musician who has learnt to play the piano. The true mystic is  the person in whom such powers transcend the merely artistic and  visionary stage, and are exalted to the point of genius: in whom the  transcendental consciousness can dominate the normal consciousness,  and who has definitely surrendered himself to the embrace of Reality.  As artists stand in a peculiar relation to the phenomenal world,  receiving rhythms and discovering truths and beauties which are hidden  from other men, so this true mystic stands in a peculiar relation to  the transcendental world, there experiencing actual, but to us  unimaginable tension and delight. His consciousness is transfigured in  a particular way, he lives at [p. 76] [iii.iv-Page_76] different  levels of experience from other people: and this of course means that  he sees a different world, since the world as we know it is the  product of certain scraps or aspects of reality acting upon a normal  and untransfigured consciousness. Hence his mysticism is no isolated  vision, no fugitive glimpse of reality, but a complete system of life  carrying its own guarantees and obligations. As other men are immersed  in and react to natural or intellectual life, so the mystic is  immersed in and reacts to spiritual life. He moves towards that utter  identification with its interests which he calls "Union with  God." He has been called a lonely soul. He might more properly  be described as a lonely body: for his soul, peculiarly responsive,  sends out and receives communications upon every side.

[iii.iv-p27]The earthly artist, because perception brings with it  the imperative longing for expression, tries to give us in colour,  sound or words a hint of his ecstasy, his glimpse of truth. Only those  who have tried, know how small a fraction of his vision he can, under  the most favourable circumstance, contrive to represent. The mystic,  too, tries very hard to tell an unwilling world his secret. But in his  case, the difficulties are enormously increased. First, there is the  huge disparity between his unspeakable experience and the language  which will most nearly suggest it. Next, there is the great gulf fixed  between his mind and the mind of the world. His audience must be  bewitched as well as addressed, caught up to something of his state,  before they can be made to understand.

[iii.iv-p28]Were he a musician, it is probable that the mystic  could give his message to other musicians in the terms of that art,  far more accurately than language will allow him to do: for we must  remember that there is no excuse but that of convenience for the  pre-eminence amongst modes of expression which we accord to words.  These correspond so well to the physical plane and its adventures,  that we forget that they have but the faintest of relations with  transcendental things. Even the artist, before he can make use of  them, is bound to re-arrange them in accordance with the laws of  rhythm: obeying unconsciously the rule by which all arts "tend  to approach the condition of music."

[iii.iv-p29]So too the mystic. Mysticism, the most romantic of  adventures, from one point of view the art of arts, their source and  also their end, finds naturally enough its closest correspondences in  the most purely artistic and most deeply significant of all forms of  expression. The mystery of music is seldom realized by those who so  easily accept its gifts. Yet of all the arts music alone shares with  great mystical literature the power of waking in us a response to the  life-movement of the universe: brings us--we know not  how--news of its exultant passions and its incomparable peace.  [p. 77] [iii.iv-Page_77] Beethoven heard the very voice of  Reality, and little of it escaped when he translated it for our ears.   [*121] 

[iii.iv-p31]The mediaeval mind, more naturally mystical than ours,  and therefore more sharply aware of the part which rhythmic harmony  plays in the worlds of nature and of grace, gave to music a cosmic  importance, discerning its operation in many phenomena which we now  attribute to that dismal figment, Law. "There are three kinds of  music," says Hugh of St. Victor, "the music of the worlds,  the music of humanity, the music of instruments. Of the music of the  worlds, one is of the elements, another of the planets, another of  Time. Of that which is of the elements, one is of number, another of  weights, another of measure. Of that which is of the planets, one is  of place, another of motion, another of nature. Of that which is of  Time, one is of the days and the vicissitudes of light and darkness;  another of the months and the waxing and waning of the moon; another  of the years and the changes of spring, summer, autumn and winter. Of  the music of humanity, one is of the body, another of the soul,  another in the connexion that is between them."   [*122]    Thus the life of the visible and invisible universe consists in a  supernal fugue.

[iii.iv-p33]One contemplative at least, Richard Rolle of Hampole,  "the father of English mysticism," was acutely aware of  this music of the soul, discerning in it a correspondence with the  measured harmonies of the spiritual universe. In those enraptured  descriptions of his inward experience which are among the jewels of  mystical literature, nothing is more remarkable than his constant and  deliberate employment of musical imagery. This alone, it seems, could  catch and translate for him the character of his experience of  Reality. The condition of joyous and awakened love to which the mystic  passes when his purification is at an end is to him, above all else,  the state of Song. He does not "see" the spiritual world:  he "hears" it. For him, as for St. Francis of Assisi, it  is a "heavenly melody, intolerably sweet."   [*123] 

[iii.iv-p35]"Song I call," he says, "when in a  plenteous soul the sweetness of eternal love with burning is taken,  and thought into song is turned, and the mind into full sweet sound is  changed."   [*124]    He who [p. 78] [iii.iv-Page_78] experiences this joyous  exaltation "says not his prayers like other righteous men"  but "is taken into marvellous mirth: and, goodly sound being  descended into him, as it were with notes his prayers he sings."   [*125]    So Gertrude More--"O lett me sitt alone, silent to all the  world and it to me, that I may learn the song of Love."   [*126] 

[iii.iv-p39]Rolle's own experience of mystic joy seems  actually to have come to him in this form: the perceptions of his  exalted consciousness presenting themselves to his understanding under  musical conditions, as other mystics have received them in the form of  pictures or words. I give in his own words the classic description of  his passage from the first state of "burning love" to the  second state of "songful love"--from   Calor    to   Canor--   when "into song of joy meditation is turned." "In  the night, before supper, as I my psalms sung, as it were the sound of  readers or rather singers about me I beheld. Whilst, also praying, to  heaven with all desire I took heed, suddenly, in what manner I wot  not, in me the sound of song I felt; and likeliest heavenly melody I  took, with me dwelling in mind. Forsooth my thought continually to  mirth of song was changed, and my meditation to praise turned; and my  prayers and psalm-saying, in   sound    I showed."   [*127] 

[iii.iv-p41]The song, however, is a mystic melody having little in  common with its clumsy image, earthly music. Bodily song "lets  it"; and "noise of janglers makes it turn again to  thought," "for sweet ghostly song accords not with outward  song, the which in churches and elsewhere is used. It discords much:  for all that is man's voice is formed with bodily ears to be  heard; but among angels' tunes it has an acceptable melody, and  with marvel it is commended of them that have known it." To  others it is incommunicable. "Worldly lovers soothly words or  ditties of our song may know, for the words they read: but the tone  and sweetness of that song they may not learn."   [*128] 

[iii.iv-p46]Such symbolism as this--a living symbolism of  experience and action, as well as of statement--seems almost  essential to mystical expression. The mind must employ some device of  the kind if its transcendental perceptions--wholly unrelated as  they are to the phenomena with which intellect is able to  deal--are ever to be grasped by the surface consciousness.  Sometimes the symbol and the perception which it represents become  fused in that consciousness; and the mystic's experience then  presents itself to [p. 79] [iii.iv-Page_79] him as  "visions" or "voices" which we must look upon  as the garment he has himself provided to veil that Reality upon which  no man may look and live. The nature of this garment will be largely  conditioned by his temperament--as in Rolle's evident bias  towards music, St. Catherine of Genoa's leaning towards the  abstract conceptions of fire and light--and also by his  theological education and environment. Cases in point are the highly  dogmatic visions and auditions of St. Gertrude, Suso, St. Catherine of  Siena, the Blessed Angela of Foligno; above all of St. Teresa, whose  marvellous self-analyses provide the classic account of these attempts  of the mind to translate transcendental intuitions into concepts with  which it can deal.

[iii.iv-p47]The greatest mystics, however--Ruysbroeck, St.  John of the Cross, and St. Teresa herself in her later  stages--distinguish clearly between the ineffable Reality which  they perceive and the image under which they describe it. Again and  again they tell us with Dionysius and Eckhart, that the Object of  their contemplation "hath no image": or with St. John of  the Cross that "the soul can never attain to the height of the  divine union, so far as it is possible in this life, through the  medium of any forms or figures."   [*129]    Therefore the attempt which has sometimes been made to identify  mysticism with such forms and figures--with visions, voices,  "supernatural favours" and other abnormal  phenomena--is clearly wrong.

[iii.iv-p49]"The highest and most divine things which it is  given us to see and to know," says Dionysius the Areopagite  plainly, "are but the symbolic language of things subordinate to  Him who Himself transcendeth them all: through which things His  incomprehensible Presence is shown, walking on those heights of His  Holy Places which are perceived by the mind.   [*130] 

[iii.iv-p51]The mystic, as a rule, cannot wholly do without symbol  and image, inadequate to his vision though they must always be: for  his experience must be expressed if it is to be communicated, and its  actuality is inexpressible except in some side-long way, some hint or  parallel which will stimulate the dormant intuition of the reader, and  convey, as all poetic language does, something beyond its surface  sense. Hence the large part which is played in all mystical writings  by symbolism and imagery; and also by that rhythmic and exalted  language which induces in sensitive persons something of the languid  ecstasy of dream. The close connection between rhythm and heightened  states of consciousness is as yet little understood. Its further  investigation will probably throw much light on ontological as well as  psychological problems. [p. 80] [iii.iv-Page_80] Mystical, no  less than musical and poetic perception, tends naturally--we know  not why--to present itself in rhythmical periods: a feature which  is also strongly marked in writings obtained in the automatic state.  So constant is this law in some subjects that Baron von Hugel  adopted the presence or absence of rhythm as a test whereby to  distinguish the genuine utterances of St. Catherine of Genoa from  those wrongly attributed to her by successive editors of her legend.   [*131] 

[iii.iv-p53]All kinds of symbolic language come naturally to the  articulate mystic, who is often a literary artist as well: so  naturally, that he sometimes forgets to explain that his utterance is  but symbolic--a desperate attempt to translate the truth of that  world into the beauty of this. It is here that mysticism joins hands  with music and poetry: had this fact always been recognized by its  critics, they would have been saved from many regrettable and some  ludicrous misconceptions. Symbol--the clothing which the  spiritual borrows from the material plane--is a form of artistic  expression. That is to say, it is not literal but suggestive: though  the artist who uses it may sometimes lose sight of this distinction.  Hence the persons who imagine that the "Spiritual  Marriage" of St. Catherine or St. Teresa veils a perverted  sexuality, that the vision of the Sacred Heart involved an incredible  anatomical experience, or that the divine inebriation of the Sufis is  the apotheosis of drunkenness, do but advertise their ignorance of the  mechanism of the arts: like the lady who thought that Blake   must    be mad because he said that he had touched the sky with his  finger.

[iii.iv-p54]Further, the study of the mystics, the keeping company  however humbly with their minds, brings with it as music or poetry  does--but in a far greater degree--a strange exhilaration,  as if we were brought near to some mighty source of Being, were at  last on the verge of the secret which all seek. The symbols displayed,  the actual words employed, when we analyse them, are not enough to  account for such effect. It is rather that these messages from the  waking transcendental self of another, stir our own deeper selves in  their sleep. It were hardly an extravagance to say, that those  writings which are the outcome of true and first-hand mystical  experience may be known by this power of imparting to the reader the  sense of exalted and extended life. "All mystics," says  Saint-Martin, "speak the same language, for they come from the  same country." The deep undying life within us came from that  country too: and it recognizes the accents of home, though it cannot  always understand what they would say.

[iii.iv-p55]Now, returning to our original undertaking, that of  defining [p. 81] [iii.iv-Page_81] if we can the characteristics  of true mysticism, I think that we have already reached a point at  which William James's celebrated "four marks" of the  mystic state, Ineffability, Noetic Quality, Transiency, and Passivity,   [*132]    will fail to satisfy us. In their place I propose to set out,  illustrate and, I hope, justify four other rules or notes which may be  applied as tests to any given case which claims to take rank amongst  the mystics.

[iii.iv-p57]1. True mysticism is active and practical, not passive  and theoretical. It is an organic life-process, a something which the  whole self does; not something as to which its intellect holds an  opinion.

[iii.iv-p58]2. Its aims are wholly transcendental and spiritual.  It is in no way concerned with adding to, exploring, re-arranging, or  improving anything in the visible universe. The mystic brushes aside  that universe, even in its supernormal manifestations. Though he does  not, as his enemies declare, neglect his duty to the many, his heart  is always set upon the changeless One.

[iii.iv-p59]3. This One is for the mystic, not merely the Reality  of all that is, but also a living and personal Object of Love; never  an object of exploration. It draws his whole being homeward, but  always under the guidance of the heart.

[iii.iv-p60]4. Living union with this One--which is the term  of his adventure--is a definite state or form of enhanced life.  It is obtained neither from an intellectual realization of its  delights, nor from the most acute emotional longings. Though these  must be present they are not enough. It is arrived at by an arduous  psychological and spiritual process--the so-called Mystic  Way--entailing the complete remaking of character and the  liberation of a new, or rather latent, form of consciousness; which  imposes on the self the condition which is sometimes inaccurately  called "ecstasy," but is better named the Unitive  State.

[iii.iv-p61]Mysticism, then, is not an opinion: it is not a  philosophy. It has nothing in common with the pursuit of occult  knowledge. On the one hand it is not merely the power of contemplating  Eternity: on the other, it is not to be identified with any kind of  religious queerness. It is the name of that organic process which  involves the perfect consummation of the Love of God: the achievement  here and now of the immortal heritage of man. Or, if you like it  better--for this means exactly the same thing--it is the art  of establishing his conscious relation with the Absolute.

[iii.iv-p62]The movement of the mystic consciousness towards this  consummation, is not merely the sudden admission to an overwhelming  vision of Truth: though such dazzling glimpses may from time to time  be vouchsafed to the soul. It is rather an ordered movement [p. 82] [iii.iv-Page_82] towards ever higher levels of reality, ever  closer identification with the Infinite. "The mystic  experience," says Recejac, "ends with the words,  'I live, yet not I, but God in me.' This feeling of  identification, which is the term of mystical activity, has a very  important significance. In its early stages the mystic consciousness  feels the Absolute in opposition to the Self . . . as mystic activity  goes on, it tends to abolish this opposition. . . . When it has  reached its term the consciousness finds itself possessed by the sense  of a Being at one and the same time greater than the Self and  identical with it: great enough to be God, intimate enough to be  me."   [*133] 

[iii.iv-p64]This is that mystic union which is the only possible  fulfilment of mystic love: since

   [iii.iv-p64.1] "All that is not One must ever
   Suffer with the wound of Absence
   And whoever in Love's city
   Enters, finds but room for One
   And but in One-ness, Union."   [*134]  
  [iii.iv-p66]The history of mysticism is the history of the  demonstration of this law upon the plane of reality.

[iii.iv-p67]Now, how do these statements square with the practice  of the great mystics; and with the various forms of activity which  have been classified at one time or another as mystical?

[iii.iv-p68](1)   Mysticism is practical, not theoretical. 

[iii.iv-p69]This statement, taken alone, is not, of course, enough  to identify mysticism; since it is equally true of magic, which also  proposes to itself something to be done rather than something to be  believed. It at once comes into collision, however, with the opinions  of those who believe mysticism to be "the reaction of the born  Platonist upon religion."

[iii.iv-p70]The difference between such devout philosophers and  the true mystic, is the difference which George Tyrrell held to  distinguish revelation from theology.   [*135]    Mysticism, like revelation, is final and personal. It is not merely a  beautiful and suggestive diagram but experience in its most intense  form. That experience, in the words of Plotinus, is the soul's  solitary adventure: "the flight of the Alone to the  Alone."   [*136]    It provides the material, the substance, upon which mystical  philosophy cogitates; as theologians cogitate upon the revelation  which forms the basis of faith. Hence those whom we are to accept as  mystics must have received, and acted upon, intuitions of a Truth  which is for them absolute. If we are [p. 83] [iii.iv-Page_83] to  acknowledge that they "knew the doctrine" they must have  "lived the life"; submitted to the interior travail of the  Mystic Way, not merely have reasoned about the mystical experiences of  others. We could not well dispense with our Christian Platonists and  mystical philosophers. They are our stepping-stones to higher things;  interpret to our dull minds, entangled in the sense-world, the ardent  vision of those who speak to us from the dimension of Reality. But  they are no more mystics than the milestones on the Dover Road are  travellers to Calais. Sometimes their words--the wistful words of  those who know but cannot be--produce mystics; as the sudden  sight of a signpost pointing to the sea will rouse the spirit of  adventure in a boy. Also there are many instances of true mystics,  such as Eckhart, who have philosophized upon their own experiences,  greatly to the advantage of the world; and others--Plotinus is  the most characteristic example--of Platonic philosophers who  have passed far beyond the limits of their own philosophy, and  abandoned the making of diagrams for an experience, however imperfect,  of the reality at which these diagrams hint. It were more accurate to  reverse the epigram above stated, and say, that Platonism is the  reaction of the intellectualist upon mystical truth.

[iii.iv-p73]Over and over again the great mystics tell us, not how  they speculated, but how they acted. To them, the transition from the  life of sense to the life of spirit is a formidable undertaking, which  demands effort and constancy. The paradoxical "quiet" of  the contemplative is but the outward stillness essential to inward  work. Their favourite symbols are those of action: battle, search, and  pilgrimage.

   [iii.iv-p73.1] "In an obscure night
   Fevered with love's anxiety
   (O hapless, happy plight!)
   I   went   , none seeing me
   Forth from my house, where all things quiet  be,"   [*137]  
  [iii.iv-p75]said St. John of the Cross, in his poem of the  mystic quest.

[iii.iv-p76]"It became evident to me," says Al  Ghazzali of his own search for mystic truth, "that the Sufis are  men of intuition and not men of words. I recognized that I had learnt  all that can be learnt of Sufiism by study, and that the rest could  not be learnt by study or by speech."   [*138]    "Let no one suppose," says the "Theologia  Germanica," "that we may attain to this true light and  perfect knowledge . . . by hearsay, or by reading and study, nor yet  by high skill and great learning."   [*139]    "It is not enough," says Gerlac [p. 84] [iii.iv-Page_84] Petersen, "to know by estimation merely:  but we must know by experience."   [*140]    So Mechthild of Magdeburg says of her revelations, "The writing  of this book was seen, heard, and experienced in every limb. . . . I  see it with the eyes of my soul, and hear it with the ears of my  eternal spirit."   [*141] 

[iii.iv-p81]Those who suppose mystical experience to be merely a  pleasing consciousness of the Divine in the world, a sense of the  "otherness" of things, a basking in the beams of the  Uncreated Light, are only playing with Reality. True mystical  achievement is the most complete and most difficult expression of life  which is as yet possible to man. It is at once an act of love, an act  of surrender, and an act of supreme perception; a trinity of  experiences which meets and satisfies the three activities of the  self. Religion might give us the first and metaphysics the third of  these processes. Only Mysticism can offer the middle term of the  series; the essential link which binds the three in one.  "Secrets," says St. Catherine of Siena, "are  revealed to a friend who has become one thing with his friend and not  to a servant."   [*142] 

[iii.iv-p83](2)   Mysticism is an entirely Spiritual Activity. 

[iii.iv-p84]This rule provides us with a further limitation, which  of course excludes all the practisers of magic and of magical  religion: even in their most exalted and least materialistic forms. As  we shall see when we come to consider these persons, their  object--not necessarily an illegitimate one--is to improve  and elucidate the visible by help of the invisible: to use the  supernormal powers of the self for the increase of power, virtue,  happiness or knowledge. The mystic never turns back on himself in this  way, or tries to combine the advantages of two worlds. At the term of  his development he knows God by communion, and this direct intuition  of the Absolute kills all lesser cravings. He possesses God, and needs  nothing more. Though he will spend himself unceasingly for other men,  become "an agent of the Eternal Goodness," he is destitute  of supersensual ambitions and craves no occult knowledge or power.  Having his eyes set on eternity, his consciousness steeped in it, he  can well afford to tolerate the entanglements of time. "His  spirit," says Tauler, "is as it were sunk and lost in the  Abyss of the Deity, and loses the consciousness of all  creature-distinctions. All things are gathered together in one with  the divine sweetness, and the man's being is so penetrated with  the divine substance that he loses himself therein, as a drop of water  is lost in a cask of strong wine. And thus the man's spirit is  so sunk in God in divine union, that he loses all sense of distinction  . . . [p. 85] [iii.iv-Page_85] and there remains a secret, still  union, without cloud or colour."   [*143]    "I wish not," said St. Catherine of Genoa, "for  anything that comes forth from Thee, but only for Thee, oh sweetest  Love!"   [*144]    "Whatever share of this world," says Rabi'a,  "Thou dost bestow on me, bestow it on Thine enemies, and  whatever share of the next world thou dost give me, give it to Thy  friends. Thou art enough for me!"   [*145]    "The Soul," says Plotinus in one of his most profound  passages, "having now arrived at the desired end, and  participating of Deity, will know that the Supplier of true life is  then present. She will likewise then require nothing farther; for, on  the contrary it will be requisite to lay aside other things, to stop  in this alone, amputating everything else with which she is  surrounded."   [*146] 

[iii.iv-p89](3)   The business and method of Mysticism is Love. 

[iii.iv-p90]Here is one of the distinctive notes of true  mysticism; marking it off from every other kind of transcendental  theory and practice and providing the answer to the question with  which our last chapter closed. It is the eager, outgoing activity  whose driving power is generous love, not the absorbent, indrawing  activity which strives only for new knowledge, that is fruitful in the  spiritual as well as in the physical world.

[iii.iv-p91]Having said this, however, we must add--as we did  when speaking of the "heart"--that the word Love as  applied to the mystics is to be understood in its deepest, fullest  sense; as the ultimate expression of the self's most vital  tendencies, not as the superficial affection or emotion often  dignified by this name. Mystic Love is a total dedication of the will;  the deep-seated desire and tendency of the soul towards its Source. It  is a condition of humble access, a life-movement of the self: more  direct in its methods, more valid in its results--even in the  hands of the least lettered of its adepts--than the most piercing  intellectual vision of the greatest philosophic mind. Again and again  the mystics insist upon this. "For silence is not God, nor  speaking is not God; fasting is not God nor eating is not God;  onliness is not God nor company is not God; nor yet any of all the  other two such quantities, He is hid between them, and may not be  found by any work of thy soul, but all only by love of thine heart. He  may not be known by reason, He may not be gotten by thought, nor  concluded by understanding; but he may be loved and chosen with the  true lovely will of thine heart. . . . Such a blind shot with the  sharp dart of longing love may never fail of the prick, the which is  God."   [*147]    [p. 86] [iii.iv-Page_86]

[iii.iv-p93]"'Come down quickly,'" says  the Incomprehensible Godhead to the soul that has struggled like  Zaccheus to the topmost branches of the theological tree,  "'for I would dwell with you to-day.' And this hasty  descent to which he is summoned by God is simply a descent by love and  desire in to that abyss of the Godhead which the intellect cannot  understand. But where intelligence must rest without, love and desire  can enter in."   [*148] 

[iii.iv-p95]Volumes of extracts might be compiled from the works  of the mystics illustrative of this rule, which is indeed their  central principle. "Some there are," says Plotinus,  "that for all their effort have not attained the Vision; the  soul in them has come to no sense of the splendour there. It has not  taken warmth; it has not felt burning within itself the flame of love  for what is there to know."   [*149]    "Love," says Rolle, "truly suffers not a loving  soul to bide in itself, but ravishes it out to the Lover, that the  soul is more there where it loves, than where the body is that lives  and feels it." "Oh singular joy of love  everlasting," he says again, "that ravishes all his to  heavens above all worlds, them binding with bands of virtue! Oh dear  charity, in earth that has thee not is nought wrought, whatever it  hath! He truly in thee that is busy, to joy above earthly is soon  lifted! Thou makest men contemplative, heaven-gate thou openest,  mouths of accusers thou dost shut, God thou makest to be seen and  multitude of sins thou hidest. We praise thee, we preach thee, by thee  the world we quickly overcome, by whom we joy and the heavenly ladder  we ascend."   [*150] 

[iii.iv-p98]Love to the mystic, then, is (a) the active, conative,  expression of his will and desire for the Absolute; (b) his innate  tendency to that Absolute, his spiritual weight. He is only thoroughly  natural, thoroughly alive, when he is obeying its voice. For him it is  the source of joy, the secret of the universe, the vivifying principle  of things. In the words of Recejac, "Mysticism claims  to be able to know the Unknowable without any help from dialectics;  and believes that, by the way of love and will it reaches a point to  which thought alone is unable to attain." Again, "It is  the heart and never the reason which leads us to the Absolute."   [*151]    Hence in St. Catherine of Siena's exquisite allegory it is the  feet of the soul's affection which brings it first to the  Bridge, "for the feet carry the body as affection carries the  soul."   [*152] 

[iii.iv-p101]The jewels of mystical literature glow with this  intimate and impassioned love of the Absolute; which transcends the  dogmatic language in which it is clothed and becomes applicable to  mystics of every race and creed. There is little difference in this  between [p. 87] [iii.iv-Page_87] the extremes of Eastern and  Western thought: between A Kempis the Christian and Jalalu 'd  Din the Moslem saint.

[iii.iv-p102]"How great a thing is Love, great above all  other goods: for alone it makes all that is heavy light, and bears  evenly all that is uneven. . . .

[iii.iv-p103]"Love would be aloft, nor will it be kept back  by any lower thing. Love would be free, and estranged from all worldly  affection, that its inward sight be not hindered: that it may not be  entangled by any temporal comfort, nor succumb to any tribulation.

[iii.iv-p104]"Nought is sweeter than love, nought stronger,  nought higher, nought wider: there is no more joyous, fuller, better  thing in heaven or earth. For love is born of God, and cannot rest  save in God, above all created things.

[iii.iv-p105]"The lover flies, runs, and, rejoices: he is  free, and cannot be restrained. He gives all for all, and has all in  all; for he rests in One Supreme above all, from whom all good flows  and proceeds.

[iii.iv-p106]"He looks not at the gift, but above all goods  turns himself to the giver.

[iii.iv-p107]". . . He who loves knows the cry of this voice.  For this burning affection of the soul is a loud cry in the ears of  God when it saith 'My God, My Love, Thou art all mine, and I am  all Thine.'"   [*153] 

[iii.iv-p109]So much for the Christian. Now for the Persian  mystic.

   [iii.iv-p109.1] "While the thought of the Beloved fills our  hearts
   All our work is to do Him service and spend life for  Him.
   Wherever He kindles His destructive torch
   Myriads of lovers' souls are burnt  therewith.
   The lovers who dwell within the sanctuary
   Are moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved's  face.
   O heart, hasten thither! for God will shine upon  you,
   And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a  terror.
   He will infuse into your soul a new soul,
   So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine.
   Take up your abode in His Soul!
   Take up your abode in heaven, oh bright full  moon!
   Like the heavenly Scribe, He will open your  heart's book
   That he may reveal mysteries unto you."   [*154]  
  [iii.iv-p111]Well might Hilton say that "Perfect love maketh  God and the soul to be as if they both together were but one  thing,"   [*155]    and Tauler that "the well of life is love, and he who dwelleth  not in love is dead."   [*156] 

[iii.iv-p114]These, nevertheless, are objective and didactic  utterances; though their substance may be--probably  is--personal, their form is not. But if we want to see what it  really means to be "in love [p. 88] [iii.iv-Page_88] with  the Absolute,"--how intensely actual to the mystic is the  Object of his passion, how far removed from the spheres of pious duty  or philosophic speculation, how concrete, positive and dominant such a  passion may be--we must study the literature of autobiography,  not that of poetry or exhortation. I choose for this purpose, rather  than the well-known self-analyses of St. Augustine, St. Teresa or  Suso, which are accessible to every one, the more private confessions  of that remarkable mystic Dame Gertrude More, contained in her  "Spiritual Exercises."

[iii.iv-p115]This nun, great-great-granddaughter of Sir Thomas  More, and favourite pupil of the celebrated Benedictine contemplative,  the Ven. Augustine Baker, exhibits the romantic and personal side of  mysticism more perfectly than even St. Teresa, whose works were  composed for her daughters' edification. She was an eager  student of St. Augustine, "my deere deere Saint," as she  calls him more than once. He had evidently influenced her language;  but her passion is her own.

[iii.iv-p116]Remember that Gertrude More's confessions  represent the most secret conversations of her soul with God. They  were not meant for publication; but, written for the most part on  blank leaves in her breviary, were discovered and published after her  death. "She called them," says the title-page with  touching simplicity, [iii.iv-p116.1]"  Amor ordinem nescit:     an Ideot's Devotions. Her only spiritual  father and directour, Father Baker, styled them   Confessiones Amantis,    A Lover's Confessions. [iii.iv-p116.2]  Amans Deum anima sub Deo despicit universa.     A soul that loveth God despiseth all things that be  inferiour unto God."   [*157] 

[iii.iv-p118]The spirit of her little book is summed up in two  epigrams: epigrams of which her contemporary, Crashaw, might have been  proud. "To give all for love is a most sweet bargain."   [*158]    "O let me love, or not live!"   [*159]    Love indeed was her life: and she writes of it with a rapture which  recalls at one moment the exuberant poetry of Jacopene da Todi, at  another the love songs of the Elizabethan poets.

[iii.iv-p121]"Never was there or can there be imagined such a  Love, as is between an humble soul and thee. Who can express what  passeth between such a soul and thee? Verily neither man nor Angell is  able to do it sufficiently. . . . In thy prayse I am only happy, in  which, my Joy, I will exult with all that love thee. For what can be a  comfort while I live separated from thee, but only to remember that my  God, who is more myne than I am my owne, is absolutely and infinitely  happy? . . . Out of this true love between a [p. 89] [iii.iv-Page_89] soul and thee, there ariseth such a knowledge  in the soul that it loatheth all that is an impediment to her further  proceeding in the Love of thee. O Love, Love, even by naming thee, my  soul loseth itself in thee. . . . Nothing can Satiate a reasonable  soul but only thou: and having of thee, who art indeed all, nothing  could be said to be wanting to her. . . .   Blessed are the cleans of hart for they shall see God.    O sight to be wished, desired, and longed for; because once to have  seen thee is to have learnt all things. Nothing can bring us to this  sight but love. But what love must it be? not a sensible love only, a  childish love, a love which seeketh itself more than the beloved. No,  no, but it must be an ardent love, a pure love, a courageous love, a  love of charity, an humble love, and a constant love, not worn out  with labours, not daunted with any difficulties. . . . For that soul  that hath set her whole love and desire on thee, can never find any  true satisfaction, but only in thee."   [*160] 

[iii.iv-p123]Who will not see that we have here no literary  exercise, but the fruits of an experience of peculiar intensity? It  answers exactly to one of the best modern definitions of mysticism as  "in essence, the concentration of all the forces of the soul  upon a supernatural Object, conceived and loved as a living  Person."   [*161]    "Love and desire," says the same critic, "are the  fundamental necessities; and where they are absent man, even though he  be a visionary, cannot be called a mystic."   [*162]    Such a definition, of course, is not complete. It is valuable  however, because it emphasizes the fact that all true mysticism is  rooted in personality; and is therefore fundamentally a science of the  heart.

[iii.iv-p126]Attraction, desire, and union as the fulfilment of  desire; this is the way Life works, in the highest as in the lowest  things. The mystic's outlook, indeed, is the lover's  outlook. It has the same element of wildness, the same quality of  selfless and quixotic devotion, the same combination of rapture and  humility. This parallel is more than a pretty fancy: for mystic and  lover, upon different planes, are alike responding to the call of the  Spirit of Life. The language of human passion is tepid and  insignificant beside the language in which the mystics try to tell the  splendours of their love. They force upon the unprejudiced reader the  conviction that they are dealing with an ardour far more burning for  an Object far more real.

[iii.iv-p127]"This monk can give lessons to lovers!"  exclaimed Arthur Symons in astonishment of St. John of the Cross.   [*163]    It would be strange if he could not; since their finite passions are  but the feeble images of his infinite one, their beloved the imperfect  symbol of [p. 90] [iii.iv-Page_90] his First and only Fair.  "I saw Him and sought Him: I had Him and I wanted Him,"  says Julian of Norwich, in a phrase which seems to sum up all the  ecstasy and longing of man's soul. Only this mystic passion can  lead us from our prison. Its brother, the desire of knowledge, may  enlarge and improve the premises to an extent as yet undreamed of: but  it can never unlock the doors.

[iii.iv-p129](4)   Mysticism entails a definite Psychological Experience. 

[iii.iv-p130]That is to say, it shows itself not merely as an  attitude of mind and heart, but as a form of organic life. It is not  only a theory of the intellect or a hunger, however passionate, of the  heart. It involves the organizing of the whole self, conscious and  unconscious, under the spur of such a hunger: a remaking of the whole  character on high levels in the interests of the transcendental life.  The mystics are emphatic in their statement that spiritual desires are  useless unless they initiate this costly movement of the whole self  towards the Real.

[iii.iv-p131]Thus in the visions of Mechthild of Magdeburg,  "The soul spake thus to her Desire, 'Fare forth and see  where my Love is. Say to him that I desire to love.' So Desire  sped forth, for she is quick of her nature, and came to the Empyrean  and cried, 'Great Lord, open and let me in!' Then said the  Householder of that place: 'What means this fiery  eagerness?' Desire replied, 'Lord I would have thee know  that my lady can no longer bear to live. If Thou wouldst flow forth to  her, then might she swim: but the fish cannot long exist that is left  stranded on the shore.' 'Go back,' said the Lord,  'I will not let thee in unless thou bring to me that hungry  soul, for it is in this alone that I take delight.'"   [*164] 

[iii.iv-p133]We have said   [*165]    that the full mystic consciousness is extended in two distinct  directions. So too there are two distinct sides to the full mystical  experience. (A) The vision or consciousness of Absolute Perfection.  (B) The inward transmutation to which that Vision compels the mystic,  in order that he may be to some extent worthy of that which he has  beheld: may take his place within the order of Reality. He has seen  the Perfect; he wants to be perfect too. The "third term,"  the necessary bridge between the Absolute and the Self, can only, he  feels, be moral and spiritual transcendence--in a word,   Sanctity--   for "the only means of attaining the Absolute lies in adapting  ourselves to It."   [*166]    The moral virtues are for him, then, the obligatory "ornaments  of the Spiritual Marriage" as Ruysbroeck called them: though far  more than their presence is needed to bring that marriage about.  Unless this impulse for moral perfection be born in him, this travail  of the inner life begun, he [p. 91] [iii.iv-Page_91] is no  mystic: though he may well be a visionary, a prophet, a  "mystical" poet.

[iii.iv-p136]Moreover, this process of transmutation, this  rebuilding of the self on higher levels, will involve the  establishment within the field of consciousness, the making  "central for life," of those subconscious spiritual  perceptions which are the primary material of mystical experience. The  end and object of this "inward alchemy" will be the  raising of the whole self to the condition in which conscious and  permanent union with the Absolute takes place and man, ascending to  the summit of his manhood, enters into that greater life for which he  was made. In its journey towards this union, the subject commonly  passes through certain well-marked phases, which constitute what is  known as the "Mystic Way." This statement rules out from  the true mystic kingdom all merely sentimental and affective piety and  visionary poetry, no less than mystical philosophy. It brings us back  to our first proposition--the concrete and practical nature of  the mystical act.

[iii.iv-p137]More than the apprehension of God, then, more than the  passion for the Absolute, is needed to make a mystic. These must be  combined with an appropriate psychological make-up, with a nature  capable of extraordinary concentration, an exalted moral emotion, a  nervous organization of the artistic type. All these are necessary to  the successful development of the mystic life process. In the  experience of those mystics who have left us the records of their own  lives, the successive stages of this life process are always  traceable. In the second part of this book, they will be found worked  out at some length. Rolle, Suso, St. Teresa, and many others have left  us valuable self-analyses for comparison: and from them we see how  arduous, how definite, and how far removed from mere emotional or  intellectual activity, is that educational discipline by which  "the eye which looks upon Eternity" is able to come to its  own. "One of the marks of the true mystic," says  Leuba--by no means a favourable witness--"is the  tenacious and heroic energy with which he pursues a definite moral  ideal."   [*167]    "He is," says Pacheu, "the pilgrim of an inward  Odyssey."   [*168]    Though we may be amazed and delighted by his adventures and  discoveries on the way, to him the voyage and the end are all.  "The road on which we enter is a royal road which leads to  heaven," says St. Teresa. "Is it strange that the conquest  of such a treasure should cost us rather dear?"   [*169] 

[iii.iv-p141]It is one of the many indirect testimonies to the  objective reality of mysticism that the stages of this road, the  psychology [p. 92] [iii.iv-Page_92] of the spiritual ascent, as  described to us by different schools of contemplatives, always present  practically the same sequence of states. The "school for  saints" has never found it necessary to bring its curriculum up  to date. The psychologist finds little difficulty, for instance, in  reconciling the "Degrees of Orison" described by St.  Teresa   [*170]   --Recollection, Quiet, Union, Ecstasy, Rapt, the "Pain of  God," and the Spiritual Marriage of the soul--with the four  forms of contemplation enumerated by Hugh of St. Victor, or the  Sufi's "Seven Stages" of the soul's ascent to  God, which begin in adoration and end in spiritual marriage.   [*171]    Though each wayfarer may choose different landmarks, it is clear from  their comparison that the road is one.

[iii.iv-p144](5) As a corollary to these four rules, it is perhaps  well to reiterate the statement already made, that   True Mysticism is never self-seeking.    It is not, as many think, the pursuit of supernatural joys; the  satisfaction of a high ambition. The mystic does not enter on his  quest because he desires the happiness of the Beatific Vision, the  ecstasy of union with the Absolute, or any other personal reward. That  noblest of all passions, the passion for perfection for Love's  sake, far outweighs the desire for transcendental satisfaction.  "O Love," said St. Catherine of Genoa, "I do not  wish to follow thee for sake of these delights, but solely from the  motive of true love."   [*172]    Those who do otherwise are only, in the plain words of St. John of  the Cross, "spiritual gluttons":   [*173]    or, in the milder metaphor here adopted, magicians of the more  high-minded sort. The true mystic claims no promises and makes no  demands. He goes because he must, as Galahad went towards the Grail:  knowing that for those who can live it, this alone is life. He never  rests in that search for God which he holds to be the fulfilment of  his highest duty; yet he seeks without any certainty of success. He  holds with St. Bernard that "He alone is God who can never be  sought in vain: not even when He cannot be found."   [*174]    With Mechthild of Magdeburg, he hears the Absolute saying in his  soul, "O soul, before the world was I longed for thee: and I  still long for thee, and thou for Me. Therefore, when our two desires  unite, Love shall be fulfilled."   [*175] 

[iii.iv-p149]Like his type, the "devout lover" of  romance, then, the mystic serves without hope of reward. By one of the  many paradoxes of the spiritual life, he obtains satisfaction because  he does not seek it; completes his personality because he gives it up.  "Attainment," [p. 93] [iii.iv-Page_93] says Dionysius  the Areopagite in words which are writ large on the annals of  Christian ecstasy, "comes only by means of this sincere,  spontaneous, and entire surrender of yourself and all things."   [*176]    Only with the annihilation of selfhood comes the fulfilment of love.  Were the mystic asked the cause of his often extraordinary behaviour,  his austere and steadfast quest, it is unlikely that his reply would  contain any reference to sublime illumination or unspeakable delights.  It is more probable that he would answer in some such words as those  of Jacob Boehme, "I am not come to this meaning, or to this work  and knowledge through my own reason or through my own will and  purpose; neither have I sought this knowledge, nor so much as to know  anything concerning it. I sought only for the heart of God, therein to  hide myself."   [*177] 

[iii.iv-p152]"Whether we live or whether we die," said  St. Paul, "we are the Lord's." The mystic is a  realist, to whom these words convey not a dogma but an invitation: an  invitation to the soul to attain that fullness of life for which she  was made, to "lose herself in That which can be neither seen nor  touched; giving herself entirely to this sovereign Object without  belonging either to herself or to others; united to the Unknown by the  most noble part of herself and because of her renouncement of  knowledge; finally drawing from this absolute ignorance a knowledge  which the understanding knows not how to attain.   [*178]    Mysticism, then, is seen as the "one way out" for the  awakened spirit of man; healing that human incompleteness which is the  origin of our divine unrest. "I am sure," says Eckhart,  "that if a soul knew the very least of all that Being means, it  would never turn away from it."   [*179]    The mystics have never turned away: to do so would have seemed to  them a self-destructive act. Here, in this world of illusion, they  say, we have no continuing city. This statement, to you a proposition,  is to us the central fact of life. "Therefore, it is necessary  to hasten our departure from hence, and detach ourselves in so far as  we may from the body to which we are fettered, in order that with the  whole of our selves, we may fold ourselves about Divinity, and have no  part void of contact with Him."   [*180] 

[iii.iv-p156]To sum up. Mysticism is seen to be a highly  specialized form of that search for reality, for heightened and  completed life, which we have found to be a constant characteristic of  human consciousness. It is largely prosecuted by that "spiritual  spark," that transcendental faculty which, though the life of  our life, remains below the threshold in ordinary men. Emerging from  its [p. 94] [iii.iv-Page_94] hiddenness in the mystic, it  gradually becomes the dominant factor in his life; subduing to its  service, and enhancing by its saving contact with reality, those vital  powers of love and will which we attribute to the heart, rather than  those of mere reason and perception, which we attribute to the head.  Under the spur of this love and will, the whole personality rises in  the acts of contemplation and ecstasy to a level of consciousness at  which it becomes aware of a new field of perception. By this  awareness, by this "loving sight," it is stimulated to a  new life in accordance with the Reality which it has beheld. So  strange and exalted is this life, that it never fails to provoke  either the anger or the admiration of other men. "If the great  Christian mystics," says Leuba, "could by some miracle be  all brought together in the same place, each in his habitual  environment, there to live according to his manner, the world would  soon perceive that they constitute one of the most amazing and  profound variations of which the human race has yet been  witness."   [*181] 

[iii.iv-p158]A discussion of mysticism, regarded as a form of human  life, will therefore include two branches. First the life process of  the mystic: the remaking of his personality; the method by which his  peculiar consciousness of the Absolute is attained, and faculties  which have been evolved to meet the requirements of the phenomenal,  are enabled to do work on the transcendental, plane. This is the  "Mystic Way" in which the self passes through the states  or stages of development which were codified by the Neoplatonists, and  after them by the mediaeval mystics, as Purgation, Illumination, and  Ecstasy. Secondly, the content of the mystical field of perception;  the revelation under which the contemplative becomes aware of the  Absolute. This will include a consideration of the so called doctrines  of mysticism: the attempts of the articulate mystic to sketch for us  the world into which he has looked, in language which is only adequate  to the world in which the rest of us dwell. Here the difficult  question of symbolism, and of symbolic theology, comes in: a point  upon which many promising expositions of the mystics have been  wrecked. It will be our business to strip off as far as may be the  symbolic wrapping, and attempt a synthesis of these doctrines; to  resolve the apparent contradictions of objective and subjective  revelations, of the ways of negation and affirmation, emanation and  immanence, surrender and deification, the Divine Dark and the Inward  Light; and finally to exhibits if we can, the essential unity of that  experience in which the human soul enters consciously into the  Presence of God.

[iii.iv-p159][p. 95] [iii.iv-Page_95]

Footnotes

^72:111 [iii.iv-p6.1][iii.iv-p7]         See "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 387,    "The Drunken Consciousness is a bit of the Mystic    Consciousness."

^73:112 [iii.iv-p9.1][iii.iv-p10]         Llama de Amor Viva, II. 26.

^73:113 [iii.iv-p11.1][iii.iv-p12]         Compare above, pp. 24, 26, 57.

^74:114 [iii.iv-p13.1][iii.iv-p14]         J. A. Stewart, "The Myths of Plato," p. 40.

^74:115 [iii.iv-p16.1][iii.iv-p17]         "Descriptive Catalogue."

^74:116 [iii.iv-p17.1][iii.iv-p18]         See T. Rolleston, "Parallel Paths."

^75:117 [iii.iv-p19.1][iii.iv-p20]         Laurence Binyon, "Painting in the Far East," p. 9.

^75:118 [iii.iv-p21.1][iii.iv-p22]         "The Mirror of Simple Souls," Pt. III, cap. 1.

^75:119 [iii.iv-p22.5][iii.iv-p23]    Par. xxxiii. 139. "Not for this were my wings fitted: save    only that my mind was smitten by a lightning flash wherein came to    it its desire."

^75:120 [iii.iv-p24.1][iii.iv-p25]         In this connexion Godfernaux (    Revue          Philosophique,      February, 1902) has a highly significant remark to the effect that    romanticism represents the invasion of secular literature by mystic    or religious emotion. It is, he says, the     secularization of the inner life.      Compare also Bremond, "Priere et Poesie."

^77:121 [iii.iv-p29.1][iii.iv-p30]         I take from Hebert's monograph "Le Divin" two    examples of the analogy between mystical and musical emotion. First    that of Gay, who had "the soul, the heart, and the head full    of music, of another beauty than that which is formulated by    sounds." Next that of Ruysbroeck, who, in a passage that might    have been written by Keats, speaks of contemplation and Love as    "two heavenly pipes" which, blown upon by the Holy    Spirit, play "ditties of no tone" (    op. cit     . p. 29).

^77:122 [iii.iv-p31.1][iii.iv-p32]         Hugh of St. Victor, "Didascalicon de Studio    Legendi."

^77:123 [iii.iv-p33.1][iii.iv-p34]         "Fioretti." Delle Istimati. (Arnold's    translation.)

^77:124 [iii.iv-p35.1][iii.iv-p36]         Richard Rolle, 'The Fire of Love" (Early English Text    Society), bk. i. cap. xv. In this and subsequent quotations from    Rolle's     Incendium Amoris      I have usually adopted Misyn's fifteenth-century translation;    slightly modernizing the spelling, and, where necessary, correcting    from the Latin his errors and obscurities.

^78:125 [iii.iv-p36.1][iii.iv-p37]         Op. cit.,      bk. i. cap. xxiii. Compare bk. ii. caps. v. and vi.

^78:126 [iii.iv-p37.1][iii.iv-p38]         "Spiritual Exercises," p. 30.

^78:127 [iii.iv-p39.1][iii.iv-p40]         Op. cit.,      bk. i. cap. xv.

^78:128 [iii.iv-p41.1][iii.iv-p42]         Op. cit.,      bk. ii. caps, iii. and xii. Shelley is of the same    opinion:--

[iii.iv-p43]"The world can hear not the sweet    notes that move

[iii.iv-p44]The Sphere whose light is melody to    lovers."

[iii.iv-p45]("The Triumph of Life ")

^79:129 [iii.iv-p47.1][iii.iv-p48]         "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. xv.

^79:130 [iii.iv-p49.1][iii.iv-p50]         "De Mystica Theologia," i. 3.

^80:131 [iii.iv-p51.1][iii.iv-p52]         Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol.    i. p. 189.

^81:132 [iii.iv-p55.1][iii.iv-p56]         "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 380.

^82:133 [iii.iv-p62.1][iii.iv-p63]         "Les Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 45.

^82:134 [iii.iv-p64.7][iii.iv-p65]         Jami. Quoted in "Jalalu 'd Din" (Wisdom    of the East Series), p. 25.

^82:135 [iii.iv-p70.1][iii.iv-p71]         "Through Scylla and Charybdis," p. 264.

^82:136 [iii.iv-p71.1][iii.iv-p72]         Ennead vi. 9.

^83:137 [iii.iv-p73.7][iii.iv-p74]         "En una Noche Escura," Stanza 1. I quote from Arthur    Symons's beautiful translation, which will be found in vol.    ii. of his Collected Poems.

^83:138 [iii.iv-p76.1][iii.iv-p77]         Schmolders, "Les Ecoles Philosophiques chez les    Arabes," p. 55.

^83:139 [iii.iv-p77.1][iii.iv-p78]         Cap. xix.

^84:140 [iii.iv-p78.1][iii.iv-p79]         "Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium," cap. xi.

^84:141 [iii.iv-p79.1][iii.iv-p80]         "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. iv. cap,    13.

^84:142 [iii.iv-p81.1][iii.iv-p82]         Dialogo, cap. lx.

^85:143 [iii.iv-p84.1][iii.iv-p85]         Tauler, Sermon for Septuagesima Sunday (Winkworth's    translation, p. 253).

^85:144 [iii.iv-p85.1][iii.iv-p86]         Vita e Dottrina, cap. vi.

^85:145 [iii.iv-p86.1][iii.iv-p87]         M. Smith, "Rabi'a the Mystic," p. 30.

^85:146 [iii.iv-p87.1][iii.iv-p88]         Ennead vi. 9.

^85:147 [iii.iv-p91.1][iii.iv-p92]         "An Epistle of Discretion." This beautiful old English    tract, probably by the author of "The Cloud of    Unknowing," is printed by E. Gardner, ' The Cell of Self    Knowledge," p. 108.

^86:148 [iii.iv-p93.1][iii.iv-p94]         Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. i.    cap. xxvi.

^86:149 [iii.iv-p95.1][iii.iv-p96]         Ennead, vi. 9.

^86:150 [iii.iv-p96.1][iii.iv-p97]         "The Mending of Life," cap. xi.

^86:151 [iii.iv-p98.1][iii.iv-p99]         "Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 7.

^86:152 [iii.iv-p99.1][iii.iv-p100]         Dialogo, cap. xxvi.

^87:153 [iii.iv-p107.1][iii.iv-p108]         "De Imitatione Christi," I. ii. cap. v.

^87:154 [iii.iv-p109.16][iii.iv-p110]         Jalalu 'd Din (Wisdom of the East Series), p. 79.

^87:155 [iii.iv-p111.1][iii.iv-p112]         Treatise to a Devout Man, cap. viii.

^87:156 [iii.iv-p112.1][iii.iv-p113]         Sermon for Thursday in Easter Week (Winkworth's translation,    p. 294).

^88:157 [iii.iv-p116.3][iii.iv-p117]         They were printed in 1658, "At Paris by Lewis de la Fosse in    the Carme Street at the Signe of the Looking Glass," and have    lately been republished. I quote from the original edition.

^88:158 [iii.iv-p118.1][iii.iv-p119]         P. 138.

^88:159 [iii.iv-p119.1][iii.iv-p120]         P. 181.

^89:160 [iii.iv-p121.1][iii.iv-p122]         Op. cit.      pp. 9, 16, 25, 35, 138, 175.

^89:161 [iii.iv-p123.1][iii.iv-p124]         Berger, "William Blake," p. 72.

^89:162 [iii.iv-p124.1][iii.iv-p125]         Ibid     ., p. 74.

^89:163 [iii.iv-p127.1][iii.iv-p128]         Contemporary Review,      April, 1899.

^90:164 [iii.iv-p131.1][iii.iv-p132]         "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. iii. cap.    1.

^90:165 [iii.iv-p133.1][iii.iv-p134]         Supra. p. 35.

^90:166 [iii.iv-p134.1][iii.iv-p135]         Recejac,     op. cit     ., p. 35.

^91:167 [iii.iv-p137.1][iii.iv-p138]         Revue Philosophique,      July, 1902.

^91:168 [iii.iv-p138.1][iii.iv-p139]         "Psychologie des Mystiques Chretiens," p 14.

^91:169 [iii.iv-p139.1][iii.iv-p140]         "Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xxiii.

^92:170 [iii.iv-p141.1][iii.iv-p142]         In "El Castillo Interior."

^92:171 [iii.iv-p142.1][iii.iv-p143]         See Palmer, "Oriental Mysticism," pt. v. ch. v.

^92:172 [iii.iv-p144.1][iii.iv-p145]         Vita, p. 8.

^92:173 [iii.iv-p145.1][iii.iv-p146]         "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. vii.

^92:174 [iii.iv-p146.1][iii.iv-p147]         "De Consideratione," I. v. cap. xi.

^92:175 [iii.iv-p147.1][iii.iv-p148]         "Das Fliessende Light der Gottheit," pt. vii. cap.    16.

^93:176 [iii.iv-p149.1][iii.iv-p150]         "De Mystica Theologia," i. 1.

^93:177 [iii.iv-p150.1][iii.iv-p151]         "Aurora," English translation, 1764, p. 237.

^93:178 [iii.iv-p152.1][iii.iv-p153]         Dionysius the Areopagite. "De Mystica Theologia," i.    3.

^93:179 [iii.iv-p153.1][iii.iv-p154]         "Mystische Schriften," p. 137.

^93:180 [iii.iv-p154.1][iii.iv-p155]         Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

^94:181 [iii.iv-p156.1][iii.iv-p157]           Op. cit. 

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

V. Mysticism and   Theology

 [iii.v][iii.v-p1]In[iii.v-p1.1] the last chapter we tried to establish a distinction between the  mystic who tastes supreme experience and the mystical philosopher who  cogitates upon the data so obtained. We have now, however, to take  account of the fact that often the true mystic is also a mystical  philosopher; though there are plenty of mystical philosophers who are  not and could never be mystics.

[iii.v-p2]Because it is characteristic of the human self to  reflect upon its experience, to use its percepts as material for the  construction of a concept, most mystics have made or accepted a theory  of their own adventures. Thus we have a mystical philosophy or  theology--the comment of the intellect on the proceedings of  spiritual intuition--running side by side with true or empirical  mysticism: classifying its data, criticizing it, explaining it, and  translating its vision of the supersensible into symbols which are  amenable to dialectic.

[iii.v-p3]Such a philosophy is most usually founded upon the  formal creed which the individual mystic accepts. It is characteristic  of him that in so far as his transcendental activities are healthy he  is generally an acceptor and not a rejector of such creeds. The view  which regards the mystic as a spiritual anarchist receives little  support from history; which shows us, again and again, [p. 96] [iii.v-Page_96] the great mystics as faithful sons of the great  religions. Almost any religious system which fosters unearthly love is  potentially a nursery for mystics: and Christianity, Islam,  Brahmanism, and Buddhism each receives its most sublime interpretation  at their hands. Thus St. Teresa interprets her ecstatic apprehension  of the Godhead in strictly Catholic terms, and St. John of the Cross  contrives to harmonize his intense transcendentalism with  incarnational and sacramental Christianity. Thus Boehme believed to  the last that his explorations of eternity were consistent with the  teaching of the Lutheran Church. The Sufis were good Mohammedans,  Philo and the Kabalists were orthodox Jews. Plotinus even  adapted--though with what difficulty--the relics of paganism  to his doctrine of the Real.

[iii.v-p4]Attempts, however, to limit mystical truth--the  direct apprehension of the Divine Substance--by the formula of  any one religion, are as futile as the attempt to identify a precious  metal with the die which converts it into current coin. The dies which  the mystics have used are many. Their peculiarities and excrescences  are always interesting and sometimes highly significant. Some give a  far sharper, more coherent, impression than others. But the gold from  which this diverse coinage is struck is always the same precious  metal: always the same Beatific Vision of a Goodness, Truth, and  Beauty which is   one.    Hence its substance must always be distinguished from the accidents  under which we perceive it: for this substance has an absolute, and  not a denominational, importance.

[iii.v-p5]Nevertheless, if we are to understand the language of  the mystics, it is evident that we must know a little of accident as  well as of substance: that is to say, of the principal philosophies or  religions which they have used in describing their adventures to the  world. This being so, before we venture to apply ourselves to the  exploration of theology proper, it will be well to consider the two  extreme forms under which both mystics and theologians have been  accustomed to conceive Divine Reality: that is to say, the so-called  "emanation-theory" and "immanence-theory" of  the transcendental world.

[iii.v-p6]Emanation and Immanence are formidable words; which  though perpetually tossed to and fro by amateurs of religious  philosophy, have probably, as they stand, little actuality for  practical modern men. They are, however, root-ideas for the maker of  mystical diagrams: and his best systems are but attempts towards their  reconciliation. Since the aim of every mystic is union with God, it is  obvious that the vital question in his philosophy must be the place  which this God, the Absolute of his quest, occupies in the scheme.  Briefly, He has been conceived--or, it were better to say, [p. 97] [iii.v-Page_97] presented--by the great mystics under two  apparently contradictory modes.

[iii.v-p7](1) The opinion which is represented in its most  extreme form by the theory of   Emanations,    declares His utter transcendence. This view appears early in the  history of Greek philosophy. It is developed by Dionysius, by the  Kabalists, by Dante: and is implied in the language of Rulman Merswin,  St. John of the Cross and many other Christian ecstatics.

[iii.v-p8]The solar system is an almost perfect symbol of this  concept of Reality; which finds at once its most rigid and most  beautiful expression in Dante's "Paradiso."   [*182]    The Absolute Godhead is conceived as removed by a vast distance from  the material world of sense; the last or lowest of that system of  dependent worlds or states which, generated by or emanating from the  Unity or Central Sun, become less in spirituality and splendour,  greater in multiplicity, the further they recede from their source.  That Source--the Great Countenance of the Godhead--can  never, say the Kabalists, be discerned by man. It is the Absolute of  the Neoplatonists, the Unplumbed Abyss of later mysticism: the Cloud  of Unknowing wraps it from our sight. Only by its  "emanations" or manifested attributes can we attain  knowledge of it. By the outflow of these same manifested attributes  and powers the created universe exists, depending in the last resort  on the [iii.v-p12.1]   latens Deitas:     Who is therefore conceived as external to the world  which He illuminates and vivifies.

[iii.v-p13]St. Thomas Aquinas virtually accepts the doctrine of  Emanations when he writes:   [*183]    "As all the perfections of Creatures descend in order from God,  who is the height of perfection, man should begin from the lower  creatures and ascend by degrees, and so advance to the knowledge of  God. . . . And because in that roof and crown of all things, God, we  find the most perfect unity, and everything is stronger and more  excellent the more thoroughly it is one; it follows that diversity and  variety increase in things, the further they are removed from Him who  is the first principle of all." Suso, whose mystical system,  like that of most Dominicans, is entirely consistent with Thomist  philosophy, is really glossing Aquinas when he writes: "The  supreme and superessential Spirit has ennobled man by illuminating him  with a ray from the Eternal Godhead. . . . Hence from out the great  ring which represents the [p. 98] [iii.v-Page_98] Eternal  Godhead there flow forth . . . little rings, which may be taken to  signify the high nobility of natural creatures."   [*184] 

[iii.v-p16]Obviously, if this theory of the Absolute be accepted  the path of the soul's ascent to union with the divine must be  literally a transcendence: a journey "upward and outward,"  through a long series of intermediate states or worlds till, having  traversed the "Thirty-two paths of the Tree of Life," she  at last arrives, in Kabalistic language, at the Crown: fruitive  knowledge of God, the Abyss or Divine Dark of the Dionysian school,  the Neoplatonic One. Such a series of worlds is symbolized by the Ten  Heavens of Dante, the hierarchies of Dionysius, the Tree of Life or  Sephiroth of the Kabalah: and receives its countersign in the inward  experience, in the long journey of the self through Purgation and  Illumination to Union. "We ascend," says St. Augustine,  "thy ways that be in our heart, and sing a song of degrees; we  glow inwardly with thy fire, with thy good fire, and we go, because we  go upwards to the peace of Jerusalem."   [*185] 

[iii.v-p18]This theory postulates, under normal and non-mystical  conditions, the complete separation of the human and the divine; the  temporal and the eternal worlds. "Never forget," says St.  John of the Cross, "that God is inaccessible. Ask not therefore  how far your powers may comprehend Him, your feeling penetrate Him.  Fear thus to content yourself with too little, and deprive your soul  of the agility which it needs in order to mount up to Him."   [*186]    The language of pilgrimage, of exile, comes naturally to the mystic  who apprehends reality under these terms. To him the mystical  adventure is essentially a "going forth" from his normal  self and from his normal universe. Like the Psalmist "in his  heart he hath disposed to ascend by steps in this vale of tears"  from the less to the more divine. He, and with him the  Cosmos--for to mystical philosophy the soul of the individual  subject is the microcosm of the soul of the world--has got to  retrace the long road to the Perfection from which it originally came  forth; as the fish in Rulman Merswin's Vision of Nine Rocks must  struggle upwards from pool to pool until they reach their Origin.

[iii.v-p20]Such a way of conceiving Reality accords with the type  of mind which William James called the "sick soul."   [*187]    It is the mood of the penitent; of the utter humility which, appalled  by the sharp contrast between itself and the Perfect which it  contemplates, can only cry "out of the depths." It comes  naturally to the temperament which leans to pessimism, which sees a  "great gulf fixed" between itself and its desire, and is  above all things sensitive [p. 99] [iii.v-Page_99] to the  elements of evil and imperfection in its own character and in the  normal experience of man. Permitting these elements to dominate its  field of consciousness, wholly ignoring the divine aspect of the World  of Becoming, such a temperament constructs from its perceptions and  prejudices the concept of a material world and a normal self which are  very far from God.

[iii.v-p22](2)   Immanence.    At the opposite pole from this way of sketching Reality is the  extreme theory of Immanence, which plays so large a part in modern  theology. To the holders of this theory, who commonly belong to  James's "healthy minded" or optimistic class, the  quest of the Absolute is no long journey, but a realization of  something which is implicit in the self and in the universe: an  opening of the eyes of the soul upon the Reality in which it is  bathed. For them earth is literally "crammed with heaven."  "Thou wert I, but dark was my heart, I knew not the secret  transcendent," says Tewekkul Beg, a Moslem mystic of  the seventeenth century.   [*188]    This is always the cry of the temperament which leans to a theology  of immanence, once its eyes are opened on the light.  "God," says Plotinus, "is not external to anyone,  but is present with all things, though they are ignorant that He is  so."   [*189]    In other and older words, "The Spirit of God is within  you." The Absolute Whom all seek does not hold Himself aloof  from an imperfect material universe, but dwells within the flux of  things: stands as it were at the very threshold of consciousness and  knocks awaiting the self's slow discovery of her treasures.  "He is not far from any one of us, for in Him we live and move  and have our being," is the pure doctrine of Immanence: a  doctrine whose teachers are drawn from amongst the souls which react  more easily to the touch of the Divine than to the sense of alienation  and of sin, and are naturally inclined to love rather than to awe.

[iii.v-p25]Unless safeguarded by limiting dogmas, the theory of  Immanence, taken alone, is notoriously apt to degenerate into  pantheism; and into those extravagant perversions of the doctrine of  "deification" in which the mystic holds his transfigured  self to be identical with the Indwelling God. It is the philosophical  basis of that practice of introversion, the turning inward of the  soul's faculties in contemplation, which has been the  "method" of the great practical mystics of all creeds.  That God, since He is in all--in a sense,   is    all--may most easily be found within ourselves, is the doctrine  of these adventurers;   [*190]    who, denying or ignoring the existence of those intervening  "worlds" or "planes" between the material  [p. 100] [iii.v-Page_100] world and the Absolute, which are  postulated by the theory of Emanations, claim with Ruysbroeck that  "by a simple introspection in fruitive love" they  "meet God without intermediary."   [*191]    They hear the Father of Lights "saying eternally, without  intermediary or interruption, in the most secret part of the spirit,  the one, unique, and abysmal Word."   [*192] 

[iii.v-p29]This discovery of a "divine" essence or  substance, dwelling, as Ruysbroeck says, at the apex of man's  soul is that fundamental experience--found in some form or degree  in all genuine mystical religion--which provides the basis of the  New Testament doctrine of the indwelling spirit. It is, variously  interpreted, the "spark of the soul" of Eckhart, the  "ground" of Tauler, the Inward Light of the Quakers, the  "Divine Principle" of some modern transcendentalists; the  fount and source of all true life. At this point logical exposition  fails mystic and theologian alike. A tangle of metaphors takes its  place. We are face to face with the "wonder of  wonders"--that most real, yet most mysterious, of all the  experiences of religion, the union of human and divine, in a nameless   something    which is "great enough to be God, small enough to be me."  In the struggle to describe this experience, the "spark of the  soul," the point of juncture, is at one moment presented to us  as the divine to which the self attains: at another, as that  transcendental aspect of the self which is in contact with God. On  either hypothesis, it is here that the mystic encounters Absolute  Being. Here is his guarantee of God's immediate presence in the  human heart; and, if in the human heart, then in that universe of  which man's soul resumes in miniature the essential  characteristics.

[iii.v-p30]According to the doctrine of Immanence, creation, the  universe, could we see it as it is, would be perceived as the  self-development, the self-revelation of this indwelling Deity. The  world is not projected from the Absolute, but immersed in God.  "I understood," says St. Teresa, "how our Lord was  in all things, and how He was in the soul: and the illustration of a  sponge filled with water was suggested to me."   [*193]    The world-process, then, is the slow coming to fruition of that  Divine Spark which is latent alike in the Cosmos and in man.  "If," says Boehme, "thou conceivest a small minute  circle, as small as a grain of mustard seed, yet the Heart of God is  wholly and perfectly therein: and if thou art born in God, then there  is in thyself (in the circle of thy life) the whole [p. 101] [iii.v-Page_101] Heart of God undivided."   [*194]    The idea of Immanence has seldom been more beautifully expressed.

[iii.v-p33]It is worth noticing that both the theological  doctrines of reality which have been acceptable to the mystics  implicitly declare, as science does, that the universe is not static  but dynamic; a World of Becoming. According to the doctrine of  Immanence this universe is free, self-creative. The divine action  floods it: no part is more removed from the Godhead than any other  part. "God," says Eckhart, "is nearer to me than I  am to myself; He is just as near to wood and stone, but they do not  know it."   [*195] 

[iii.v-p35]These two apparently contradictory explanations of the  Invisible have both been held, and that in their extreme form, by the  mystics: who have found in both adequate, and indeed necessary,  diagrams by which to suggest something of their rich experience of  Reality.   [*196]    Some of the least lettered and most inspired amongst them--for  instance, St. Catherine of Siena, Julian of Norwich--and some of  the most learned, as Dionysius the Areopagite and Meister Eckhart,  have actually used in their rhapsodies language appropriate to both  the theories of Emanation and of Immanence. It would seem, then, that  both these theories convey a certain truth; and that it is the  business of a sound mystical philosophy to reconcile them. It is too  often forgotten by quarrelsome partisans of a concrete turn of mind  that at best all these transcendental theories are only symbols,  methods, diagrams; feebly attempting the representation of an  experience which in its fullness is always the same, and of which the  dominant characteristic is ineffability. Hence they insist with  tiresome monotony that Dionysius must be wrong if Tauler be right:  that it is absurd to call yourself the Friend of God if unknowableness  be that God's first attribute: that Plato's Perfect Beauty  and St. Catherine of Siena's Accepter of Sacrifices cannot be  the same: that the "courteous and dear-worthy Lord" who  said to Lady Julian, "My darling, I am glad that thou art come  to Me, in all thy woe I have ever been with thee,"   [*197]    rules out the formless and impersonal One of Plotinus, the  "triple circle" of Suso and Dante. Finally, that if God be  truly immanent in the material world it is either sin or folly to  refuse that world in order that we may find Him; and if introversion  be right, a plan of the universe which postulates intervening planes  between Absolute Being and the phenomenal world must be wrong.

[iii.v-p38]Now as regards the mystics, of whom we hold both these  [p. 102] [iii.v-Page_102] doctrines, these ways of seeing  truth--for what else is a doctrine but that?--it is well to  remind ourselves that their teaching about the relation of the  Absolute to the finite, of God to the phenomenal world, must be  founded in the first instance on what they know by experience of the  relation between that Absolute and the individual self. This  experience is the valid part of mysticism, the thing which gives to it  its unique importance amongst systems of thought, the only source of  its knowledge. Everything else is really guessing aided by analogy.  When therefore the mystic, applying to the universe what he knows to  be true in respect of his own soul, describes Divine Perfection as  very far removed from the material world, yet linked with it by a  graduated series of "emanations"--states or qualities  which have each of them something of the godlike, though they be not  God--he is trying to describe the necessary life-process which he  has himself passed through in the course of his purgation and  spiritual ascent from the state of the "natural man" to  that other state of harmony with the spiritual universe, sometimes  called "deification," in which he is able to contemplate,  and unite with, the divine. We have in the "Divina  Commedia" a classic example of such a twofold vision of the  inner and the outer worlds: for Dante's journey up and out to  the Empyrean Heaven is really an inward alchemy, an ordering and  transmuting of his nature, a purging of his spiritual sight  till--transcending all derived beatitude--it can look for an  instant on the Being of God.

[iii.v-p39]The mystic assumes--because he tends to assume an  orderly basis for things--that there is a relation, an analogy,  between this microcosm of man's self and the macrocosm of the  world-self. Hence his experience, the geography of the individual  quest, appears to him good evidence of the geography of the Invisible.  Since he must transcend his natural life in order to attain  consciousness of God, he conceives of God as essentially transcendent  to the natural world. His description of that geography,  however--of his path in a land where there is no time and space,  no inner and no outer, up or down--will be conditioned by his  temperament, by his powers of observation, by the metaphor which comes  most readily to his hand, above all by his theological education. The  so-called journey itself is a psychological and spiritual experience:  the purging and preparation of the self, its movement to higher levels  of consciousness, its unification with that more spiritual but  normally unconscious self which is in touch with the transcendental  order, and its gradual or abrupt entrance into union with the Real.  Sometimes it seems to the self that this performance is a retreat  inwards to that "ground of the soul" where, as St. Teresa  says, "His Majesty awaits us": sometimes [p. 103] [iii.v-Page_103] a going forth from the Conditioned to the  Unconditioned, the "supernatural flight" of Plotinus and  Dionysius the Areopagite. Both are but images under which the self  conceives the process of attaining conscious union with that God who  is "at once immanent and transcendent in relation to the Soul  which shares His life."   [*198] 

[iii.v-p41]He has got to find God. Sometimes his temperament  causes him to lay most stress on the length of the search; sometimes  the abrupt rapture which brings it to a close makes him forget that  preliminary pilgrimage in which the soul is "not outward bound  but rather on a journey to its centre." The habitations of the  Interior Castle through which St. Teresa leads us to that hidden  chamber which is the sanctuary of the indwelling God: the hierarchies  of Dionysius, ascending from the selfless service of the angels, past  the seraphs' burning love, to the God enthroned above time and  space: the mystical paths of the Kabalistic Tree of Life which lead  from the material world of Malkuth through the universes of action and  thought, by Mercy, Justice and Beauty, to the Supernal Crown;   [*199]    all these are different ways of describing this same pilgrimage.

[iii.v-p43]As every one is born a disciple of either Plato or  Aristotle, so every human soul leans to one of these two ways of  apprehending reality. The artist, the poet, every one who looks with  awe and rapture on created things, acknowledges in this act the  Immanent God. The ascetic, and that intellectual ascetic the  metaphysician, turning from the created, denying the senses in order  to find afar off the uncreated, unconditioned Source, is  really--though often he knows it not--obeying that  psychological law which produced the doctrine of Emanations.

[iii.v-p44]A good map then, a good mystical philosophy, will  leave room for both these ways of interpreting our experience. It will  mark the routes by which many different temperaments claim to have  found their way to the same end. It will acknowledge both the aspects  under which the [iii.v-p44.1]  patria splendida     Truth has appeared to its lovers: the aspects which  have called forth the theories of emanation and immanence and are  enshrined in the Greek and Latin names of God.   Deus,    whose root means day, shining, the Transcendent Light; and   Theos,    whose true meaning is supreme desire or prayer--the Inward  Love--do not contradict, but complete each other. They form, when  taken together, an almost perfect definition of that Godhead which is  the object of the mystic's desire: the Divine Love which,  immanent in the soul spurs on that soul to union with the transcendent  and Absolute [p. 104] [iii.v-Page_104] Light--at once the  source, the goal, the life of created things.

[iii.v-p45]The true mystic--the person with a genius for  God--hardly needs a map himself. He steers a compass course  across the "vast and stormy sea of the divine." It is  characteristic of his intellectual humility, however, that he is  commonly willing to use the map of the community in which he finds  himself, when it comes to showing other people the route which he has  pursued. Sometimes these maps have been adequate. More, they have  elucidated the obscure wanderings of the explorer; helped him; given  him landmarks; worked out right. Time after time he puts his finger on  some spot--some great hill of vision, some city of the  soul--and says with conviction,   "Here    have I been." At other times the maps have embarrassed him,  have refused to fit in with his description. Then he has tried, as  Boehme did and after him Blake, to make new ones. Such maps are often  wild in drawing, because good draughtsmanship does not necessarily go  with a talent for exploration. Departing from the usual convention,  they are hard--sometimes impossible--to understand. As a  result, the orthodox have been forced to regard their makers as madmen  or heretics: when they were really only practical men struggling to  disclose great matters by imperfect means.

[iii.v-p46]Without prejudice to individual beliefs, and without  offering an opinion as to the exclusive truth of any one religious  system or revelation--for here we are concerned neither with  controversy nor with apologetics--we are bound to allow as a  historical fact that mysticism, so far, has found its best map in  Christianity. Christian philosophy, especially that Neoplatonic  theology which, taking up and harmonizing all that was best in the  spiritual intuitions of Greece, India, and Egypt, was developed by the  great doctors of the early and mediaeval Church, supports and  elucidates the revelations of the individual mystic as no other system  of thought has been able to do.

[iii.v-p47]We owe to the great fathers of the first five  centuries--to Clement of Alexandria and Irenaeus, Gregory of  Nyssa and Augustine; above all to Dionysius the Areopagite, the great  Christian contemporary of Proclus--the preservation of that  mighty system of scaffolding which enabled the Catholic mystics to  build up the towers and bulwarks of the City of God. The peculiar  virtue of this Christian philosophy, that which marks its superiority  to the more coldly self-consistent systems of Greece, is the fact that  it re-states the truths of metaphysics in terms of personality: thus  offering a third term, a "living mediator" between the  Unknowable God, the unconditioned Absolute, and the conditioned self.  This was the priceless gift which the Wise Men [p. 105] [iii.v-Page_105] received in return for their gold,  frankincense, and myrrh. This solves the puzzle which all explorers of  the supersensible have sooner or later to face: [iii.v-p47.1]   come si convenne l'imago al cerchio,       [*200]    the reconciliation of Infinite and intimate, both known and felt, but  neither understood. Such a third term, such a stepping-stone, was  essential if mysticism were ever to attain that active union that  fullness of life which is its object, and develop from a blind and  egoistic rapture into fruitful and self-forgetting love.

[iii.v-p49]Where non-Christian mystics, as a rule, have made a  forced choice between the two great dogmatic expressions of their  experience, (  a   ) the long pilgrimage towards a transcendent and unconditioned  Absolute, (  b   ) the discovery of that Absolute in the "ground" or  spiritual principle of the self; it has been possible to Christianity,  by means of her central doctrine of the Trinity, to find room for both  of them and to exhibit them as that which they are in fact--the  complementary parts of a whole. Even Dionysius, the godfather of the  emanation doctrine, combines with his scheme of descending hierarchies  the dogma of an indwelling God: and no writer is more constantly  quoted by Meister Eckhart, who is generally considered to have  preached immanence in its most extreme and pantheistic form.

[iii.v-p50]Further, the Christian atmosphere is the one in which  the individual mystic has most often been able to develop his genius  in a sane and fruitful way; and an overwhelming majority of the great  European contemplatives have been Christians of a strong impassioned  and personal type. This alone would justify us in regarding it as  embodying, at any rate in the West, the substance of the true  tradition: providing the "path of least resistance"  through which that tradition flows. The very heretics of Christianity  have often owed their attraction almost wholly to the mystical element  in their teachings. The Gnostics, the Fraticelli, the Brethren of the  Free Spirit, the Quietists, the Quakers, are instances of this. In  others, it was to an excessive reliance on reason when dealing with  the suprarational, and a corresponding absence of trust in mystical  intuition that heresy was due. Arius and Pelagius are heretics of this  type.

[iii.v-p51]The greatest mystics, however, have not been heretics  but Catholic saints. In Christianity the "natural  mysticism" which like "natural religion," is latent  in humanity, and at a certain point of development breaks out in every  race, came to itself; and attributing for the first time true and  distinct personality to its Object, brought into focus the confused  and unconditioned God which Neoplatonism had constructed from the  abstract concepts of philosophy blended with the intuitions of Indian  ecstatics, and [p. 106] [iii.v-Page_106] made the basis of its  meditations on the Real. It is a truism that the chief claim of  Christian philosophy on our respect does not lie in its exclusiveness  but in its Catholicity: in the fact that it finds truth in a hundred  different systems, accepts and elucidates Greek, Jewish, and Indian  thought, fuses them in a coherent theology, and says to speculative  thinkers of every time and place, "Whom therefore ye ignorantly  worship, Him declare I unto you."

[iii.v-p52]The voice of that Truth which spoke once for all on  Calvary, and there declared the ground plan of the universe, was heard  more or less perfectly by all the great seers, the intuitive leaders  of men, the possessors of genius for the Real. There are few of the  Christian names of God which were not known to the teachers of  antiquity. To the Egyptians He was the Saviour, to the Platonists the  Good, Beautiful and True, to the Stoics the Father and Companion. The  very words of the Fourth Gospel are anticipated by Cleanthes.  Heracleitus knew the Energizing Fire of which St. Bonaventura and  Mechthild of Magdeburg speak. Countless mystics, from St. Augustine to  St. John of the Cross, echo again and again the language of Plotinus.  It is true that the differentia which mark off Christianity from all  other religions are strange and poignant: but these very differentia  make of it the most perfect of settings for the mystic life. Its note  of close intimacy, of direct and personal contact with a spiritual  reality given here and now--its astonishing combination of  splendour and simplicity, of the sacramental and  transcendent--all these things minister to the needs of the  mystical type.

[iii.v-p53]Hence the Christian system, or some colourable  imitation of it, has been found essential by almost all the great  mystics of the West. They adopt its nomenclature, explain their  adventures by the help of its creed, identify their Absolute with the  Christian God. Amongst European mystics the most usually quoted  exception to this rule is Blake; yet it is curious to notice that the  more inspired his utterance, the more passionately and dogmatically  Christian even this hater of the Churches becomes:--

   [iii.v-p53.1] "We behold
   Where Death eternal is put off eternally. O Lamb
   Assume the dark satanic body in the Virgin's  womb!
   O Lamb divine ! it cannot thee annoy! O pitying  One
   Thy pity is from the foundation of the world, and thy  Redemption
   Begins already in Eternity."   [*201]  
  [iii.v-p55]This is the doctrine of the Incarnation in a nutshell:  here St. Thomas himself would find little to correct. Of the two  following extracts from "Jerusalem," the first is but a  poet's gloss on [p. 107] [iii.v-Page_107] the  Catholic's cry, [iii.v-p55.1]  "O felix culpa!"     the second is an almost perfect epitome of Christian  theology and ethics:--

   [iii.v-p55.2] "If I were pure, never could I taste the  sweets
   Of the forgiveness of sins. If I were holy I never  could behold the tears
   Of Love . . . O Mercy! O divine Humanity!
   O Forgiveness, O Pity and Compassion! If I were pure  I should never
   Have known Thee."
   "Wouldst thou love one who never died
   For thee, or ever die for one who had not died for  thee?
   And if God dieth not for man, and giveth not  Himself
   Eternally for Man, Man could not exist, for Man is  Love
   As God is Love. Every kindness to another is a little  death
   In the Divine Image, nor can Man exist but by  brotherhood."   [*202]  
  [iii.v-p57]Whether the dogmas of Christianity be or be not  accepted on the scientific and historical plane, then, those dogmas  are necessary to an adequate description of mystical  experience--at least, of the fully developed dynamic mysticism of  the West. We must therefore be prepared in reading the works of the  contemplatives for much strictly denominational language; and shall be  wise if we preface the encounter by some consideration of this  language, and of its real meaning for those who use and believe  it.

[iii.v-p58]No one needs, I suppose, to be told that the two chief  features of Christian schematic theology are the dogmas of the Trinity  and the Incarnation. They correlate and explain each other: forming  together, for the Christian, the "final key" to the riddle  of the world. The history of practical and institutional Christianity  is the history of the attempt to exhibit their meaning in space and  time. The history of mystical philosophy is the history--still  incomplete--of the demonstration of their meaning in  eternity.

[iii.v-p59]Some form of Trinitarian dogma is found to be  essential, as a method of describing observed facts, the moment that  mysticism begins either (  a   ) to analyse its own psychological conditions, or (  b   ) to philosophize upon its intuitive experience of God. It must, that  is to say, divide the aspects under which it knows the Godhead, if it  is to deal with them in a fruitful or comprehensible way. The  Unconditioned One, which is, for Neoplatonic and Catholic mystic  alike, the final object of their quest, cannot of itself satisfy the  deepest instincts of humanity: for man is aware that diversity in  unity is a necessary condition if perfection of character is to be  expressed. Though the idea of unity alone may serve to define the  End--and though the mystics return to it again and again as a  relief from that "heresy of multiplicity" by which they  are oppressed--it cannot by itself be adequate to the description  of the All. [p. 108] [iii.v-Page_108]

[iii.v-p60]The first question, then, must be--How many of  such aspects are necessary to a satisfactory presentment of the  mystic's position? How many faces of Reality does he see? We  observe that his experience involves at least a twofold apprehension.  (  a   ) That Holy Spirit within, that Divine Life by which his own life is  transfused and upheld, and of which he becomes increasingly conscious  as his education proceeds. (  b   ) That Transcendent Spirit without, the "Absolute,"  towards union with which the indwelling and increasingly dominant  spirit of love presses the developing soul. In his ecstasy, it seems  to the mystic that these two experiences of God become one. But in the  attempt to philosophize on his experiences he is bound to separate  them. Over and over again the mystics and their critics acknowledge,  explicitly or implicitly, the necessity of this discrimination for  human thought.

[iii.v-p61]Thus even the rigid monotheism of Israel and Islam  cannot, in the hands of the Kabalists and the Sufis, get away from an  essential dualism in the mystical experience. According to the Zohar  "God is considered as immanent in all that has been created or  emanated, and yet is transcendent to all."   [*203]    So too the Sufis. God, they say, is to be contemplated   (a)    outwardly in the imperfect beauties of the earth; (b) inwardly, by  meditation. Further, since He is One, and in all things, "to  conceive one's self as separate from God is an error: yet   only when one sees oneself as separate from God, can one reach out  to God.   "   [*204] 

[iii.v-p64]Thus Delacroix, speaking purely as a psychologist, and  denying to the mystical revelation--which he attributes  exclusively to the normal content of the subliminal mind--any  transcendental value, writes with entire approval of St. Teresa, that  she "set up externally to herself the definite God of the Bible,  at the same time as she set up within her soul the confused God of the  Pseudo-Areopagite: the One of Neoplatonism. The first is her guarantee  of the orthodoxy of the second, and prevents her from losing herself  in an indistinction which is non-Christian. The confused God within is  highly dangerous. . . . St. Teresa knew how to avoid this peril, and,  served by her rich subconscious life, by the exaltation of her mental  images, by her faculty of self-division on the one hand, on the other  by her   rare powers of unification,    she realized simultaneously a double state in which the two Gods [  i.e.   , the two ways of apprehending God, transcendence and immanence] were  guarantees of each other, mutually consolidating and enriching one  another: such is the intellectual vision of the Trinity in the Seventh  Habitation."   [*205]    [p. 109] [iii.v-Page_109]

[iii.v-p66]It is probable that St. Teresa, confronted by this  astonishing analysis, would have objected that her Trinity, unlike  that of her eulogist, consisted of three and not two Persons. His  language concerning confused interior and orthodox exterior Gods would  certainly have appeared to her delicate and honest mind both clumsy  and untrue: nor could she have allowed that the Unconditioned One of  the Neoplatonists was an adequate description of the strictly personal  Divine Majesty, Whom she found enthroned in the inmost sanctuary of  the Castle of the Soul. What St. Teresa really did was to actualize in  her own experience, apprehend in the "ground of her soul"  by means of her extraordinarily developed transcendental perceptions,  the three distinct and personal Aspects of the Godhead which are  acknowledged by the Christian religion.

[iii.v-p67]First, the Father, pure transcendent Being, creative  Source and Origin of all that Is: the Unconditioned and Unknowable One  of the Neoplatonists: Who is "neither This nor That" and  must be conceived,   pace    M. Delacroix, as utterly transcendent to the subject rather than  "set up within the soul."

[iii.v-p68]Secondly, in the Person of Christ, St. Teresa isolated  and distinguished the Logos or Creative Word; the expression, or  outbirth, of the Father's thought. Here is the point at which  the Divine Substance first becomes apprehensible by the spirit of man;  that mediating principle "raised up between heaven and  earth" which is at once the Mirror of Pure Being and the Light  of a finite world. The Second Person of the Christian Trinity is for  the believer not only the brightness or express image of Deity, but  also the personal, inexhaustible, and responsive Fount of all life and  Object of all love: Who, because of His taking up (in the Incarnation)  of humanity into the Godhead, has become the Bridge between finite and  infinite, between the individual and the Absolute Life, and hence in  mystic language the "true Bridegroom" of every human  soul.

[iii.v-p69]Thirdly, she recognized within herself the germ of  that Absolute Life, the indwelling Spirit which is the source of  man's transcendental consciousness and his link with the Being  of God. That is to say, the Holy Spirit of Divine Love, the Real  Desirous seeking for the Real Desired, without Whose presence any  knowledge of or communion with God on man's part would be  inconceivable.

[iii.v-p70]In the supreme Vision of the Trinity which was  vouchsafed to St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation of the soul, these  three aspects became fused in One. In the deepest recesses of her  spirit, in that abyss where selfhood ceases to have meaning, and the  individual soul touches the life of the All, distinction vanished and  she "saw God in a point." Such an experience, such an  intuition of simple and undifferentiated Godhead--the  Unity--beyond [p. 110] [iii.v-Page_110] those three centres  of Divine Consciousness which we call the Trinity of Persons, is  highly characteristic of mysticism. The German  mystics--temperamentally miles asunder from St.  Teresa--described it as the attainment of the "still  wilderness" or "lonely desert of Deity": the  limitless Divine Abyss, impersonal, indescribable, for ever hid in the  Cloud of Unknowing, and yet the true Country of the Soul.   [*206] 

[iii.v-p72]These statements, which appear when thus laid down to  be hopelessly academic, violently divorced from life, were not for St.  Teresa or any other Christian mystic abstract propositions; but  attempts towards the description of first-hand experience.

[iii.v-p73]"By some mysterious manifestation of the  truth," she says, "the three Persons of the most Blessed  Trinity reveal themselves, preceded by an illumination which shines on  the spirit like a most dazzling cloud of light. The three Persons are  distinct from one another; a sublime knowledge is infused into the  soul, imbuing it with a certainty of the truth that the Three are of  one substance, power, and knowledge, and are one God. Thus that which  we hold as a doctrine of faith, the soul now, so to speak, understands  by sight, though it beholds the Blessed Trinity neither by the eyes of  the body nor of the soul, this being no imaginary vision. All the  Three Persons here communicate Themselves to the soul, speak to it,  and make it understand the words of our Lord in the Gospel, that He  and the Father and the Holy Ghost will come and make their abode with  the soul which loves Him and keeps His commandments.

[iii.v-p74]O my God, how different from merely hearing and  believing these words is it to realize their truth in this way! Day by  day a growing astonishment takes possession of this soul, for the  three Persons of the Blessed Trinity seem never to depart; that They  dwell far within its own centre and depths; though for want of  learning it cannot describe how, it is conscious of the indwelling of  these divine Companions."   [*207] 

[iii.v-p76]Mystical writers constantly remind us that life as  perceived by the human minds shows an inveterate tendency to arrange  itself in triads: that if they proclaim the number Three in the  heavens, they can also point to it as dominating everywhere upon the  earth. Here Christianity did but give form to a deep instinct of the  human mind: an instinct which made Pythagoras call Three the number of  God, because beginning, middle, and end were contained therein. Thus  to Hindu thought the Absolute Godhead was unknowable, but He disclosed  three faces to man--Brahma the [p. 111] [iii.v-Page_111]  Creator, Shiva the Destroyer, Krishna the Repairer--and these  three were One. So too the Neoplatonists distinguished three worlds;  the Sensible or Phenomenal, the Rational or Intellectual, the  Intelligible or Spiritual; and three aspects of God--the  Unconditioned Absolute, the Logos or Artificer, and the divine Essence  or Soul of the World which is both absolute and created. Perhaps we  have in such triads a first sketch of the Christian Trinity; though  falling far short of the requirements of man's spiritual  experience. The dry bones await the breath of more abundant life.  Corresponding with this diagram of God's nature the Platonists  see also three grades of beauty; the Corporeal, the Spiritual, and the  Divine.

[iii.v-p77]Man, that "thing of threes," of body, soul  and spirit, of understanding, memory and will, follows in his path  towards unity the Threefold Way: for "our soul," says Lady  Julian, "is made-trinity like to the unmade blissful Trinity,  known and loved from without beginning, and in the making oned to the  Maker."   [*208]    We still tend to analyse our psychic life into emotional, volitional,  and intellectual elements. Even the Subject and Object implied in  every experience required a third term, the relation between them,  without which no thought can be complete. Thus the very principle of  analogy imposes upon man a Trinitarian definition of Reality as the  one with which his mind is best able to cope.   [*209]    It is easy for the hurried rationalist to demonstrate the absurdity  of this fact but he will find it a very different matter when it comes  to disproving it.

[iii.v-p80]"I could wish," says St. Augustine,  "that men would consider these three things that are in  themselves . . . To Be, to Know, and to Will. For I am, and I know,  and I will, I am knowing and willing, and I know myself to be and to  will; and I will to be and to know. In these three therefore let him  who can, see how inseparable a life there is--even one life, one  mind, one essence: finally how inseparable is the distinction, and yet  a distinction. Surely a man hath it before him: let him look into  himself and see and tell me. But when he discovers and can see  anything of these, let him not think that he has discovered that which  is above these Unchangeable: which Is unchangeably and Knows  unchangeably and Wills unchangeably."   [*210] 

[iii.v-p82]In a well-known passage, Julian of Norwich tells us  how she [p. 112] [iii.v-Page_112] saw the Trinity of the Divine  Nature shining in the phenomenal as well as in the spiritual world.  "He showed me," she says, "a little thing, the  quantity of an hazel nut, in the palm of my hand; and it was as round  as a ball. I looked thereupon with the eye of my understanding, and  thought,   What may this be?    And it was answered generally thus:   It is all that is made. . . .    In this Little Thing I saw three properties. The first is that God  made it, the second is that God loveth it, the third is that God  keepeth it. But what is to me verily the Maker, the Keeper, and the  Lover, I cannot tell."   [*211] 

[iii.v-p84]Julian, a simple and deeply human Englishwoman of  middle age dwelling alone in her churchyard cell, might well be called  the poet of the Trinity. She treats this austere and subtle  dogma--of which the mediaeval mystics write with a passion little  understood by those who look upon it as "orthodoxy reduced to  mathematics"--with an intimacy and vigour which carry with  them a conviction of her own direct and personal apprehension of the  theological truth she struggles to describe. "I beheld,"  she says of a vision which is close to that of St. Teresa in the  "Seventh Habitation of the Soul," and more lucidly if less  splendidly expressed, "the working of all the blessed Trinity:  in which beholding, I saw and understood these three properties: the  property of the Fatherhood, the property of the Motherhood, and the  property of the Lordhood, in one God. In our Father Almighty we have  our keeping and our bliss as anent our natural Substance,   [*212]    which is to us by our making, without beginning. And in the Second  Person in wit and wisdom we have our keeping as anent our Sense-soul:  our restoring and our saving; for He is our Mother, Brother, and  Saviour. And in our good Lord, the Holy Ghost, we have our rewarding  and our meed-giving for our living and our travail, and endless  overpassing of all that we desire, in His marvellous courtesy of His  high plenteous grace. For all our life is in   three:    in the first we have our Being, in the second we have our Increasing,  and in the third we have our Fulfilling; the first is Nature, the  second is Mercy, and the third is Grace.   [*213]    . . . The high Might of the Trinity is our Father, and the deep  Wisdom of the Trinity is our Mother, and the great Love of the Trinity  is our Lord: and all this we have in Nature and in our Substantial  Making."   [*214] 

[iii.v-p88]Again, in a passage of exquisite tenderness, "As  verily as God [p. 113] [iii.v-Page_113] is our Father, so verily  God is our Mother; and that shewed He in all [her revelations] and  especially in these sweet words where He saith:   I it am.    That is to say,   I it am, the Might and the Goodness of the Fatherhood; I it am, the  Wisdom of the Motherhood, I it am the Light and the Grace that is all  blessed Love. I it am, the Trinity, I it am, the Unity: I am the  sovereign Goodness of all manner of things. I am that maketh thee to  love. I am that maketh thee to long: I it am, the endless fulfilling  of all true desires.   "   [*215] 

[iii.v-p90]So Christopher Hervey--

   [iii.v-p90.1] "The whole world round is not enough to  fill
   The heart's three corners, but it craveth  still.
   Only the Trinity that made it can
   Suffice the vast triangled heart of Man."   [*216]  
  [iii.v-p92]Any attempt towards a definition of God which does not  account for and acknowledge these three aspects is found in experience  to be incomplete. They provide objectives for the heart, the  intellect, and the will: for they offer to the Self material for its  highest love, its deepest thought, its act of supreme volition. Under  the familiar Platonic terms of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, they  represent the divine source and end of Ethics, Science, and Art, the  three supreme activities of man. Thus the ideals of artist, student,  and philanthropist, who all seek under different modes the same  reality, are gathered up in the mystic's One; as the pilgrimage  of the three kings ended in the finding of one Star

[iii.v-p93]"What is God?" says St. Bernard.  "Length, breadth, height, and depth. 'What,' you  say, 'you do after all profess to believe in the fourfold  Godhead which was an abomination to you?' Not in the least. . .  . God is designated One to suit our comprehension, not to describe his  character.   His character is capable of division, He Himself is not.    The words are different, the paths are many, but one thing is  signified; the paths lead to one Person."   [*217] 

[iii.v-p95]All possible ways of conceiving this One Person in His  living richness are found in the end to range themselves under three  heads. He is "above all and through all and in you all,"   [*218]    said St. Paul, anticipating the Councils in a flash of mystic  intuition and giving to the infant Church the shortest and most  perfect definition of its Triune God. Being, which is above all,  manifests itself as Becoming; as the dynamic omnipresent Word of Life.  The Divine Love immanent in the heart and in the world comes forth  from, and returns to, the Absolute One. "Thou, my God, who art  [p. 114] [iii.v-Page_114] Love," says Nicolas of Cusa,  "art Love that loveth, and Love that is loveable, and Love that  is the bond between these twain."   [*219]    Thus is completed "the Eternal Circle from Goodness, through  Goodness, to Goodness." It is true that to these fundamental  respects of the perceived Godhead--that Being, Becoming, and  Desire whereto the worlds keep time--the mystics have given many  and various names; for they have something of the freedom of true  intimates in treating of the Reality which they love. In particular,  those symbols of the Absolute which are drawn from the great and  formless forces of the universe, rather than from the orthodox but  necessarily anthropomorphic imagery of human relationship, have always  appealed to them. Their intense apprehension of Spirit seems to find  freer and more adequate expression in such terms, than in those in  which the notion of space is involved, or which suggest a concrete  picture to the mind. Though they know as well as the philosophers that  "there must always he something symbolic in our way of  expressing the spiritual life," since "that unfathomable  infinite whose spiritual character is first recognized in our human  experience, can never reveal itself fully and freely under the  limitations of our earthly existence";   [*220]    yet they ever seek, like the artists they are, some new and vital  image which is not yet part of the debased currency of formal  religion, and conserves its original power of stinging the imagination  to more vivid life.

[iii.v-p99]Thus "the Kingdom of Heaven," says Law,  "stands in this threefold life, where three are one, because it  is a manifestation of the Deity, which is Three and One; the Father  has His distinct manifestation in the Fire, which is always generating  the Light; the Son has His distinct manifestation in the Light, which  is always generated from the Fire; the Holy Ghost has His  manifestation in the Spirit, that always proceeds from both, and is  always united with them. It is this eternal unbeginning Trinity in  Unity of Fire, Light, and Spirit, that constitutes Eternal Nature, the  Kingdom of Heaven, the heavenly Jerusalem, the Divine Life, the  Beatific Visibility, the majestic Glory and Presence of God. Through  this Kingdom of Heaven, or Eternal Nature, is the invisible God, the  incomprehensible Trinity, eternally breaking forth and manifesting  itself in a boundless height and depth of blissful wonders, opening  and displaying itself to all its creatures as in an infinite variation  and endless multiplicity of its powers, beauties, joys, and  glories."   [*221]    [p. 115] [iii.v-Page_115]

[iii.v-p101]Perhaps an easier, better, more beautiful example of  these abstract symbols of the Trinity than Law's Fire, Light,  and Spirit is that of Light, Life, and Love: a threefold picture of  the Real which is constantly dwelt upon and elaborated by the  Christian mystics. Transcendent Light, intangible but unescapable,  ever emanating Its splendour through the Universe: indwelling,  unresting, and energizing Life: desirous and directive  Love--these are cardinal aspects of Reality to which they return  again and again in their efforts to find words which will express  something of the inexpressible truth.

[iii.v-p102](  a   ) LIGHT, ineffable and uncreated, the perfect symbol of pure  undifferentiated Being: above the intellect, as St. Augustine reminds  us, but known to him who loves.   [*222]    This Uncreated Light is the "deep yet dazzling darkness"  of the Dionysian school, "dark from its surpassing brightness .  . . as the shining of the sun on his course is as darkness to weak  eyes."   [*223]    It is St. Hildegarde's [iii.v-p104.1]   lux vivens,     Dante's [iii.v-p104.2]   somma luce,     wherein he saw multiplicity in unity, the ingathered  leaves of all the universe   [*224]   : the Eternal Father, or Fount of Things. "For well we  know," says Ruysbroeck "that the bosom of the Father is  our ground and origin, wherein our life and being is begun."   [*225] 

[iii.v-p107](  b   ) LIFE, the Son, hidden Steersman of the Universe, the Logos, Fire, or  cosmic Soul of Things. This out-birth or Concept of the Father's  Mind, which He possesses within Himself, as Battista Vernazza was told  in her ecstasy,   [*226]    is that Word of Creation which since It is alive and infinite, no  formula can contain. the Word eternally "spoken" or  generated by the Transcendent Light. "This is why," says  Ruysbroeck again, "all that lives in the Father unmanifested in  the Unity, is also in the Son actively poured forth in  manifestation."   [*227]    This life, then, is the flawless expression or character of the  Father, [iii.v-p109.1]  Sapientia Patris.     It is at once the personal and adorable comrade of  the mystic's adventure and the inmost principle, the sustaining  power, of a dynamic universe; for that which intellect defines as the  Logos or Creative Spirit, contemplative love   knows    as Wonderful, Counsellor, and Prince of Peace.

[iii.v-p110]Since Christ, for the Christian philosopher, is Divine  Life Itself--the drama of Christianity expressing this fact and  its implications "in a point"--it follows that His  active spirit is to be discerned, not symbolically, but in the most  veritable sense, in the ecstatic and abounding life of the world. In  the rapturous vitality [p. 116] [iii.v-Page_116] of the birds, in  their splendid glancing flight: in the swelling of buds and the  sacrificial beauty of the flowers: in the great and solemn rhythms of  the sea--there is somewhat of Bethlehem in all these things,  somewhat too of Calvary in their self-giving pains. It was this  re-discovery of Nature's Christliness which Blake desired so  passionately when he sang--

   [iii.v-p110.1] "I will not cease from mental fight,
   Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand
   Till we have built Jerusalem
   In England's green and pleasant  land."
  [iii.v-p111]Here then it is, on this pinnacle of faith, at the  utmost boundaries of human speech, that mystical theology suddenly  shows herself--not as the puzzle-headed constructor of impossible  creeds, but as accepting and transmuting to a more radiant life those  two profound but apparently contradictory metaphysical definitions of  Reality which we have already discussed.   [*228]    Eternal Becoming, God immanent and dynamic, striving with and in His  world: the unresting "flux of things" of Heracleitus, the  crying aloud of that Word "which is through all things  everlastingly"--the evolutionary world-process beloved of  modern philosophers--is here placed once for all in true relation  with pure transcendent and unmoved Being; the Absolute One of  Xenophanes and the Platonists. This Absolute is discerned by mystic  intuition as the "End of Unity" in whom all diversities  must cease;   [*229]    the Ocean to which that ceaseless and painful Becoming, that  unresting river of life, in which we are immersed, tends to return:  the Son going to the Father.

[iii.v-p114](  c   ) LOVE, the principle of attraction, which seems to partake at once of  the transcendental and the created worlds. If we consider the Father  as Supreme Subject--"origin," as Aquinas says,  "of the entire procession of Deity"   [*230]   --and the Son or generated Logos as the Object of His thought, in  whom, says Ruysbroeck, "He contemplates Himself and all things  in an eternal Now";   [*231]    then this personal Spirit of Love, [iii.v-p116.1]   il desiro e il velle,     represents the relation between the two, and  constitutes the very character of God. "The heavenly  Father," says Ruysbroeck, "as a living Ground, with all  that lives in Him, is actively turned towards His Son as to His own  Eternal Wisdom. And that same Wisdom, with all that lives in it, is  actively turned back towards the Father, that is towards that very  ground from which it comes forth. And of this meeting is born the  third Person, between the Father and the [p. 117] [iii.v-Page_117] Son, that is the Holy Spirit, their mutual  Love."   [*232]    Proceeding, according to Christian doctrine, from Light and Life, the  Father and Son--implicit, that is, in both the Absolute Source  and dynamic flux of things--this divine spirit of desire is found  enshrined in our very selfhood; and is the agent by which that  selfhood is merged in the Absolute Self. "My love is my  weight," said St. Augustine.   [*233]    It is the spiritual equivalent of that gravitation which draws all  things to their place. Thus Bernard Holland says in his Introduction  to Boehme's "Dialogues," "In a deep sense, the  desire of the Spark of Life in the Soul to return to its Original  Source is part of the longing desire of the universal Life for its own  heart or centre. Of this longing, the universal attraction striving  against resistance, towards a universal centre, proved to govern the  phenomenal or physical world, is but the outer sheath and visible  working." Again, "Desire is everything in Nature; does  everything. Heaven is Nature filled with divine Life attracted by  Desire."   [*234] 

[iii.v-p120]"The best masters say," says Eckhart,  "that the love wherewith we love is the Holy Spirit.   [*235]    Some deny it. But this is always true: all those motives by which we  are moved to love, in these is nothing else than the Holy  Spirit."   [*236] 

[iii.v-p123]"God wills," says Ruysbroeck, gathering  these scattered symbols to unity again, "that we should come  forth from ourselves in this Eternal Light; that we should reunite  ourselves in a supernatural manner with that image which is our true  Life, and that we should possess it with Him actively and fruitively  in eternal blessedness . . . this going forth of the contemplative is  also in Love: for by fruitive love he overpasses his created being and  finds and tastes the riches and delights which are God Himself, and  which He causes to pour forth without ceasing in the most secret  chamber of the soul, at that place where it is most like unto the  nobility of God."   [*237] 

[iii.v-p125]Here only, in the innermost sanctuary of being, the  soul's "last habitation," as St. Teresa said, is the  truth which these symbols express truly known: for "as to how  the Trinity is one and the Trinity in the Unity of the nature is one,  whilst nevertheless the Trinity comes forth from the Unity, this  cannot be expressed in [p. 118] [iii.v-Page_118] words,"  says Suso, "owing to the simplicity of that deep abyss. Hither  it is, into this intelligible   where    that the spirit, spiritualizing itself, soars up; now flying in the  measureless heights, now swimming in the soundless deeps, of the  sublime marvels of the Godhead!"   [*238] 

[iii.v-p127]Mystical philosophy, then, has availed itself gladly  of the doctrine of the Trinity in expressing its vision of the nature  of that Absolute which is found, by those who attain the deep Abyss of  the Godhead, to be essentially One. But it is by the complementary  Christian dogma of the Incarnation that it has best been able to  describe and explain the nature of the inward and personal mystic  experience. The Incarnation, which is for traditional Christianity  synonymous with the historical birth and earthly life of Christ, is  for mystics of a certain type, not only this but also a perpetual  Cosmic and personal process. It is an everlasting bringing forth, in  the universe and also in the individual ascending soul, of the divine  and perfect Life, the pure character of God, of which the one  historical life dramatized the essential constituents. Hence the soul,  like the physical embryo, resumes in its upward progress the spiritual  life-history of the race. "The one secret, the greatest of  all," says Patmore, is "the doctrine of the Incarnation,  regarded not as an historical event which occurred two thousand years  ago, but as an event which is renewed in the body of every one who is  in the way to the fulfilment of his original destiny."   [*239] 

[iii.v-p129]We have seen that for mystical theology the Second  Person of the Trinity is the Wisdom of the Father, the Word of Life.  The fullness of this Word could therefore only be communicated to the  human consciousness by a Life. In the Incarnation this Logos, this  divine character of Reality, penetrated the illusions of the sensual  world--in other words, the illusions of all the selves whose  ideas compose that world--and "saved" it by this  infusion of truth. A divine, suffering, self-sacrificing Personality  was then shown as the sacred heart of a living, striving universe: and  for once the Absolute was exhibited in the terms of finite human  existence. Some such event as this breaking through of the divine and  archetypal life into the temporal world is perceived by the mystical  philosopher to be a necessity, if man was ever to see in terms of life  that greatness of life to which he belongs: learn to transcend the  world of sense, and rebuild his life upon the levels of reality.  "For Thou art," says Nicolas of Cusa, "the Word of  God humanified, and Thou art man deified."   [*240]    Thus it is that the [p. 119] [iii.v-Page_119] Catholic priest in  the Christmas Mass gives thanks, not for the setting in hand of any  commercial process of redemption, but for a revelation of reality,  "Quia per incarnati Verbi mysterium nova mentis nostrae oculis  lux tuae claritatis infulsit: ut dum visibiliter Deum cognoscimus, per  hunc in invisibilium amorem rapiamur." The essence of mystical  Christianity seems to be summed up in these lovely words.   [*241] 

[iii.v-p132]"The Son of God, the Eternal Word in the Father,  who is the glance, or brightness, and the power of the light  eternity" says Boehme, "must become man and be born in  you, if you will know God: otherwise you are in the dark stable and go  about groping."   [*242]    "The Word," says Ruysbroeck finely, "is no other  than See. And this is the coming forth and the birth of the Son of the  Eternal Light, in Whom all blessedness is seen and known."   [*243]    Once at any rate, they say in effect, the measure of that which it  was possible for the Spirit of Life to do and for living creatures to  be, was filled to the brim. By this event, all were assured that the  ladder of Creation was made whole; in this hypostatic union, the  breach between appearance and reality, between God and man, was  healed. The Bridge so made--to use St. Catherine of Siena's  allegory again--is eternal, since it was "laid before the  foundation of the world" in the "Eternal Now." Thus  the voice of the Father says to her in that vision, "I also wish  thee to look at the Bridge of My only-begotten Son, and see the  greatness thereof, for it reaches from Heaven to earth; that is, that  the earth of your humanity is joined to the greatness of the Deity  thereby. I say, then, that this Bridge reaches from Heaven to earth,  and constitutes the union which I have made with man. . . . So the  height of the Divinity, humbled to the earth, and joined with your  humanity made the Bridge and reformed the road. Why was this done? In  order that man might come to his true happiness with the angels. And  observe that it is not enough, in order that you should have life,  that My son should have made you this Bridge, unless you walk  thereon."   [*244]    "Our high Father God Almighty, which is Being," says Lady  Julian, "He knew and loved us from afore any time. Of which  knowing, in His marvellous deep charity, and the foreseeing counsel of  all the blessed Trinity, He willed that the Second Person should  become our Mother."   [*245] 

[iii.v-p137]It is of course this assertion of the quickening  communication [p. 120] [iii.v-Page_120] of grace to nature, of  God to man--an influx of ultimate reality, possible of  assimilation by all--which constitutes the strength of the  Christian religion. Instead of the stony diet of the philosophers, it  offers to the self hungry for the Absolute that [iii.v-p137.1]   Panis Angelorum,     the vivifying principle of the world. That is to  say, it gives concrete and experimental knowledge of a supreme  Personality--absorption into His mystical body--instead of  the artificial conviction produced by concentration on an idea. It  knits up the universe; shows the phenomenal pierced in all directions  by the real, the natural as the vehicle of the supernatural. It  provides a solid basis for mysticism, a basis which is at once  metaphysical and psychological: and shows that state towards which the  world's deepest minds have always instinctively aspired, as a  part of the cosmic return through Christ to God.

   [iii.v-p137.2] "Quivi e la sapienza e la possanza
   ch' apri le strade intra il cielo e la  terra
   onde fu gia si lunga disianza."   [*246]  
  [iii.v-p139]This is what the Christian mystics mean to express  when they declare over and over again that the return to the Divine  Substance, the Absolute, which is the end of the soul's ascent,  can only be made through the humanity of Christ. The Son, the Word, is  the character of the Father: that in which the Ineffable Godhead knows  Himself, as we only know ourselves in our own characters. He is thus a  double link: the means of God's self-consciousness, the means of  man's consciousness of God. How then, asks mystic theology,  could such a link complete its attachments without some such process  as that which the Incarnation dramatized in time and space? The  Principle of Life is also the Principle of Restitution; by which the  imperfect and broken life of sense is mended and transformed into the  perfect life of spirit. Hence the title of Repairer applied by Boehme  to the Second Person of the Trinity.

[iii.v-p140]In the last resort, the doctrine of the Incarnation is  the only safeguard of the mystics against the pantheism to which they  always tend. The Unconditioned Absolute, so soon as it alone becomes  the object of their contemplation, is apt to be conceived merely as  Divine Essence; the idea of Personality evaporates. The union of the  soul with God is then thought of in terms of absorption. The  distinction between Creator and creature is obliterated and loving  communion is at an end. This is probably the reason why many of the  greatest contemplatives--Suso and St. Teresa are cases in  point--have found that deliberate meditation upon the humanity of  Christ, difficult and uncongenial as [p. 121] [iii.v-Page_121]  this concrete devotion sometimes is to the mystical temperament, was a  necessity if they were to retain a healthy and well-balanced inner  life.

[iii.v-p141]Further, these mystics see in the historic life of  Christ an epitome--or if you will, an exhibition--of the  essentials of all spiritual life. There they see dramatized not only  the cosmic process of the Divine Wisdom, but also the inward  experience of every soul on her way to union with that Absolute  "to which the whole Creation moves." This is why the  expressions which they use to describe the evolution of the mystical  consciousness from the birth of the divine in the spark of the soul to  its final unification with the Absolute Life are so constantly chosen  from the Drama of Faith. In this drama they see described under veils  the necessary adventures of the spirit. Its obscure and humble birth,  its education in poverty, its temptation, mortification and solitude,  its "illuminated life" of service and contemplation, the  desolation of that "dark night of the soul" in which it  seems abandoned by the Divine: the painful death of the self, its  resurrection to the glorified existence of the Unitive Way, its final  reabsorption in its Source--all these, they say, were lived once  in a supreme degree in the flesh. Moreover, the degree of closeness  with which the individual experience adheres to this Pattern is always  taken by them as a standard of the healthiness, ardour, and success of  its transcendental activities.

   [iii.v-p141.1] "Apparve in questa forma
   Per dare a noi la norma."
  [iii.v-p142]sang Jacopone da Todi. "And he who vainly  thinketh otherwise," says the "Theologia Germanica"  with uncompromising vigour, "is deceived. And he who saith  otherwise, lieth."   [*247] 

[iii.v-p144]Those to whom such a parallel seems artificial should  remember that according to the doctrine of mysticism that drama of the  self-limitation and self-sacrifice of the Absolute Life, which was  once played out in the phenomenal world--forced, as it were, upon  the consciousness of dim-eyed men--is eternally going forward  upon the plane of reality. To them the Cross of Calvary is implicit in  the Rose of the World. The law of this Infinite Life which was in the  Incarnation expressing Its own nature in human terms, must then also  be the law of the finite life; in so far as that life aspires to  transcend individual limitations, rise to freedom, and attain union  with Infinity. It is this governing idea which justifies the  apparently fanciful allegorizations of Christian history which swarm  in the works of the mystics.

[iii.v-p145]To exhibit these allegorizations in detail would be  tedious. All [p. 122] [iii.v-Page_122] that is necessary is that  the principle underlying them should be understood. I give, then, but  one example: that which is referred by mystical writers to the  Nativity, and concerns the eternal Birth or Generation of the Son or  Divine Word.

[iii.v-p146]This Birth is in its first, or cosmic sense, the  welling forth of the Spirit of Life from the Divine Abyss of the  unconditioned Godhead. "From our proper Ground, that is to say  from the Father and all that which lives in Him, there shines,"  says Ruysbroeck, "an eternal Ray, the which is the Birth of the  Son."   [*248]    It is of this perpetual generation of the Word that Meister Eckhart  speaks, when he says in his Christmas sermon, "We are  celebrating the feast of the Eternal Birth which God the Father has  borne and   never ceases to bear    in all Eternity: whilst this birth also comes to pass in Time and in  human nature. Saint Augustine says this Birth is ever taking  place." At this point, with that strong practical instinct which  is characteristic of the mystics, Eckhart turns abruptly from  speculation to immediate experience, and continues "But if it  takes not place in me, what avails it? Everything lies in this, that  it should take place in me."   [*249]    Here in a few words the two-fold character of this Mystic Birth is  exhibited. The interest is suddenly deflected from its cosmic to its  personal aspect; and the individual is reminded that in him, no less  than in the Archetypal Universe, real life must be born if real life  is to be lived. "When the soul brings forth the Son," says  Eckhart in another place, "it is happier than Mary."   [*250] 

[iii.v-p150]Since the soul, according to mystic principles, can  only perceive Reality in proportion as she is real, know God by  becoming Godlike, it is clear that this birth is the initial  necessity. The true and definitely directed mystical life does and  must open with that most actual, though indescribable phenomenon, the  coming forth into consciousness of man's deeper, spiritual self,  which ascetical and mystical writers of all ages have agreed to call  Regeneration or Re-birth. Nothing that is within him is able of its  own power to achieve this. It must be evoked by an energy, a  quickening Spirit, which comes from beyond the soul, and  "secretly initiates what He openly crowns."   [*251]    [p. 123] [iii.v-Page_123]

[iii.v-p152]We nave already considered   [*252]    the New Birth in its purely psychological aspect, as the emergence of  the transcendental sense. Here its more profound and mystical side is  exhibited. By a process which may indifferently be described as the  birth of something new or the coming forth of something which has  slept--since both these phrases are but metaphors for another and  more secret operation--the eye is opened on Eternity, the self,  abruptly made aware of Reality, comes forth from the cave of illusion  like a child from the womb and begins to live upon the supersensual  plane. Then she feels in her inmost part a new presence, a new  consciousness--it were hardly an exaggeration to say a new  Person--weak, demanding nurture, clearly destined to pass through  many phases of development before its maturity is reached; yet of so  strange a nature, that in comparison with its environment she may well  regard it as Divine.

[iii.v-p154]"This change, this upsetting, is called  re-birth.   To be born    simply means to enter into a world in which the senses dominate, in  which wisdom and love languish in the bonds of individuality. To be   re-born    means to return to a world where the spirit of wisdom and love  governs and animal-man obeys."   [*253]    So Eckartshausen. It means, says Jane Lead, "the bringing forth  of a new-created Godlike similitude in the soul."   [*254]    He is brought forth, says Eckartshausen again, in the stable  previously inhabited by the ox of passion and the ass of prejudice.   [*255]    His mother, says Boehme, is the Virgin Sophia, the Divine Wisdom, or  Mirror of the Being of God. With the emergence of this new factor into  the conscious field--this spiritual birth--the mystic life  begins: as the Christian epoch began with the emergence of Divine  Spirit in the flesh. Paradise, says Boehme, is still in the world, but  man is not in Paradise unless he be born again. In that case, he  stands therein in the New Birth,   [*256]    and tastes here and now that Eternal Life for which he has been  made.

[iii.v-p159]Here then are some characteristics of the map which  the Christian mystics are most inclined to use. There are, of course,  other great landmarks upon it: and these we shall meet as we follow in  detail the voyages of the questing soul. One warning, however, must be  given to amateur geographers before we go on. Like all other maps,  this one at its best can but represent by harsh outline and  conventional colour the living earth which those travellers trod and  the mysterious seas on which they sailed. It is a deliberately  schematic representation of Reality, a flat and sometimes arid symbol  of great landscapes, rushing rivers, awful peaks: [p. 124] [iii.v-Page_124] dangerous unless these its limitations be  always kept in mind. The boy who defined Canada as "very  pink" was not much further off the track than those who would  limit the Adorable Trinity to the definitions of the  "Athanasian" Creed; however useful that chart may be, and  is, within the boundaries imposed by its form.

[iii.v-p160]Further, all such maps, and we who treat of them, can  but set down in cold blood and with a dreadful pretence of precision,  matters which the true explorers of Eternity were only able to  apprehend in the ardours of such a passion, in the transports of such  a union as we, poor finite slaves of our frittered emotions, could  hardly look upon and live. "If you would truly know how these  things come to pass," says St. Bonaventura, in a passage which  all students of theology should ever keep in mind, "ask it of  grace, not of doctrine; of desire, not of intellect; of the ardours of  prayer, not of the teachings of the schools; of the Bridegroom, not of  the Master; of God, not of man; of the darkness, not of the day; not  of illumination, but of that Fire which enflames all and wraps us in  God with great sweetness and most ardent love. The which Fire most  truly is God, and the hearth thereof is in Jerusalem."   [*257] 

[iii.v-p162][p. 125] [iii.v-Page_125]

Footnotes

^97:182 [iii.v-p8.1][iii.v-p9]         "La gloria di colui che tutto move

[iii.v-p10]per l'universo penetra, e    resplende

[iii.v-p11]in una parte piu e meno    altrove" (Par. i. 1-3).

[iii.v-p12]The theological ground-plan of the    Cantica is epitomized in this introductory verse.

^97:183 [iii.v-p13.1][iii.v-p14]         "Summa Contra Gentiles," 1. iv. cap. 1. (Rickaby's    translation).

^98:184 [iii.v-p14.1][iii.v-p15]         Leben, cap. lvi.

^98:185 [iii.v-p16.1][iii.v-p17]         Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. xi.

^98:186 [iii.v-p18.1][iii.v-p19]         Avisos y Sentencias Espirituales, N. 51.

^98:187 [iii.v-p20.1][iii.v-p21]         "Varieties of Religious Experience," Lecture vi.

^99:188 [iii.v-p22.1][iii.v-p23]         Quoted by W. L. Lilly, "Many Mansions," p. 140.

^99:189 [iii.v-p23.1][iii.v-p24]         Ennead vi. 9.

^99:190 [iii.v-p25.1][iii.v-p26]         Thus Aquinas says, "Since God is the universal cause of all    Being, in whatever region Being can be found, there must be the    Divine Presence" ("Summa Contra Gentiles," 1. iii.    cap. lxviii.). And we have seen that the whole claim of the mystics    ultimately depends on man's possession of pure being in    "the spark of the soul."

^100:191 [iii.v-p26.1][iii.v-p27]         "De Ornatu Spiritualium Nuptiarum," I. ii. cap.    lxvii.

^100:192 [iii.v-p27.1][iii.v-p28]         Op. cit.,      I. iii. cap. i.

^100:193 [iii.v-p30.1][iii.v-p31]         Relaccion ix. 10. But this image of a sponge, which also suggested    itelf to St. Augustine, proved an occasion of stumbling to his more    metaphysical mind: tending to confuse his idea of the nature of God    with the category of space.     Vide      Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. v.

^101:194 [iii.v-p31.1][iii.v-p32]         "The Threefold Life of Man," cap. vi.  section 71.

^101:195 [iii.v-p33.1][iii.v-p34]         Eckhart, Pred, lxix. So too we read in the Oxyrhyncus Papyri,    "Raise the stone and there thou shalt find Me. Cleave the wood    and there am I."

^101:196 [iii.v-p35.1][iii.v-p36]         Compare above, cap. ii.

^101:197 [iii.v-p36.1][iii.v-p37]         "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. xl.

^103:198 [iii.v-p39.1][iii.v-p40]         Boyce Gibson, "God with Us," p. 24.

^103:199 [iii.v-p41.1][iii.v-p42]         See A. E. Waite,     "     TheDoctrine and Literature of the Kabalah," pp. 36-53.

^105:200 [iii.v-p47.2][iii.v-p48]         Par. xxxiii. 137.

^106:201 [iii.v-p53.8][iii.v-p54]         "Vala," viii. 237.

^107:202 [iii.v-p55.14][iii.v-p56]         "Jerusalem," lxi. 44 and xcv. 23.

^108:203 [iii.v-p61.1][iii.v-p62]         A. E. Waite, "The Doctrine and Literature of the    Kabalah," p. 35.

^108:204 [iii.v-p62.1][iii.v-p63]         Palmer. "Oriental Mysticism," pt. i. cap. i

^108:205 [iii.v-p64.1][iii.v-p65]         Delacroix, "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 75. The    reference in the last sentence is to St. Teresa's    "Castillo Interior."

^110:206 [iii.v-p70.1][iii.v-p71]         See Tauler, Sermon on St. John Baptist, and Third Instruction    (" The Inner Way," pp. 97 and 321); Suso,    "Buchlein von der Warheit," cap. v.; Ruysbroeck,    "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," 1. iii. caps, ii. and    vi.

^110:207 [iii.v-p74.1][iii.v-p75]         St. Teresa, "El Castillo Interior," Moradas;    Setimas, cap. i.

^111:208 [iii.v-p77.1][iii.v-p78]         Julian of Norwich, "Revelations of Divine Love." cap.    lv. Julian here repeats a familiar Patristic doctrine. So St. Thomas    says ("Summa Contra Gentiles," 1. iv. cap. xxvi),    "A likeness of the Divine Trinity is observable in the human    mind."

^111:209 [iii.v-p78.1][iii.v-p79]         "The three Persons of the Trinity," said John Scotus    Erigena, "are less modes of the Divine Substance than modes    under which our mind conceives the Divine Substance"--a    stimulating statement of dubious orthodoxy.

^111:210 [iii.v-p80.1][iii.v-p81]         Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. xi.

^112:211 [iii.v-p82.1][iii.v-p83]         Op. cit.,      cap. v.

^112:212 [iii.v-p84.1][iii.v-p85]         Substance      is here, of course, to be understood in the scholastic sense, as    the reality which underlies merely phenomenal existence.

^112:213 [iii.v-p85.1][iii.v-p86]         I.e.     , the Second Person of the Christian Trinity is the redemptive,    "fount of mercy," the medium by which Grace, the free    gift of transcendental life, reaches and vivifies human nature:    "permeates it," in Eucken's words, "with the    Infinite and Eternal" ("Der Sinn und Wert des    Lebens," p. 181).

^112:214 [iii.v-p86.1][iii.v-p87]         "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lviii.

^113:215 [iii.v-p88.1][iii.v-p89]         Op. cit.     , cap. lix.

^113:216 [iii.v-p90.6][iii.v-p91]         "The School of the Heart," Epigram x. This book, which    is a free translation of the "Scola Cordis" of Benedict    Haeften (1635), is often, but wrongly attributed to Francis    Quarles.

^113:217 [iii.v-p93.1][iii.v-p94]         "De Consideratione," bk. v. cap. viii.

^113:218 [iii.v-p95.1][iii.v-p96]         [iii.v-p96.1][iii.v-p96.1].

^114:219 [iii.v-p96.2][iii.v-p97]         "De Visione Dei," cap. xvii.

^114:220 [iii.v-p97.1][iii.v-p98]         Eucken, "Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 131.

^114:221 [iii.v-p99.1][iii.v-p100]         "An Appeal to All who Doubt" ("Liberal and    Mystical Writings of William Law" p. 54). Law's symbols    are here borrowed from the system of his master, Jacob Boehme. (See    the "De Signatura Rerum" of Boehme, cap. xiv.)

^115:222 [iii.v-p102.1][iii.v-p103]         Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

^115:223 [iii.v-p103.1][iii.v-p104]         Tauler, 3rd Instruction ("The Inner Way," p. 324).

^115:224 [iii.v-p104.3][iii.v-p105]         Par. xxxiii 67, 85.

^115:225 [iii.v-p105.1][iii.v-p106]         "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. iii. cap. iii.

^115:226 [iii.v-p107.1][iii.v-p108]         Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol.    i. p. 357.

^115:227 [iii.v-p108.1][iii.v-p109]         Ruysbroeck,     op. cit.     .,     loc. cit. 

^116:228 [iii.v-p111.1][iii.v-p112]         Supra,      Cap. II.

^116:229 [iii.v-p112.1][iii.v-p113]         Tauler,     op. cit., loc. cit. 

^116:230 [iii.v-p114.1][iii.v-p115]         "Summa Contra Gentiles," I. iv. cap. xxvi.

^116:231 [iii.v-p115.1][iii.v-p116]         "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii. cap. iv.

^117:232 [iii.v-p116.2][iii.v-p117]         Op. cit.,      I. ii. cap. xxxvii.

^117:233 [iii.v-p117.1][iii.v-p118]         Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. ix.

^117:234 [iii.v-p118.1][iii.v-p119]         Introduction to "Three Dialogues of the Supersensual    Life," p. xxx.

^117:235 [iii.v-p120.1][iii.v-p121]         The doctrine is found in St. Augustine, and is frequently reproduced    by the mediaeval mystics. Eckhart is perhaps here quoting St. Thomas    Aquinas, a usual source of his more orthodox utterances. Compare    "Summa Contra Gentiles," I. iv. cap. xxiii: "Since    the Holy Ghost proceeds as the love wherewith God loves Himself, and    since God loves with the same love Himself and other beings for the    sake of His own goodness, it is clear that the love wherewith God    loves us belongs to the Holy Ghost. In like manner also the love    wherewith we love God."

^117:236 [iii.v-p121.1][iii.v-p122]         Pred. xii.

^117:237 [iii.v-p123.1][iii.v-p124]         "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum " I. iii. cap. iii.

^118:238 [iii.v-p125.1][iii.v-p126]         Suso, Leben, cap. lvi.

^118:239 [iii.v-p127.1][iii.v-p128]         "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," "Homo,"    xix.

^118:240 [iii.v-p129.1][iii.v-p130]         "De Visione Dei," cap. xxiii.

^119:241 [iii.v-p130.1][iii.v-p131]         "Because by the mystery of the Incarnate Word the new light of    Thy brightness hath shone upon the eyes of our mind: that we,    knowing God seen of the eyes, by Him may be snatched up into the    love of that which eye hath not seen" (Missale Romanum.    Praefatio Solemnis de Nativitate).

^119:242 [iii.v-p132.1][iii.v-p133]         "The Threefold Life of Man, cap. iii.  section 31.

^119:243 [iii.v-p133.1][iii.v-p134]         Ruysbroeck,     op. cit     ., 1. iii. cap. i.

^119:244 [iii.v-p134.1][iii.v-p135]         Dialogo, cap. xxii.

^119:245 [iii.v-p135.1][iii.v-p136]         "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lix.

^120:246 [iii.v-p137.6][iii.v-p138]         Par. xxiii. 37. "Here is the Wisdom and the Power which opened    the ways betwixt heaven and earth, for which there erst had been so    long a yearning."

^121:247 [iii.v-p142.1][iii.v-p143]         "Theologia Germanica," cap. xviii.

^122:248 [iii.v-p146.1][iii.v-p147]         "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," 1. iii. cap. v. The    extreme antiquity of this idea is illustrated by the Catholic    practice, dating from Patristic times, of celebrating three Masses    on Christmas Day. Of these the first, at midnight, commemorates the    Eternal Generation of the Son; the second, at dawn, His incarnation    upon earth; the third His birth in the heart of man. Compare the    Roman Missal: also Kellner, "Heortology" (English    translation, London, 1908), p. 156.

^122:249 [iii.v-p147.1][iii.v-p148]         Eckhart, Pred. i., "Mystische Schriften," p. 13. Compare    Tauler, Sermon on the Nativity of Our Lady ("The Inner    Way," p. 167).

^122:250 [iii.v-p148.1][iii.v-p149]         This idea of re-birth is probably of Oriental origin. It can be    traced back to Egypt, being found in the Hermetic writings of the    third century, B.C. See Petrie, "Personal Religion in Egypt    before Christianity," p. 167.

^122:251 [iii.v-p150.1][iii.v-p151]         F. von Hugel, "The Life of Prayer," p. 24.

^123:252 [iii.v-p152.1][iii.v-p153]         Supra     , p. 53.

^123:253 [iii.v-p154.1][iii.v-p155]         "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary," p. 77.

^123:254 [iii.v-p155.1][iii.v-p156]         The Enochian Walks with God," p. 3.

^123:255 [iii.v-p156.1][iii.v-p157]         Op. cit     ., p. 81.

^123:256 [iii.v-p157.1][iii.v-p158]         "De Signatura Rerum," viii. 47.

^124:257 [iii.v-p160.1][iii.v-p161]         "De Itinerado Mentis in Deo," cap. vii.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VI. Mysticism and   Symbolism

 [iii.vi][iii.vi-p1]In[iii.vi-p1.1] our study of theology we saw the Christian mystic adopting, as chart  and pilot book of his voyages and adventures, the scheme of faith, and  diagram of the spiritual world, which is accepted by ordinary  Christian men. We saw that he found in it a depth and richness of  content which the conventional believer in that theology, the  "good churchman," seldom suspects: and that which is true  of the Christian mystic is also true in its measure and as regards  their respective theologies, of the Pagan, the Mahommedan and the  Buddhist.

[iii.vi-p2]But since the spiritual adventures of the mystic are  not those of ordinary men, it will follow that this map, though always  true for him, is not complete. He can press forward to countries which  unmystical piety must mark as unexplored, Pushing out from harbour to  "the vast and stormy sea of the divine," he can take  soundings, and mark dangers the existence of which such piety never  needs to prove. Hence it is not strange that certain maps, artistic  representations or symbolic schemes, should have come into being which  describe or suggest the special experiences of the mystical  consciousness, and the doctrines to which these experiences have given  birth. Many of these maps have an uncouth, even an impious appearance  in the eyes of those unacquainted with the facts which they attempt to  translate: as the charts of the deep-sea sailor seem ugly and  unintelligible things to those who have never been out of sight of  land. Others--and these the most pleasing, most easily  understood--have already been made familiar, perhaps tiresomely  familiar, to us by the poets; who, intuitively recognizing their  suggestive qualities, their links with [p. 126] [iii.vi-Page_126]  truth, have borrowed and adapted them to their own business of  translating Reality into terms of rhythm and speech. Ultimately,  however, they owe their origin to the mystics, or to that mystical  sense which is innate in all true poets: and in the last resort it is  the mystic's kingdom, and the mystic's experience, which  they affect to describe.

[iii.vi-p3]These special mystical diagrams, these symbolic and  artistic descriptions of man's inward history--his secret  adventures with God--are almost endless in their variety: since  in each we have a picture of the country of the soul seen through a  different temperament. To describe all would be to analyse the whole  field of mystical literature, and indeed much other literature as  well; to epitomize in fact all that has been dreamed and written  concerning the so-called "inner life"--a dreary and a  lengthy task. But the majority of them, I think, express a  comparatively small number of essential doctrines or fundamental ways  of seeing things; and as regards their imagery, they fall into three  great classes, representative of the three principal ways in which  man's spiritual consciousness reacts to the touch of Reality,  the three primary if paradoxical facts of which that consciousness  must be aware. Hence a consideration of mystic symbols drawn from each  of these groups may give us a key with which to unlock some at least  of the verbal riddles of the individual adventurer.

[iii.vi-p4]Thanks to the spatial imagery inseparable from human  thinking and human expression, no direct description of spiritual  experience is or can be possible to man. It must always be symbolic,  allusive, oblique: always suggest, but never tell, the truth: and in  this respect there is not much to choose between the fluid and  artistic language of vision and the arid technicalities of philosophy.  In another respect, however, there is a great deal to choose between  them: and here the visionary, not the philosopher, receives the palm.  The greater the suggestive quality of the symbol used, the more  answering emotion it evokes in those to whom it is addressed, the more  truth it will convey. A good symbolism, therefore, will be more than  mere diagram or mere allegory: it will use to the utmost the resources  of beauty and of passion, will bring with it hints of mystery and  wonder, bewitch with dreamy periods the mind to which it is addressed.  Its appeal will not be to the clever brain, but to the desirous heart,  the intuitive sense, of man.

[iii.vi-p5]The three great classes of symbols which I propose to  consider, appeal to three deep cravings of the self, three great  expressions of man's restlessness, which only mystic truth can  fully satisfy. The first is the craving which makes him a pilgrim and  wanderer. It is the longing to go out from his normal world in search  of a lost home, a "better country"; an Eldorado, a Sarras,  a Heavenly [p. 127] [iii.vi-Page_127] Syon. The next is that  craving of heart for heart, of the soul for its perfect mate, which  makes him a lover. The third is the craving for inward purity and  perfection, which makes him an ascetic, and in the last resort a  saint.

[iii.vi-p6]These three cravings, I think, answer to three ways in  which mystics of different temperaments attack the problem of the  Absolute: three different formulae under which their transcendence of  the sense-world can be described. In describing this transcendence,  and the special adventures involved in it, they are describing a  change from the state of ordinary men, in touch with the sense-world,  responding to its rhythms, to the state of spiritual consciousness in  which, as they say, they are "in union" with Divine  Reality, with God. Whatever be the theological creed of the mystic, he  never varies in declaring this close, definite, and actual intimacy to  be the end of his quest. "Mark me like the tulip with Thine own  streaks," says the Sufi.   [*258]    "I would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own hand is  to a man," says the German contemplative.   [*259]    "My   me    isGod, nor do I know my self-hood save in Him," says the  Italian saint.   [*260] 

[iii.vi-p10]But, since this Absolute God is for him substance,  ground or underlying Reality of all that   is   : present yet absent, near yet far: He is already as truly immanent in  the human soul as in the Universe. The seeker for the Real may  therefore objectify his quest in two apparently contradictory, yet  really mutually explanatory ways. First he may see it as an outgoing  journey from the world of illusion to the real or transcendental  world: a leaving of the visible for the invisible. Secondly, it may  appear to him as an inward alteration, remaking or regeneration, by  which his personality or character is so changed as to be able to  enter into communion with that Fontal Being which he loves and  desires; is united with and dominated by the indwelling God who is the  fount of his spiritual life. In the first case, the objective idea  "God" is the pivot of his symbolism: the Blazing Star, or  Magnet of the Universe which he has seen far off, and seeing, has  worshipped and desired. In the second case, the emphasis falls on the  subjective idea "Sanctity," with its accompanying  consciousness of a disharmony to be abolished. The Mystic Way will  then be described, not as a journey, but as an alteration of  personality, the transmuting of "earthly" into  "heavenly" man. Plainly these two aspects are obverse and  reverse of one whole. They represent that mighty pair of opposites,  Infinite and Finite, God and Self, which it is the business of  mysticism to carry up into a higher synthesis. [p. 128] [iii.vi-Page_128] Whether the process be considered as outward  search or inward change, its object and its end are the same. Man  enters into that Order of Reality for which he was made, and which is  indeed the inciting cause of his pilgrimage and his purification: for  however great the demand on the soul's own effort may be, the  initiative always lies with the living Divine World itself.  Man's small desire is evoked, met, and fulfilled by the Divine  Desire, his "separated will" or life becomes one with the  great Life of the All.

[iii.vi-p11]From what has been said in the last chapter, it will  be clear that the symbolism of outward search and of inward change  will be adopted respectively by the two groups of selves whose  experience of "union with the Divine" leans (1) to the  Transcendent or external, (2) to the Immanent or internal way of  apprehending Reality. A third or intermediate group of images will be  necessary to express the experience of those to whom mystic  feeling--the satisfaction of love--is the supreme factor in  the mystic life. According, then, to whether man's instinct  prompts him to describe the Absolute Reality which he knows and craves  for as a Place, a Person, or a State--all three of course but  partial and inadequate translations of the one Indescribable  Truth--so will he tend to adopt a symbolism of one or other of  these three types.

[iii.vi-p12]A. Those who conceive the Perfect as a beatific vision  exterior to them and very far off, who find in the doctrine of  Emanations something which answers to their inward experience, will  feel the process of their entrance into reality to be a quest, an  arduous journey from the material to the spiritual world. They move  away from, rather than transmute to another form, the life of sense.  The ecstasies of such mystics will answer to the root-meaning of that  much perverted word, as a "standing out" from themselves;  a flight to happier countries far away. For them, the soul is outward  bound towards its home.

[iii.vi-p13]B. Those for whom mysticism is above all things an  intimate and personal relation, the satisfaction of a deep  desire--who can say with Gertrude More, "never was there or  can there be imagined such a love, as is between an humble soul and  Thee"--will fall back upon imagery drawn largely from the  language of earthly passion. Since the Christian religion insists upon  the personal aspect of the Godhead, and provides in Christ an object  of such intimacy, devotion and desire, an enormous number of Christian  mystics inevitably describe their experiences under symbolism of this  kind.

[iii.vi-p14]C. Those who are conscious rather of the Divine as a  Transcendent Life immanent in the world and the self, and of a strange  spiritual seed within them by whose development man, moving to higher  levels of character and consciousness, attains his end, [p. 129] [iii.vi-Page_129] will see the mystic life as involving inward  change rather than outgoing search. Regeneration is their watchword,  and they will choose symbols of growth or transmutation: saying with  St. Catherine of Genoa, "my Being is God, not by simple  participation, but by a true transformation of my Being."   [*261] 

[iii.vi-p16]These three groups of mystics, then, stand for three  kinds of temperament; and we may fairly take as their characteristic  forms of symbolic expression the Mystic Quest, the Marriage of the  Soul, and the "Great Work" of the Spiritual  Alchemists.

   

[iii.vi-p16.1]I

[iii.vi-p17]The pilgrimage idea, the outgoing quest, appears in  mystical literature under two different aspects. One is the search for  the "Hidden Treasure which desires to be found." Such is  the "quest of the Grail" when regarded in its mystic  aspect as an allegory of the adventures of the soul. The other is the  long, hard journey towards a known and definite goal or state. Such  are Dante's "Divine Comedy" and Bunyan's  "Pilgrim's Progress"; each in their manner faithful  descriptions of the Mystic Way. The goal of the quest--the  Empyrean of Dante, the Beatific Vision or fulfilment of love--is  often called Jerusalem by the Christian mystics: naturally enough  since that city was for the mediaeval mind the supreme end of  pilgrimage. By Jerusalem they mean not only the celestial country  Heaven, but also the spiritual life, which is "itself a  heaven."   [*262]    "Right as a true pilgrim going to Jerusalem," says  Hilton, "leaveth behind him house and land, wife and child, and  maketh himself poor and bare from all that he hath, that he may go  lightly without letting: right so, if thou wilt be a ghostly pilgrim,  thou shalt make thyself naked from all that thou hast . . . then shalt  thou set in thy heart wholly and fully that thou wouldst be at  Jerusalem, and at none other place but there."  "Jerusalem," he says in this same chapter, "is as  much as to say a sight of peace; and betokeneth contemplation in  perfect love of God."   [*263] 

[iii.vi-p20]Under this image of a pilgrimage--an image as  concrete and practical, as remote from the romantic and picturesque,  for the mediaeval writers who used it, as a symbolism of hotel and  railway train would be to us--the mystics contrived to summarize  and suggest much of the life history of the ascending soul; the  developing spiritual consciousness. The necessary freedom and  detachment of the traveller, his departure from his normal life and  interests, the difficulties, enemies, and hardships encountered on  [p. 130] [iii.vi-Page_130] the road--the length of the  journey, the variety of the country, the dark night which overtakes  him, the glimpses of destination far away--all these are seen  more and more as we advance in knowledge to constitute a transparent  allegory of the incidents of man's progress from the unreal to  the real. Bunyan was but the last of a long series of minds which  grasped this fact.

[iii.vi-p21]The Traveller, says the Sufi 'Aziz bin Mahommed  Nafasi, in whose book, "The Remotest Aim," the  pilgrimage-symbolism is developed in great detail, is the Perceptive  or Intuitive Sense of Man. The goal to which he journeys is Knowledge  of God. This mysterious traveller towards the only country of the soul  may be known of other men by his detachment, charity, humility, and  patience. These primary virtues, however--belonging to ethical  rather than to spiritual life--are not enough to bring his quest  to a successful termination. They make him, say the Sufis,  "perfect in knowledge of his goal but deficient in the power of  reaching it." Though he has fraternal love for his  fellow-pilgrims, detachment from wayside allurements, untiring  perseverance on the road, he is still encumbered and weakened by  unnecessary luggage. The second stage of his journey, therefore, is  initiated like that of Christian by a casting off of his burden: a  total self-renouncement, the attainment of a Franciscan poverty of  spirit whereby he becomes "Perfectly Free."

[iii.vi-p22]Having got rid of all impediments to the spiritual  quest, he must now acquire or develop in their stead the  characteristic mystical qualities, or Three Aids of the Pilgrim; which  are called in this system Attraction, Devotion, and Elevation.  Attraction is consciousness of the mutual desire existing between  man's spirit and the Divine Spirit: of the link of love which  knits up reality and draws all things to their home in God. This is  the universal law on which all mysticism is based. It is St.  Augustine's "Thou hast made us for Thyself and our hearts  can find no rest except in Thee." This "natural  magnetism," then, once he is aware of it, will draw the pilgrim  irresistibly along the road from the Many to the One. His second aid,  Devotion, says the "Remotest Aim" in a phrase of great  depth and beauty, is "the prosecution of the journey   to    God and   in    God."   [*264]    It embraces, in fact, the whole contemplative life. It is the next  degree of spiritual consciousness after the blind yielding to the  attraction of the Real, and the setting in order of man's  relation to his source.

[iii.vi-p24]The Traveller's journey   to    God is complete when he attains [p. 131] [iii.vi-Page_131]  knowledge of Him--"Illumination," in the language of  European mystics. The point at which this is reached is called the  Tavern or resting-place upon the road, where he is fed with the Divine  Mysteries. There are also "Wine Shops" upon the way, where  the weary pilgrim is cheered and refreshed by a draught of the wine of  Divine Love.   [*265]    Only when the journey   to    God is completed begins the "Journey   in    God"--that which the Christian mystics call the Unitive  Way--and this, since it is the essence of Eternal Life, can have  no end. Elevation, the pilgrim's third aid, is the exalted or  ecstatic form of consciousness peculiar to the contemplative, and  which allows the traveller a glimpse of the spiritual city towards  which he goes.   [*266] 

[iii.vi-p27]The Sufi poet 'Attar, in his mystical poem,  "The Colloquy of the Birds," has described the stages of  this same spiritual pilgrimage with greater psychological insight, as  the journey through "Seven Valleys." The lapwing, having  been asked by other birds what is the length of the road which leads  to the hidden Palace of the King, replies that there are Seven Valleys  through which every traveller must pass: but since none who attain the  End ever come back to describe their adventures, no one knows the  length of the way.

[iii.vi-p28](1) The first valley, says the lapwing, is the Valley  of the Quest. It is long and toilsome: and there the traveller must  strip himself of all earthly things, becoming poor, bare, and  desolate: and so stay till the Supernal Light casts a ray on his  desolation. It is in fact, Dante's Purgatorio, the Christian Way  of Purgation: the period of self-stripping and purification which no  mystic system omits.

[iii.vi-p29](2) When the ray of Supernal Light has touched the  pilgrim he enters the limitless Valley of Love: begins, that is to  say, the mystic life. It is Dante's "Earthly  Paradise," or, in the traditional system of the mystics, the  onset of Illumination.

[iii.vi-p30](3) Hence he passes to the Valley of Knowledge or  Enlightenment--the contemplative state--where each finds in  communion with Truth the place that belongs to him. No Dante student  will fail to see here a striking parallel with those planetary heavens  where each soul partakes of the Divine, "not supremely in the  absolute sense," as St. Bonaventura has it, but "supremely  in respect of   himself."    The mystery of Being is now revealed to the traveller. He sees  Nature's secret, and God in all things. It is the height of  illumination. [p. 132] [iii.vi-Page_132]

[iii.vi-p31](4) The next stage is the Valley of Detachment, of  utter absorption in Divine Love--the Stellar Heaven of the  Saints--where Duty is seen to be all in all. This leads  to--

[iii.vi-p32](5) The Valley of the Unity, where the naked Godhead  is the one object of contemplation. This is the stage of ecstasy, or  the Beatific Vision: Dante's condition in the last canto of the  "Paradiso." It is transient, however, and leads  to--

[iii.vi-p33](6) The Valley of Amazement; where the Vision, far  transcending the pilgrim's receptive power, appears to be taken  from him and he is plunged in darkness and bewilderment. This is the  state which Dionysius the Areopagite, and after him many mediaeval  mystics, called the Divine Dark, and described as the truest and  closest of all our apprehensions of the Godhead. It is the Cloud of  Unknowing, "dark from excessive bright." The final stage  is--

[iii.vi-p34](7) The Valley of Annihilation of Self: the supreme  degree of union or theopathetic state, in which the self is utterly  merged "like a fish in the sea" in the ocean of Divine  Love.   [*267] 

[iii.vi-p36]Through all these metaphors of pilgrimage to a  goal--of a road followed, distance overpassed, fatigue  endured--there runs the definite idea that the travelling self in  undertaking the journey is fulfilling a destiny, a law of the  transcendental life; obeying an imperative need. The chosen Knights  are destined or   called    to the quest of the Grail. "All men are   called    to their origin," says Rulman Merswin, and the fishes which he  sees in his Vision of Nine Rocks are impelled to struggle, as it were  "against nature," uphill from pool to pool towards their  source.   [*268] 

[iii.vi-p38]All mystical thinkers agree in declaring that there is  a mutual attraction between the Spark of the Soul, the free divine  germ in man, and the Fount from which it came forth. "We long  for the Absolute," says Royce, "only in so far as in us  the Absolute also longs, and seeks, through our very temporal  striving, the peace that is nowhere in Time, but only, and yet  Absolutely, in Eternity."   [*269]    So, many centuries before the birth of American philosophy, Hilton  put the same truth of experience in lovelier words. "He it is  that desireth in thee, and He it is that is desired. He is all and He  doth all if thou might see Him."   [*270] 

[iii.vi-p41]The homeward journey of man's spirit, then, may  be thought of as due to the push of a divine life within, answering to  the pull of [p. 133] [iii.vi-Page_133] a divine life without.   [*271]    It is only possible because there is already in that spirit a certain  kinship with the Divine, a capacity for Eternal Life; and the mystics,  in undertaking it, are humanity's pioneers on the only road to  rest. Hence that attraction which the Moslem mystic discerned as the  traveller's necessary aid, is a fundamental doctrine of all  mysticism: and as a consequence, the symbolism of mutual desire is  here inextricably mingled with that of pilgrimage. The spiritual  pilgrim goes because he is called; because he wants to go, must go, if  he is to find rest and peace. "God   needs    man," says Eckhart. It is Love calling to love: and the  journey, though in one sense a hard pilgrimage, up and out, by the  terraced mount and the ten heavens to God, in another is the  inevitable rush of the roving comet, caught at last, to the Central  Sun. "My weight is my love," said St. Augustine.   [*272]    Like gravitation, it inevitably compels, for good or evil, every  spirit to its own place. According to another range of symbols, that  love flings open a door, in order that the larger Life may rush in and  it and the soul be "one thing."

[iii.vi-p44]Here, then, we run through the whole gamut of symbolic  expression; through Transcendence, Desire, and Immanence. All are seen  to point to one consummation, diversely and always allusively  expressed: the need of union between man's separated spirit and  the Real, his remaking in the interests of transcendent life, his  establishment in that Kingdom which is both "near and  far."

[iii.vi-p45]"In the book of Hidden Things it is  written," says Eckhart, "'I stand at the door and  knock and wait' . . . thou needst not seek Him here or there: He  is no farther off than the door of the heart. There He stands and  waits and waits until He finds thee ready to open and let Him in. Thou  needst not call Him from a distance; to wait until thou openest is  harder for Him than for thee. He needs thee a thousand times more than  thou canst need Him.   Thy opening and His entering are but one moment   ."   [*273]    "God," he says in another place, "can as little do  without us, as we without Him."   [*274]    Our attainment of the Absolute is not a one-sided ambition, but the  fulfilment of a mutual desire. "For our natural Will,"  says Lady Julian, "is to have God, and the Good will of [p. 134] [iii.vi-Page_134] God is to have us; and we may never cease from  longing till we have Him in fullness of joy."   [*275] 

[iii.vi-p49]So, in the beautiful poem or ritual called the  "Hymn of Jesus," contained in the apocryphal "Acts  of John" and dating from primitive Christian times, the Logos,  or Eternal Christ, is thus represented as matching with His own  transcendent, self-giving desire every need of the soul.   [*276] 

[iii.vi-p51]The Soul says:--

   [iii.vi-p51.1] "'I would be saved.'"
  [iii.vi-p52]Christ replies:--

   [iii.vi-p52.1] "'And I would save.'  Amen."
  [iii.vi-p53]The Dialogue continues:--

   [iii.vi-p53.1] "'I would be loosed.'
   'And I would loose.' Amen.
   'I would be pierced.'
   'And I would pierce.' Amen.
   'I would be born.'
   'And I would bear.' Amen.
   'I would eat.'
   'And I would be eaten.' Amen.
   'I would hear.'
   'And I would be heard.' Amen."
   "'I am a Lamp to thee who beholdest  Me,
   I am a Mirror to thee who perceivest Me,
   I am a Door to thee, who knockest at Me,
   I am a Way to thee a wayfarer.'"
  [iii.vi-p54]The same fundamental idea of the mutual quest of the  Soul and the Absolute is expressed in the terms of another symbolism  by the great Mahommedan mystic:--

   [iii.vi-p54.1] "No lover ever seeks union with his  beloved,
   But his beloved is also seeking union with him.
   But the lover's love makes his body lean
   While the beloved's love makes her fair and  lusty.
   When in   this    heart the lightning spark of love arises,
   Be sure this love is reciprocated in   that    heart.
   When the love of God arises in thy heart,
   Without doubt God also feels love for thee."   [*277]  
  [iii.vi-p56]The mystic vision, then, is of a spiritual universe  held within [p. 135] [iii.vi-Page_135] the bonds of love:    [*278]   and of the free and restless human soul, having within it the spark of  divine desire, the "tendency to the Absolute," pnly  finding satisfaction and true life when united with this Life of God.  Then, in Patmore's lovely image, "the babe is at its  mother's breast," "the lover has returned to the  beloved."   [*279] 

[iii.vi-p63]Whatever their outward sense, all true mystic symbols  express aspects of this "secret of the world," this primal  verity. But whereas such great visionary schemes as those of  'Attar and of Dante show it in its cosmic form, in many symbolic  descriptions--particularly those which we meet in the writings of  the ecstatic saints--the personal subjective note, the  consciousness of an individual relation between that one self and the  Supernal Self, overpowers all general applications. Then philosophy  and formal allegory must step aside: the sacramental language of  exalted emotion, of profoundly felt experience, takes its place. The  phases of mutual love, of wooing and combat, awe and delight--the  fevers of desire, the ecstasy of surrender--are drawn upon and  made to contribute something to the description of the great and  secret drama of the soul.

[iii.vi-p64]To such symbolic transcripts of intimate experience  belongs one amazing episode of the spiritual life-history which,  because it has been given immortal expression by the greatest mystical  poet of modern times, is familiar to thousands of readers who know  little or nothing of the more normal adventures incidental to  man's attainment of the Absolute. In "The Hound of  Heaven" Francis Thompson described with an almost terrible  power, not the self's quest of adored Reality, but  Reality's quest of the unwilling self. He shows to us the  remorseless, untiring seeking and following of the soul by the Divine  Life to which it will not surrender: the inexorable onward sweep of  "this tremendous Lover," hunting the separated spirit,  "strange piteous futile thing" that flees Him "down  the nights and down the days." This idea of the love-chase, of  the spirit rushing in terror from the overpowering presence of God,  but followed, sought, conquered in the end, is common to all the  mediaeval mystics: it is the obverse of their general doctrine of the  necessary fusion of human and divine life, "escape from the  flame of separation."

[iii.vi-p65]"I chased thee, for in this was my  pleasure," says the voice of Love to Mechthild of Magdeburg;  "I captured thee, for this was my desire; I bound thee, and I  rejoice in thy bonds; I have [p. 136] [iii.vi-Page_136] wounded  thee, that thou mayst be united to me. If I gave thee blows, it was  that I might be possessed of thee."   [*280] 

[iii.vi-p67]So in the beautiful Middle English poem of "Quia  amore langueo,"--

   [iii.vi-p67.1] "I am true love that fals was nevere,
   Mi sistyr, mannis soule, I loved hir thus;
   Bicause we wolde in no wise discevere
   I lefte my Kyngdom glorious.
   I purveyde for hir a paleis precious;
   She fleyth, I folowe, I sought hir so.
   I suffride this peyne piteous
   Quia amore langueo,"   [*281]  
  [iii.vi-p69]Meister Eckhart has the same idea of the  inexorable Following Love, impossible to escape, expressed under less  personal images. "Earth," he says, "cannot escape  the sky; let it flee up or down, the sky flows into it, and makes it  fruitful whether it will or no. So God does to man. He who will escape  Him only runs to His bosom; for all corners are open to Him."   [*282] 

[iii.vi-p71]We find in all the mystics this strong sense of a  mysterious spiritual life--a Reality--over against man,  seeking him and compelling him to Its will. It is not for him, they  think, to say that he will or will not aspire to the transcendental  world.   [*283]    Hence sometimes this inversion of man's long quest of God. The  self resists the pull of spiritual gravitation, flees from the touch  of Eternity; and the Eternal seeks it, tracks it ruthlessly down. The  Following Love, the mystics say, is a fact of experience, not a poetic  idea. "Those strong feet that follow, follow after," once  set upon the chase, are bound to win. Man, once conscious of Reality,  cannot evade it. For a time his separated spirit, his disordered  loves, may wilfully frustrate the scheme of things: but he must be  conquered in the end. Then the mystic process unfolds itself: Love  triumphs: the "purpose of the worlds" fulfils itself in  the individual life.

   

[iii.vi-p72.1]II

[iii.vi-p73]It was natural and inevitable that the imagery of  human love and marriage should have seemed to the mystic the best of  all images of his own "fulfilment of life"; his  soul's surrender, first to the call, finally to the embrace of  Perfect Love. It lay ready to [p. 137] [iii.vi-Page_137] his hand:  it was understood of all men: and moreover, it certainly does offer,  upon lower levels, a strangely exact parallel to the sequence of  states in which man's spiritual consciousness unfolds itself,  and which form the consummation of the mystic life.

[iii.vi-p74]It has been said that the constant use of such imagery  by Christian mystics of the mediaeval period is traceable to the  popularity of the Song of Songs, regarded as an allegory of the  spiritual life. I think that the truth lies rather in the opposite  statement: namely, that the mystic loved the Song of Songs because he  there saw reflected, as in a mirror, the most secret experiences of  his soul. The sense of a desire that was insatiable, of a personal  fellowship so real, inward, and intense that it could only be compared  with the closest link of human love, of an intercourse that was no  mere spiritual self-indulgence, but was rooted in the primal duties  and necessities of life--more, those deepest, most intimate  secrets of communion, those self-giving ecstasies which all mystics  know, but of which we, who are not mystics, may not speak--all  these he found symbolized and suggested, their unendurable glories  veiled in a merciful mist, in the poetry which man has invented to  honour that august passion in which the merely human draws nearest to  the divine.

[iii.vi-p75]The great saints who adopted and elaborated this  symbolism, applying it to their pure and ardent passion for the  Absolute, were destitute of the prurient imagination which their  modern commentators too often possess. They were essentially pure of  heart; and when they "saw God" they were so far from  confusing that unearthly vision with the products of morbid sexuality,  that the dangerous nature of the imagery which they employed did not  occur to them. They knew by experience the unique nature of spiritual  love: and no one can know anything about it in any other way.

[iii.vi-p76]Thus for St. Bernard, throughout his deeply mystical  sermons on the Song of Songs, the Divine Word is the Bridegroom, the  human soul is the Bride: but how different is the effect produced by  his use of these symbols from that with which he has been charged by  hostile critics! In the place of that "sensuous imagery"  which is so often and so earnestly deplored by those who have hardly a  nodding acquaintance with the writings of the saints, we find images  which indeed have once been sensuous; but which are here anointed and  ordained to a holy office, carried up, transmuted, and endowed with a  radiant purity, an intense and spiritual life.

[iii.vi-p77]"  'Let Him kiss me      with the kisses of His mouth.'    Who is it speaks these words? It is the Bride. Who is the Bride? It  is the Soul thirsting for God. . . . She who asks this is held by the  bond of love to him from whom she asks it. Of all the sentiments of  nature, [p. 138] [iii.vi-Page_138] this of love is the most  excellent, especially when it is rendered back to Him who is the  principle and fountain of it--that is, God. Nor are there found  any expressions equally sweet to signify the mutual affection between  the Word of God and the soul, as those of Bridegroom and of Bride;  inasmuch as between individuals who stand in such relation to each  other all things are in common, and they possess nothing separate or  divided. They have one inheritance, one dwelling-place, one table, and  they are in fact one flesh. If, then, mutual love is especially  befitting to a bride and bridegroom, it is not unfitting that the name  of Bride is given to a soul which loves."   [*284] 

[iii.vi-p79]To women mystics of the Catholic Church, familiar with  the antique and poetic metaphor which called every cloistered nun the  Bride of Christ, that crisis in their spiritual history in which they  definitely vowed themselves to the service of Transcendent Reality  seemed, naturally enough, the veritable betrothal of the soul. Often,  in a dynamic vision, they saw as in a picture the binding vows  exchanged between their spirits and their God.   [*285]    That further progress on the mystic way which brought with it a sharp  and permanent consciousness of union with the Divine Will, the  constant sustaining presence of a Divine Companion, became, by an  extension of the original simile, Spiritual Marriage. The elements of  duty, constancy, irrevocableness, and loving obedience involved in the  mediaeval conception of the marriage tie, made it an apt image of a  spiritual state in which humility, intimacy, and love were the  dominant characteristics. There is really no need to seek a  pathological explanation of these simple facts.   [*286]    Moreover with few exceptions, the descriptions of spiritual marriage  which the great mystics have left are singularly free from physical  imagery. "So mysterious is the secret," says St. Teresa,  "and so sublime the favour that God thus bestows instantaneously  on the soul, that it feels a supreme delight, only to be described by  saying that our Lord vouchsafes for the moment to reveal to it His own  heavenly glory in a far more subtle way than by any vision or  spiritual delight. As far as can be understood, the soul, I mean the  spirit of this soul, is made one with God, who is [p. 139] [iii.vi-Page_139] Himself a spirit, and Who has been pleased to  show certain persons how far His love for us extends in order that we  may praise His greatness. He has thus deigned to unite Himself to His  creature: He has bound Himself to her as firmly as two human beings  are joined in wedlock and will never separate Himself from her."   [*287] 

[iii.vi-p83]The great Richard of St. Victor, in one of his most  splendid mystical treatises,   [*288]    has given us perhaps the most daring and detailed application of the  symbolism of marriage to the adventures of the spirit of man. He  divides the "steep stairway of love," by which the  contemplative ascends to union with the Absolute, into four stages.  These he calls the betrothal, the marriage, the wedlock, and the  fruitfulness of the soul.   [*289]    In the betrothal, he says, the soul "thirsts for the  Beloved"; that is to say, it longs to experience the delights of  Reality. "The Spirit comes to the Soul, and seems sweeter than  honey." It is conversion, the awakening to mystical truth; the  kindling of the passion for the Absolute. "Then the Soul with  pertinacity demands more": and because of her burning desire she  attains to pure contemplation, and so passes to the second degree of  love. In this she is "led in bridal" by the Beloved.  Ascending "above herself" in contemplation, she  "sees the Sun of Righteousness." She is now confirmed in  the mystic life; the irrevocable marriage vows are made between her  spirit and her God. At this point she can "see the  Beloved," but "cannot yet come in to Him," says  Richard. This degree, as we shall see later, answers more or less to  that which other mystics call the Illuminative Way: but any attempt to  press these poetic symbols into a cast-iron series, and establish  exact parallels, is foredoomed to failure, and will merely succeed in  robbing them of their fragrance and suggestive power. In  Richard's "third stage," however, that of union, or  wedlock, it is clear that the soul enters upon the "Unitive  Way." She has passed the stages of ecstatic and significant  events, and is initiated into the Life. She is "deified,"  "passes utterly   into    God, and is glorified in Him": is transfigured, he says, by  immediate contact with the Divine Substance, into an utterly different  quality of being. "Thus," says St. John of the Cross,  "the soul, when it shall have driven away from itself all that  is contrary to the divine will, becomes transformed in God by love.   [*290] 

[iii.vi-p87]"The Soul," says Richard again, "is  utterly concentrated on the One." She is "caught up to the  divine light." The expression of [p. 140] [iii.vi-Page_140]  the personal passion, the intimate relation, here rises to its height.  But this is not enough. Where most mystical diagrams leave off,  Richard of St. Victor's "steep stairway of Love"  goes on: with the result that this is almost the only symbolic system  bequeathed to us by the great contemplatives in which all the  implications contained in the idea of the spiritual marriage have been  worked out to their term. He saw clearly that the union of the soul  with its Source could not be a barren ecstasy. That was to mistake a  means for an end; and to frustrate the whole intention of life, which  is, on all levels, fruitful and creative. Therefore he says that in  the fourth degree, the Bride who has been so greatly honoured, caught  up to such unspeakable delight, sinks her own will and "is  humiliated below herself." She accepts the pains and duties in  the place of the raptures of love; and becomes a source, a  "parent" of fresh spiritual life. The [iii.vi-p87.1]   Sponsa Dei     develops into the [iii.vi-p87.2]   Mater Divinae gratiae.     That imperative need of life, to push on, to create,  to spread, is here seen operating in the spiritual sphere. This forms  that rare and final stage in the evolution of the great mystics, in  which they return to the world which they forsook; and there live, as  it were, as centres of transcendental energy, the creators of  spiritual families, the partners and fellow-labourers with the Divine  Life.   [*291] 

   

[iii.vi-p88.1]III

[iii.vi-p89]We come now to the symbols which have been adopted by  those mystics in whom temperamental consciousness of their own  imperfection, and of the unutterable perfection of the Absolute Life  for which they longed, has overpowered all other aspects of  man's quest of reality. The "seek, and ye shall  find" of the pilgrim, the "by Love shall He be gotten and  holden" of the bride, can never seem an adequate description of  experience to minds of this type. They are intent on the inexorable  truth which must be accepted in some form by both these classes: the  crucial fact that "we behold that which we are," or, in  other words, that "only the Real can know Reality." Hence  the state of the inward man, the "unrealness" of him when  judged by any transcendental standard, is their centre of interest.  His remaking or regeneration appears to them as the primal necessity,  if he is ever to obtain rights of citizenship in the "country of  the soul."

[iii.vi-p90]We have seen that this idea of the New Birth, the  remaking or transmutation of the self, clothed in many different  symbols, runs through the whole of mysticism and much of theology. It  is the mystic's subjective reading of those necessary  psychological [p. 141] [iii.vi-Page_141] and moral changes which  he observes within himself as his spiritual consciousness grows. His  hard work of renunciation, of detachment from the things which that  consciousness points out as illusory or impure, his purifications and  trials, all form part of it. If that which is whole or perfect is to  come, then that which is in part must be done away: "for in what  measure we put off the creature, in the same measure are we able to  put on the Creator: neither more nor less."   [*292] 

[iii.vi-p92]Of all the symbolic systems in which this truth has  been enshrined none is so complete, so picturesque, and now so little  understood as that of the "Hermetic Philosophers" or  Spiritual Alchemists. This fact would itself be sufficient to justify  us in examining some of the chief features of their symbolism. There  is a further excuse for this apparently eccentric proceeding, however,  in the fact that the language of alchemy was largely--though not  always accurately and consistently--used by the great mystic  Jacob Boehme, and after him by his English disciple, William Law.  Without, then, some knowledge of the terms which they employed, but  seldom explained, the writings of this important school can hardly be  understood.

[iii.vi-p93]The alchemic symbols, especially as applied to the  mystic life, are full of an often deliberate obscurity; which makes  their exact interpretation a controversial matter at the best.  Moreover, the authors of the various Hermetic writings do not always  use them in the same sense, and whilst many of these writings are  undoubtedly mystical, others clearly deal with the physical quest of  gold: nor have we any sure standard by which to divide class from  class. The elements from which the spiritual alchemists built up their  allegories of the mystic life are, however, easily grasped: and these  elements, with the significance generally attributed to them, are as  much as those who are not specialists can hope to unravel from this  very tangled skein. First, there are the metals; of course the obvious  materials of physical alchemy. These are usually called by the names  of their presiding planets: thus in Hermetic language Luna means  silver, Sol gold, etc. Then there is the Vessel, or Athanor, in which  the transmutation of base metal to gold took place: an object whose  exact nature is veiled in much mystery. The Fire, and various solvents  and waters, peculiar to the different alchemistic recipes, complete  the apparatus necessary to the "Great Work."

[iii.vi-p94]The process of this work, sometimes described in  chemical, and sometimes in astrological terms, is more often than not  disguised in a strange heraldic and zoological symbolism dealing with  Lions, Dragons, Eagles, Vultures, Ravens and Doves: which, [p. 142] [iii.vi-Page_142] delightful in its picturesqueness, is  unequalled in its power of confusing the anxious and unwary inquirer.  It is also the subject of innumerable and deliberate allegories, which  were supposed to convey its secrets to the elect, whilst most  certainly concealing them from the crowd. Hence it is that the author  of "A Short Enquiry concerning the Hermetic Art" speaks  for all investigators of this subject when he describes the  "Hermetic science" as a "great Labyrinth, in which  are abundance of enquirers rambling to this day, many of them  undiscerned by one another." Like him, I too "have taken  several Turns in it myself, wherein one shall meet with very few; for  'tis so large, and almost every one taking a different Path,  that they seldom meet. But finding it a very melancholy place, I  resolved to get out of it, and rather content myself to walk in the  little garden before the entrance, where many things, though not all,  were orderly to be seen. Choosing rather to stay there, and  contemplate on the Metaphor set up, than venture again into the  wilderness."   [*293] 

[iii.vi-p96]Coming, then, to the "contemplation of the  Metaphor set up,"--by far the most judicious course for  modern students of the Hermetic art--we observe first that the  prime object of alchemy was held to be the production of the  Philosopher's Stone, that perfect and incorrupt substance or  "noble Tincture," never found upon our imperfect earth in  its natural state, which could purge all baser metals of their dross,  and turn them to pure gold. The quest of the Stone, in fact, was but  one aspect of man's everlasting quest of perfection, his hunger  for the Absolute; and hence an appropriate symbol of the mystic life.  But this quest was not conducted in some far off transcendental  kingdom. It was prosecuted in the Here and Now within the physical  world.

[iii.vi-p97]Gold, the Crowned King, or Sol, as it is called in the  planetary symbolism of the alchemists, was their standard of  perfection, the "Perfect Metal." Towards it, as the  Christian towards sanctity, their wills were set. It had for them a  value not sordid but ideal. Nature, they thought, is always trying to  make gold, this incorruptible and perfect thing; and the other metals  are merely the results of the frustration of her original design. Nor  is this aiming at perfection and achieving of imperfection limited to  the physical world. [iii.vi-p97.1]   Quod superius, sicut quod inferius.     Upon the spiritual plane also they held that the  Divine Idea is always aiming at "Spiritual  Gold"--divine humanity, the New Man, citizen of the  transcendental world--and "natural man" as we  ordinarily know him is a lower metal, silver at best. He is a  departure from the "plan," who yet bears within himself,  if we could find it, the spark or seed of absolute perfection: the  "tincture" which makes gold. "The [p. 143] [iii.vi-Page_143] smattering I have of the Philosopher's  Stone," says Sir Thomas Browne, "(which is something more  than the perfect exaltation of gold) hath taught me a great deal of  divinity, and instructed my belief how that immortal spirit and  incorruptible substance of my soul may lie obscure, and sleep awhile  within this house of flesh."   [*294]    This "incorruptible substance" is man's goldness,  his perfect principle: for "the highest mineral virtue resides  in Man," says Albertus Magnus, "and God may be found  everywhere."   [*295]    Hence the prosecution of a spiritual chemistry is a proper part of  the true Hermetic science.

[iii.vi-p100]The art of the alchemist, whether spiritual or  physical, consists in completing the work of perfection, bringing  forth and making dominant, as it were, the "latent  goldness" which "lies obscure" in metal or man. The  ideal adept of alchemy was therefore an "auxiliary of the  Eternal Goodness." By his search for the "Noble  Tincture" which should restore an imperfect world, he became a  partner in the business of creation, assisting the Cosmic Plan. Thus  the proper art of the Spiritual Alchemist, with whom alone we are here  concerned, was the production of the spiritual and only valid tincture  or Philosopher's Stone; the mystic seed of transcendental life  which should invade, tinge, and wholly transmute the imperfect self  into spiritual gold. That this was no fancy of seventeenth-century  allegorists, but an idea familiar to many of the oldest writers upon  alchemy--whose quest was truly a spiritual search into the  deepest secrets of the soul--is proved by the words which bring  to an end the first part of the antique "Golden Treatise upon  the Making of the Stone," sometimes attributed to Hermes  Trismegistus. "This, O Son," says that remarkable tract,  "is the Concealed Stone of Many Colours, which is born and  brought forth in one colour; know this and conceal it . . . it leads  from darkness into light, from this desert wilderness to a secure  habitation, and from poverty and straits to a free and ample  fortune."   [*296] 

[iii.vi-p102]Man, then, was for the alchemists "the true  laboratory of the Hermetic art"; which concealed in an  entanglement of vague and contradictory symbols the life-process of  his ascension to that perfect state in which he was able to meet God.  This state must not be confused with a merely moral purity, but is to  be understood as involving utter transmutation into a "new  form." It [p. 144] [iii.vi-Page_144] naturally followed from  this that the indwelling Christ, the "Corner Stone," the  Sun of Righteousness, became, for many of the Christian alchemists,  identified with the [iii.vi-p102.1]   Lapis Philosophorum     and with Sol: and was regarded both as the image and  as the earnest of this "great work." His spirit was the  "noble tincture" which "can bring that which is  lowest in the death to its highest ornament or glory;"   [*297]    transmuting the natural to the supernatural, operating the "New  Birth." "This," says Boehme, "is the noble  precious Stone [iii.vi-p103.1]  (Lapis Philosophorum),     the Philosopher's Stone, which the Magi (or  wise men) find which   tinctureth nature,    and generateth a new son in the old. He who findeth that, esteemeth  more highly of it than of this (outward) world. For the Son is many  thousand times greater than the Father." Again, "If you  take the   spirit    of the tincture, then indeed you go on a way in which   many have found    Sol; but they have followed on the way to   the heart    of Sol, where the spirit of the heavenly tincture hath laid hold on   them,    and brought them into the liberty, into the Majesty, where they have   Known    the Noble Stone, [iii.vi-p103.2]  Lapis Philosophorum,     the Philosopher's Stone, and have stood amazed  at man's blindness, and seen his labouring in vain. Would you  fain find the Noble Stone? Behold, we will show it you plain enough,  if you be a   Magus,    and worthy, else you shall remain blind still: therefore fall to work  thus: for it hath no more but   three numbers.    First tell from   one    till you come to the Cross, which is ten (X) . . . and   there    lieth the   Stone    without any great painstaking, for it is pure and not defiled with  any earthly nature."

[iii.vi-p104]"In this stone there lieth hidden, whatsoever  God and the Eternity, also heaven, the stars and elements contain and  are able to do. There never was from eternity anything better or more  precious than this, and it is offered by God and bestowed upon man;  every one may have it . . . it is in a simple form, and hath the power  of the whole Deity in it."   [*298] 

[iii.vi-p106]Boehme is here using alchemic symbols, according to  his custom, in a loose and artistic manner; for the true Hermetic  Philosopher's Stone is not something which can be found but  something which must be made. The alchemists, whether their search be  for a physical or a spiritual "tincture," say always that  this tincture is the product of the furnace and Athanor: and further  that it is composed of "three numbers" or elements, which  they call Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury. These, when found, and forced  into the proper combination, form the "Azoth" or  "Philosopher's Egg"--the stuff or First Matter  of the Great Work. Sulphur, Salt, [p. 145] [iii.vi-Page_145] and  Mercury, however, must not be understood in too literal a sense.  "You need not look for our metallic seed among the  elements," says Basil the Monk, "it need not be sought so  far back. If you can only rectify the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt  (understand   those of the sages)    until the metallic spirit and body are inseparably joined together by  means of the metallic soul, you thereby firmly rivet the chain of love  and prepare the palace for the Coronation."   [*299] 

[iii.vi-p108]Of these three ingredients, the important one is the  spiritual principle, the unseizable Mercury; which is far from being  the metal which we ordinarily know by that name. The Mercury which the  alchemists sought--often in strange places--is a hidden and  powerful substance. They call it "Mercury of the Wise";  and he who can discover it, they say, is on the way towards success.  The reader in search of mystical wisdom already begins to be  bewildered; but if he persevere in this labyrinth of symbolism, he  presently discovers--as Basil the Monk indeed hints--that  the Sulphur and the Salt, or "metallic soul and body" of  the spiritual chemistry, represent something analogous to the body and  mind of man--Sulphur his earthly nature, seasoned with  intellectual Salt. The Mercury is Spirit in its most mystic sense, the  Synteresis or holy Dweller in the Innermost, the immanent spark or  Divine Principle of his life. Only the "wise," the  mystically awakened, can know this Mercury, the agent of man's  transmutation: and until it has been discovered, brought out of the  hiddenness, nothing can be done. "This Mercury or Snowy  Splendour, is a Celestial Body drawn from the beams of the Sun and the  Moon. It is the only Agent in the world for this art."   [*300]    It is the divine-human "spark of the soul," the bridge  between Gold and Silver, God and man.

[iii.vi-p110]The Three Principles being enclosed in the vessel, or  Athanor, which is man himself, and subjected to a gentle  fire--the [iii.vi-p110.1]  Incendium Amoris    --the process of the Great Work, the mystic  transmutation of natural into spiritual man, can begin. This work,  like the ingredients which compose it, has "three  numbers": and the first matter, in the course of its  transmutation, assumes three successive colours: the Black, the White,  and the Red. These three colours are clearly analogous to the three  traditional stages of the Mystic Way: Purgation, Illumination,  Union.

[iii.vi-p111]The alchemists call the first stage, or Blackness,  Putrefaction. In it the three principles which compose the  "whole man" of body, soul and spirit, are  "sublimated" till they appear as a black powder full of  corruption, and the imperfect body is "dissolved and purified by  subtle Mercury"; as man is purified by the darkness, [p. 146] [iii.vi-Page_146] misery, and despair which follows the  emergence of his spiritual consciousness. As psychic uproar and  disorder seems part of the process of mental growth, so "  [iii.vi-p111.1]   Solve et coagula     "--break down that you may build  up--is the watchword of the spiritual alchemist. The "black  beast," the passional element, of the lower nature must emerge  and be dealt with before anything further can be done. "There is  a black beast in our forest," says the highly allegorical  "Book of Lambspring," "his name is Putrefaction, his  blackness is called the Head of the Raven; when it is cut off,  Whiteness appears."   [*301]    This Whiteness, the state of Luna, or Silver, the "chaste and  immaculate Queen," is the equivalent of the Illuminative Way:  the highest point which the mystic can attain short of union with the  Absolute. This White Stone is pure, and precious; but in it the Great  Work of man's spiritual evolution has not yet reached its term.  That term is the attainment of the Red, the colour of Perfection or  alchemic gold; a process sometimes called the "Marriage of Luna  and Sol"--the fusion of the human and divine spirit. Under  this image is concealed the final secret of the mystic life: that  ineffable union of finite and infinite--that loving reception of  the inflowing vitality of God--from which comes forth the   Magnum Opus:    deified or spiritual man.

[iii.vi-p113]"This," says the author of "A  Suggestive Enquiry," "is the union supersentient, the  nuptials sublime, [iii.vi-p113.1]  Mentis et Universi       . . . .    Lo! behold I will open to thee a mystery, cries the Adept, the  bridegroom crowneth the bride of the north [  i.e.   , she who comes out of the cold and darkness of the lower nature]. In  the darkness of the north, out of the crucifixion of the cerebral  life, when the sensual dominant is occultated in the Divine Fiat, and  subdued, there arises a Light wonderfully about the summit, which  wisely returned and multiplied according to the Divine Blessing, is  made substantial in life."   [*302] 

[iii.vi-p115]I have said, that side by side with the metallic and  planetary language of the alchemists, runs a strange heraldic  symbolism in which they take refuge when they fear--generally  without reason--that they are telling their secrets too plainly  to an unregenerate world. Many of these heraldic emblems are used in  an utterly irresponsible manner; and whilst doubtless conveying a  meaning to the individual alchemist and the disciples for whom he  wrote, are, and must ever be, unintelligible to other men. But others  are of a more general application; and appear so frequently in  seventeenth-century literature, whether mystical or non-mystical, that  some discussion of them may well be of use.

[iii.vi-p116]Perhaps the quaintest and most celebrated of all these  allegories [p. 147] [iii.vi-Page_147] is that which describes the  quest of the Philosopher's Stone as "the hunting of the  Green Lion."   [*303]    The Green Lion, though few would divine it, is the First Matter of  the Great Work: hence, in spiritual alchemy, natural man in his  wholeness--Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury in their crude state. He is  called green because, seen from the transcendent standpoint, he is  still unripe, his latent powers undeveloped; and a Lion, because of  his strength, fierceness, and virility. Here the common opinion that a  pious effeminacy, a diluted and amiable spirituality, is the proper  raw material of the mystic life, is emphatically contradicted. It is  not by the education of the lamb, but by the hunting and taming of the  wild intractable lion, instinct with vitality, full of ardour and  courage, exhibiting heroic qualities on the sensual plane, that the  Great Work is achieved. The lives of the saints enforce the same  law.

   [iii.vi-p117.1] "Our lyon wanting maturitie
   Is called greene for his unripeness trust me:
   And yet full quickly he can run,
   And soon can overtake the Sun."   [*304]  
  [iii.vi-p119]The Green Lion, then, in his strength and wholeness is  the only creature potentially able to attain Perfection. It needs the  adoption and purification of all the wealth and resources of  man's nature, not merely the encouragement of his transcendental  tastes, if he is to "overtake the Sun" and achieve the  Great Work. The Kingdom of Heaven is taken by violence, not by amiable  aspiration. "The Green Lion," says one alchemist,  "is the priest by whom Sol and Luna are wed." In other  words, the raw stuff of indomitable human nature is the means by which  man is to attain union with the Absolute. The duty of the alchemist,  the transmuting process, is therefore described as the hunting of the  Green Lion through the forest of the sensual world. He, like the Hound  of Heaven, is on a love chase down the nights and down the days.

[iii.vi-p120]When the lion is caught, when Destiny overtakes it,  its head must be cut off as the preliminary to the necessary taming  process. This is called by the alchemists "the head of the  Raven," the Crow, or the Vulture, "for its  blackness." It represents the fierce and corrupt life of the  passions: and its removal is that "death of the lower  nature" which is the object of all asceticism--  i.e.   , Purgation. The lion, the whole man, Humanity in its strength, is as  it were "slain to the world," and then resuscitated; but  in a very different shape. By its passage through this mystic death or  the "putrefaction [p. 148] [iii.vi-Page_148] of the Three  Principles" the "colour of unripeness" is taken  away. Its taming completed, it receives wings, wherewith it may fly up  to Sol, the Perfect or Divine; and is transmuted, say the alchemists,  into the Red Dragon. This is to us a hopelessly grotesque image: but  to the Hermetic philosophers, whose sense of wonder was uncorrupt, it  was the deeply mystical emblem of a new, strange, and transcendental  life, powerful alike in earth and in heaven. As the angel to the man,  so was the dragon to the world of beasts: a creature of splendour and  terror, a super-brute, veritably existent if seldom seen. We realize  something of the significance of this symbol for the alchemic writers,  if we remember how sacred a meaning it has for the Chinese: to whom  the dragon is the traditional emblem of free spiritual life, as the  tiger represents the life of the material plane in its intensest form.  Since it is from China that alchemy is supposed to have reached the  European world, it may yet be found that the Red Dragon is one of the  most antique and significant symbols of the Hermetic Art.

[iii.vi-p121]For the Spiritual Chemistry, then, the Red Dragon  represents Deified Man; whose emergence must always seem like the  birth of some monstrous and amazing creature when seen from the  standpoint of the merely natural world. With his coming forth, the  business of the alchemist, in so far as he be a mystic, is done. Man  has transcended his lower nature, has received wings wherewith to live  on higher levels of reality. The Tincture, the latent goldness, has  been found and made dominant, the   Magnum Opus    achieved. That the trite and inward business of that Work, when  stripped of its many emblematic veils, was indeed the reordering of  spiritual rather than material elements, is an opinion which rests on  a more solid foundation than personal interpretations of old  allegories and alchemic-tracts. The Norwich physician--himself  deeply read in the Hermetic science--has declared to us his own  certainty concerning it in few but lovely words. In them is contained  the true mystery of man's eternal and interior quest of the  Stone: its reconciliation with that other, outgoing quest of  "the Hidden Treasure that desires to be found."

[iii.vi-p122]"Do but extract from the corpulency of bodies,  or resolve things beyond their First Matter, and you discover the  habitation of Angels: which, if I call it the ubiquitary and  omnipresent Essence of God, I hope I shall not offend Divinity."   [*305] 

[iii.vi-p124][p. 149] [iii.vi-Page_149]

Footnotes

^127:258 [iii.vi-p6.1][iii.vi-p7]          Jami, "Joseph and Zulaikha. The Poet's    Prayer."

^127:259 [iii.vi-p7.1][iii.vi-p8]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. x.

^127:260 [iii.vi-p8.1][iii.vi-p9]          St. Catherine of Genoa, " Vita e Dottrina," cap.    xiv.

^129:261 [iii.vi-p14.1][iii.vi-p15]          "Vita e Dottrina," p. 36.

^129:262 [iii.vi-p17.1][iii.vi-p18]          This image seems first to have been elaborated by St. Augustine,    from whom it was borrowed by Hugh of St. Victor, and most of the    mediaeval mystics.

^129:263 [iii.vi-p18.1][iii.vi-p19]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxi.

^130:264 [iii.vi-p22.1][iii.vi-p23]          So too Ruysbroeck says that "the just man goes     towards      God by inward love in perpetual activity and     in      God in virtue of his fruitive affection in eternal rest"    ("De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum." I. ii. cap.    lxv).

^131:265 [iii.vi-p24.1][iii.vi-p25]          I need not remind the reader of the fact that this symbolism,    perverted to the purposes of his skeptical philosophy, runs through    the whole of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam.

^131:266 [iii.vi-p25.1][iii.vi-p26]          See Palmer's "Oriental Mysticism," pt. I. caps.    i., ii., iii., and v.

^132:267 [iii.vi-p34.1][iii.vi-p35]          An abridged translation of 'Attar's allegory of the    Valleys will be found in "The Conference of the Birds,"    by R. P. Masani (1924). See also W. S. Lilly's "Many    Mansions," p. 130.

^132:268 [iii.vi-p36.1][iii.vi-p37]          Jundt, "Rulman Merswin," p. 27.

^132:269 [iii.vi-p38.1][iii.vi-p39]          Royce, "The World and the Individual," vol. ii. p.    386.

^132:270 [iii.vi-p39.1][iii.vi-p40]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxiv.

^133:271 [iii.vi-p41.1][iii.vi-p42]          Compare Recejac ("Fondements de la Connaissance    Mystique," p. 252). "According to mysticism, morality    leads the soul to the frontiers of the Absolute and even gives it an    impulsion to enter, but this is not enough. This movement of pure    Freedom cannot succeed unless there is an equivalent movement within    the Absolute itself."

^133:272 [iii.vi-p42.1][iii.vi-p43]          Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. 9. "All those who love,"    says Ruysbroeck, "feel this attraction: more or less according    to the degree of their love." ("De Calculo sive de    Perfectione filiorum Dei.")

^133:273 [iii.vi-p45.1][iii.vi-p46]          Meister Eckhart, Pred. iii.

^133:274 [iii.vi-p46.1][iii.vi-p47]              Ibid     ., Pred. xiii.

^134:275 [iii.vi-p47.1][iii.vi-p48]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. vi.

^134:276 [iii.vi-p49.1][iii.vi-p50]          The Greek and English text will be found in the "Apocrypha    Anecdota" of Dr. M. R. James, series 2 (Cambridge, 1897), pp.    1-25. I follow his translation. It will be seen that I have adopted    the hypotheses of Mr. G. R. S. Mead as to the dramatic nature of    this poem. See his "Echoes from the Gnosis," 1896.

^134:277 [iii.vi-p54.10][iii.vi-p55]          Jalalu d' Din Rumi (Wisdom of the East Series), p. 77.

^135:278 [iii.vi-p56.1][iii.vi-p57]          So Dante--

[iii.vi-p58]" Nel    suo profondo vidi che s'interna

[iii.vi-p59]legato con amore in un volume

[iii.vi-p60]cio che per l'universo si    squaderna."

[iii.vi-p61](Par. xxxiii. 85.)

^135:279 [iii.vi-p61.1][iii.vi-p62]          "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," "Aurea    Dicta," ccxxviii.

^136:280 [iii.vi-p65.1][iii.vi-p66]          "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. i. cap.    iii.

^136:281 [iii.vi-p67.10][iii.vi-p68]          "Quia amore langueo," an anonymous fifteenth-century    poem. Printed from the Lambeth MS. by the E.E.T.S., 1866-67.

^136:282 [iii.vi-p69.1][iii.vi-p70]          Pred. lxxxviii.

^136:283 [iii.vi-p71.1][iii.vi-p72]          So we are told of St. Francis of Assisi, that in his youth he    "tried to flee God's hand." Thomas of Celano,    Legenda Prima, cap. ii.

^138:284 [iii.vi-p77.1][iii.vi-p78]          Sr. Bernard, "Cantica Canticorum," Sermon vii. For a    further and excellent discussion of St. Bernard's mystical    language, see Dom Cuthbert Butler, "Western Mysticism,"    2nd ed., pp. 160     seq     .

^138:285 [iii.vi-p79.1][iii.vi-p80]              Vide          infra,      Pt. II. cap. v.

^138:286 [iii.vi-p80.1][iii.vi-p81]          Professor Pratt, by no means an enthusiastic witness, most justly    observes "There are several excellent reasons why the mystics    almost inevitably make use of the language of human love in    describing the joy of the love of God. The first and simplest is    this: that they have no other language to use . . . the mystic must    make use of expressions drawn from earthly love to describe his    experience, or give up the attempt of describing it at all. It is    the only way he has of even suggesting to the non-mystical what he    has felt" ("The Religious Consciousness," p.    418).

^139:287 [iii.vi-p81.1][iii.vi-p82]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Setimas, cap    ii.

^139:288 [iii.vi-p83.1][iii.vi-p84]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne,    Patrologia Latina, vol. cxcvi. col. 1207).

^139:289 [iii.vi-p84.1][iii.vi-p85]          "In primo gradu fit desponsatio, in secundo nuptiae, in    tertio copula, in quarto puerperium. . . . De quarto dicitur,    Coucepimus, et quasi parturivimus et peperimus spiritum" (Isa.    xviii    .      26). (    Op. cit.,      1216, D.)

^139:290 [iii.vi-p85.1][iii.vi-p86]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," lii. cap. v.

^140:291 [iii.vi-p87.3][iii.vi-p88]              Vide infra     , pt. ii. caps. i. and x.

^141:292 [iii.vi-p90.1][iii.vi-p91]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. i.

^142:293 [iii.vi-p94.1][iii.vi-p95]          "A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p.    29.

^143:294 [iii.vi-p97.2][iii.vi-p98]          "Religio Medici," pt. i.

^143:295 [iii.vi-p98.1][iii.vi-p99]          "A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery," p.    143. This rare and curious study of spiritual alchemy was the    anonymous work of the late Mrs. Atwood. She attempted to suppress it    soon after publication under the impression--common amongst    mystics of a certain type--that she had revealed matters which    might not be spoken of; as Coventry Patmore for the same reason    destroyed his masterpiece, "Sponsa Dei."

^143:296 [iii.vi-p100.1][iii.vi-p101]          Quoted in "A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic    Mystery," p. 107. The whole of the "Golden    Treatise" will be found set out in this work.

^144:297 [iii.vi-p102.2][iii.vi-p103]          Jacob Boehme, "The Threefold Life of Man," cap. iv.     section 23.

^144:298 [iii.vi-p104.1][iii.vi-p105]          Boehme, "The Threefold Life of Man," cap. vi.  section    98; cap. x.  section section 3, 4; and cap. xiii.  section 1.

^145:299 [iii.vi-p106.1][iii.vi-p107]          "The Golden Tripod of the Monk Basilius Valentinus"    ("The Hermetic Museum, " vol. i. p. 319).

^145:300 [iii.vi-p108.1][iii.vi-p109]          "A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art," p.    17.

^146:301 [iii.vi-p111.2][iii.vi-p112]          "The Hermetic Museum," vol. i. p. 272.

^146:302 [iii.vi-p113.2][iii.vi-p114]          "A Suggestive Enquiry," p. 345.

^147:303 [iii.vi-p116.1][iii.vi-p117]          See "A Short Enquiry," p. 17, and "A Suggestive    Enquiry," pp. 297     et seq     ., where the rhymed Alchemic tract called "Hunting the Greene    Lyon" is printed in full.

^147:304 [iii.vi-p117.6][iii.vi-p118]              Op. cit. 

^148:305 [iii.vi-p122.1][iii.vi-p123]          Sir Thomas Browne, "Religio Medici," pt. i.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VII. Mysticism and Magic

 [iii.vii][iii.vii-p1]It[iii.vii-p1.1] is unnecessary to examine in detail the mistakes--in  ecclesiastical language, the heresies--into which men have been  led by a feeble, a deformed, or an arrogant mystical sense. The number  of these mistakes is countless; their wildness almost inconceivable to  those who have not been forced to study them. Too often the loud  voices and strange declarations of their apostles have drowned the  quieter accents of the orthodox.

[iii.vii-p2]It seems as though the moment of puberty were far more  critical in the spiritual than it is in the physical life: the  ordinary dangers of adolescence being intensified when they appear  upon the higher levels of consciousness. In the condition of psychic  instability which is characteristic of his movement to new states, man  is unusually at the mercy of the suggestions and impressions which he  receives. Hence in every period of true mystical activity we find an  outbreak of occultism, illuminism, or other perverted spirituality  and--even more dangerous and confusing for the student--a  borderland region where the mystical and psychical meet. In the youth  of the Christian Church, side by side with genuine mysticism  descending from the Johannine writings or brought in by the Christian  Neoplatonists, we have the arrogant and disorderly transcendentalism  of the Gnostics: their attempted fusion of the ideals of mysticism and  magic. During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance there are the  spurious mysticism of the [p. 150] [iii.vii-Page_150] Brethren of  the Free Spirit, the occult propaganda of Paracelsus, the  Rosicrucians, the Christian Kabalists; and the innumerable  pantheistic, Manichean, mystery-making, and Quietist heresies which  made war upon Catholic tradition. In the modern world, Theosophy in  its various forms is probably the most widespread and respectable  representative of the occult tradition.

[iii.vii-p3]The root idea from which these varied beliefs and  practices develop is always the same; and, since right doctrine is  often most easily defined by contrast with its opposite, its study is  likely to help us to fix more precisely the true characters of  mysticism. Leaving therefore the specifically mystical error of  Quietism until we come to the detailed discussion of the contemplative  states, we will consider here some of those other supernormal  activities of the self which we have already agreed to classify as  magic: and learn through them more of those hidden and  half-comprehended forces which she has at her command.

[iii.vii-p4]The word "magic" is out of fashion, though  its spirit was never more widely diffused than at the present time.  Thanks to the gradual debasement of the verbal currency, it suggests  to the ordinary reader the production of optical illusions and other  parlour tricks. It has dragged with it in its fall the terrific verb  "to conjure," which, forgetting that it once undertook to  compel the spirits of men and angels, is now content to produce  rabbits from top-hats. These facts would have little importance, were  it not that modern occultists--annoyed, one supposes, by this  abuse of their ancient title--constantly arrogate to their tenets  and practices the name of "Mystical Science." Vaughan, in  his rather supercilious survey of the mystics, classed all forms of  white magic, alchemy, and occult philosophy as "theurgic  mysticism,"   [*306]    and, on the other side of the shield, the occultists display an  increasing eagerness to claim the mystics as masters in their school.   [*307]    Even the "three-fold way" of mysticism has been adopted  by them and relabelled "Probation, Enlightenment,  Initiation."   [*308] 

[iii.vii-p8]In our search for the characteristics of mysticism we  have already marked the boundary which separates it from magic: and  tried to define the true nature and intention of occult philosophy.   [*309]    We saw that it represented the instinctive human "desire to  know more" applied to suprasensible things. For good or ill this  desire, and the occult sciences and magic arts which express it, have  haunted humanity from the earliest times. No student of man [p. 151] [iii.vii-Page_151] can neglect their investigation, however  distasteful to his intelligence their superficial absurdities may be.  The starting-point of all magic, and of all magical religion--the  best and purest of occult activities--is, as in mysticism,  man's inextinguishable conviction that there are other planes of  being than those which his senses report to him; and its proceedings  represent the intellectual and individualistic results of this  conviction--his craving for the hidden knowledge. It is, in the  eyes of those who really practise it, a moyen de parvenir:  not the performance of illicit tricks, but a serious attempt to solve  the riddle of the world. Its result, according to a modern writer upon  occult philosophy, "comprises an actual, positive, and  realizable knowledge concerning the worlds which we denominate  invisible, because they transcend the imperfect and rudimentary  faculties of a partially developed humanity, and concerning the latent  potentialities which constitute--by the fact of their  latency--the interior man. In more strictly philosophical  language, the Hermetic science is a method of transcending the  phenomenal world and attaining to the reality which is behind  phenomena."   [*310] 

[iii.vii-p11]Though fragments of this enormous claim seem able to  justify themselves in experience, the whole of it cannot be admitted.  The last phrase in particular is identical with the promise which we  have seen to be characteristic of mysticism. It presents magic as a  pathway to reality; a promise which it cannot fulfil, for the mere  transcending of phenomena does not entail the attainment of the  Absolute. Magic even at its best extends rather than escapes the  boundaries of the phenomenal world. It stands, where genuine, for that  form of transcendentalism which does abnormal things, but does not  lead anywhere: and we are likely to fall victims to some kind of magic  the moment that the declaration "I want to know" ousts the  declaration "I want to be" from the chief place in our  consciousness. The true "science of ultimates" must be a  science of pure Being, for reasons which the reader is now in a  position to discover for himself. But magic is merely a system whereby  the self tries to assuage its transcendental curiosity by extending  the activities of the will beyond their usual limits; sometimes,  according to its own account, obtaining by this means an experimental  knowledge of planes of existence usually--but  inaccurately--regarded as "supernatural."

[iii.vii-p12]Even this modified claim needs justification. For most  persons who do not specialize in the eccentric sciences the occultist  can only be said to exist in either the commercial or the academic  sense. The fortune-teller represents one class; the annotator of  improper grimoires the other. In neither department is the thing  supposed [p. 152] [iii.vii-Page_152] to be taken seriously: it is  merely the means of obtaining money, or of assuaging a rather morbid  curiosity.

[iii.vii-p13]Such a view is far from accurate. In magic, whether  regarded as a superstition or a science, we have at any rate the  survival of a great and ancient tradition, the true meaning of whose  title should hardly have been lost in a Christian country; for it  claims to be the science of those Magi whose quest of the symbolic  Blazing Star brought them once, at least, to the cradle of the  Incarnate God. Its laws, and the ceremonial rites which express those  laws, have come down from immemorial antiquity. They appear to  enshrine a certain definite knowledge, and a large number of less  definite theories, concerning the sensual and supersensual worlds, and  concerning powers which man, according to occult thinkers, may develop  if he will. Orthodox persons should be careful how they condemn the  laws of magic: for they unwittingly conform to many of them whenever  they go to church. All ceremonial religion contains some elements of  magic. The art of medicine will never wholly cast it off: many  centuries ago it gave birth to that which we now call modern science.  It seems to possess inextinguishable life. This is not surprising when  we perceive how firmly occultism is rooted in psychology: how  perfectly it is adapted to certain perennial characteristics of the  human mind--its curiosity, its arrogance, its love of  mystery.

[iii.vii-p14]Magic, in its uncorrupted form, claims to be a  practical, intellectual, highly individualistic science; working  towards the declared end of enlarging the sphere on which the human  will can work, and obtaining experimental knowledge of planes of being  usually regarded as transcendental. It is the last descendant of a  long line of teaching--the whole teaching, in fact, of the  mysteries of Egypt and Greece--which offered to initiate man into  a certain secret knowledge and understanding of things. "In  every man," says a modern occultist, "there are latent  faculties by means of which he can acquire for himself knowledge of  the higher worlds . . . as long as the human race has existed there  have always been schools in which those who possessed these higher  faculties gave instruction to those who were in search of them. Such  are called the occult schools, and the instruction which is imparted  therein is called esoteric science or the occult teaching."   [*311] 

[iii.vii-p16]These occult schools, as they exist in the present  day, state their doctrine in terms which seem distressingly prosaic to  the romantic inquirer; borrowing from physics and psychology theories  of vibration, attraction, mental suggestion and subconscious activity  which can be reapplied for their own purposes. According to its modern  teachers, magic is simply an extension of the theory [p. 153] [iii.vii-Page_153] and practice of volition beyond the usual  limits. The will, says the occultist, is king, not only of the House  of Life, but of the universe outside the gates of sense. It is the key  to "man limitless" the true "ring of Gyges,"  which can control the forces of nature known and unknown. This aspect  of occult philosophy informs much of the cheap American  transcendentalism which is so lightly miscalled mystical by its  teachers and converts; Menticulture, "New" or  "Higher Thought," and the scriptures of the so-called  "New Consciousness." The ingenious authors of  "Volo," "The Will to be Well," and "Just  How to Wake the Solar Plexus," the seers who assure their eager  disciples that by "Concentration" they may acquire not  only health, but also that wealth which is "health of  circumstance," are no mystics. They are magicians; and teach,  though they know it not, little else but the cardinal doctrines of  Hermetic science, omitting only their picturesque ceremonial  accompaniments.    [*312] 

[iii.vii-p18]These cardinal doctrines, in fact, have varied little  since their first appearance early in the world's history:  though, like the doctrines of theology, they have needed re-statement  from time to time. In discussing them I shall quote chiefly from the  works of Eliphas Levi; the pseudonym under which Alphonse Louis  Constant, the most readable occult philosopher of the nineteenth  century, offered his conclusions to the world.

[iii.vii-p19]The tradition of magic, like most other ways of escape  which man has offered to his own soul, appears to have originated in  the East. It was formulated, developed, and preserved by the religion  of Egypt. It made an early appearance in that of Greece. It has its  legendary grand master in Hermes Trismegistus, who gave to it its  official name of Hermetic Science, and whose status in occultism is  much the same as that occupied by Moses in the tradition of the Jews.  Fragmentary writings attributed to this personage and said to be  derived from the Hermetic books, are the primitive scriptures of  occultism: and the probably spurious Table of Emerald, which is said  to have been discovered in his tomb, ranks as the magician's  Table of Stone.   [*313]    In Gnosticism, in the allegories of the Kabalah, in theosophy, in  secret associations which still exist in England, France, and  Germany--and even in certain practices embedded in the ceremonial  of the Christian Church--[p. 154] [iii.vii-Page_154] the main  conceptions which constitute the "secret wisdom" of  magical tradition have wandered down the centuries. The baser  off-shoots of that tradition are but too well known, and need not be  particularized.   [*314] 

[iii.vii-p22]Like the world which it professes to interpret, magic  has a body and a soul: an outward vesture of words and ceremonies and  an inner doctrine. The outward vesture, which is all that the  uninitiated are permitted to perceive, consists of a series of  confusing and often ridiculous symbolic veils: of strange words and  numbers, grotesque laws and ritual acts, personifications and  mystifications. The outward vestures of our religious, political, and  social systems--which would probably appear equally irrational to  a wholly ignorant yet critical observer--offer an instructive  parallel to this aspect of occult philosophy. Stripped of these  archaic formulae, symbols, and mystery-mongerings, however, magic as  described by its apologists, is found to rest upon three fundamental  axioms which can hardly be dismissed as ridiculous by those who listen  respectfully to the ever-shifting hypotheses of psychology and  physics.

[iii.vii-p23](1) The first axiom declares the existence of an  imponderable "medium" or "universal agent,"  which is described as beyond the plane of our normal sensual  perceptions yet interpenetrating and binding up the material world.  This agent, which is not luminous and has nothing to do with the  stars, is known to the occultists by the unfortunate name of  "Astral Light": a term originally borrowed from the  Martinists by Eliphas Levi. To live in conscious communication  with the "Astral Light" is to live upon the "Astral  Plane," or in the Astral World: to have achieved, that is to  say, a new level of consciousness. The education of the occultist is  directed towards this end.

[iii.vii-p24]This doctrine of the Astral Plane, like most of our  other diagrams of the transcendent, possesses a respectable ancestry,  and many prosperous relations in the world of philosophic thought.  Traces of it may even be detected under veils in the speculations of  orthodox physics. It is really identical with the "Archetypal  World" or  Yesod of the Kabalah--the "Perfect Land"  of old Egyptian religion--in which the true or spirit forms of  all created things are held to exist. It may be connected with the  "real world" described by such visionaries as Boehme and  Blake, many of whose [p. 155] [iii.vii-Page_155] experiences are  far more occult than mystical in character.   [*315]    A persistent tradition as to the existence of such a plane of being  or of consciousness is found all over the world: in Indian, Greek  Egyptian, Celtic, and Jewish thought. "Above this visible nature  there exists another, unseen and eternal, which, when all things  created perish, does not perish," says the Bhagavad Gita.  According to the Kabalists it is "the seat of life and vitality,  and the nourishment of all the world."   [*316]    Vitalism might accept it as one of those aspects of the universe  which can be perceived by a more extended rhythm than that of normal  consciousness. Various aspects of the Astral have been identified with  the "Burning Body of the Holy Ghost" of Christian  Gnosticism and with the Odic force of the old-fashioned  spiritualists.

[iii.vii-p27]Further, the Astral Plane is regarded as constituting  the "Cosmic Memory," where the images of all beings and  events are preserved, as they are preserved in the memory of man.

   [iii.vii-p27.1] "The high that proved too high, the heroic for  earth too hard
   The passion that left the ground to lose itself in  the sky"--
  [iii.vii-p28]all are living in the Astral World. There too  the concepts of future creation are present in their completeness in  the Eternal Now before being brought to birth in the material sphere.  On this theory prophecy, and also clairvoyance--one of the great  objects of occult education--consist in opening the eyes of the  mind upon this timeless Astral World: and spiritualists, evoking the  phantoms of the dead, merely call them up from the recesses of  universal instead of individual remembrance. The reader who feels his  brain to be whirling amidst this medley of solemn statement and  unproven fairy tale must remember that the dogmatic part of the occult  tradition can only represent the attempt of an extended or otherwise  abnormal consciousness to find an explanation of its own  experiences.

[iii.vii-p29]Further, our whole selves--not merely our  sentient selves--are regarded as being bathed in the Astral  Light, as in the ether of physics. Hence in occult language it is a  "universal agent" connecting soul with soul, and becomes  the possible vehicle of hypnotism, telepathy, clairvoyance, and all  those supernormal phenomena which are the subject-matter of  "psychical research." This hypothesis also accounts for  the confusing fact of an initial similarity of experience in many of  the proceedings of mystic and occultist. Both must pass through the  plane of consciousness which the concept of the "Astral"  represents, because this plane [p. 156] [iii.vii-Page_156] of  perception is the one which lies "next beyond" our normal  life. The transcendental faculties may become aware of this world;  only, in the case of the mystic, to pass through it as quickly as they  can. But the occultist, the medium, the psychic, rest in the  "Astral" and develop their perceptions of this aspect of  the world. It is the medium in which they work.

[iii.vii-p30]From earliest times, occult philosophy has insisted on  the existence of this medium: as a scientific fact, outside the range  of our normal senses, but susceptible of verification by the trained  powers of the "initiate." The possessor of such trained  powers, not the wizard or the fortune-teller, is regarded as the true  magician: and it is the declared object of occult education, or  initiation, to actualize this supersensual plane of experience, to  give the student the power of entering into conscious communion with  it, and teach him to impose upon its forces the directive force of his  own will, as easily as he imposes that will upon the  "material" things of senses.   [*317] 

[iii.vii-p32](2) This brings us to the second axiom of magic, which  also has a curiously modern air: for it postulates simply the  limitless power of the disciplined human will. This dogma has been  "taken over" without acknowledgment from occult philosophy  to become the trump card of menticulture, "Christian  Science," and "New Thought." The preachers of  "Joy Philosophy" and other dilute forms of mental  discipline, the Liberal Catholic "priest" producing  "a vast bubble of etheric astromental matter, a thought-edifice,  ethereal, diaphanous, a bubble which just includes the  congregation--"   [*318]    these are the true hierophants of magic in the modern world.   [*319] 

[iii.vii-p35]The first lesson of the would-be magus is  self-mastery. "By means of persevering and gradual  athletics," says Eliphas Levi, "the powers of the  body can be developed to an amazing extent. It is the same with the  powers of the soul. Would you govern yourself and others? Learn how to  will. How may one learn how to will? This is the first secret of  magical initiation; and it was to make the foundations of this secret  thoroughly understood that the antique keepers of the mysteries  surrounded the approach to the sanctuary with so many terrors and  illusions. They did not believe in a will until it had given its  proofs; and they were right. [p. 157] [iii.vii-Page_157] Strength  cannot prove itself except by conquest. Idleness and negligence are  the enemies of the will, and this is the reason why all religions have  multiplied their practices and made their cults difficult and minute.  The more trouble one gives oneself for an idea, the more power one  acquires in regard to that idea. . . . Hence the power of religions  resides entirely in the inflexible will of those who practise  them."   [*320] 

[iii.vii-p37]This last sentence alone is enough to define the  distinction between mysticism and magic, and clear the minds of those  who tend to confuse the mystical and magical elements of religion. In  accordance with it, real "magical initiation" is in  essence a form of mental discipline, strengthening and focussing the  will. This discipline, like that of the religious life, consists  partly in physical austerities and a deliberate divorce from the  world, partly in the cultivation of will-power: but largely in a  yielding of the mind to the influence of suggestions which have been  selected and accumulated in the course of ages because of their power  over that imagination which Eliphas Levi calls "The eye of  the soul." There is nothing supernatural about it. Like the more  arduous, more disinterested self-training of the mystic, it is  character-building with an object, conducted upon an heroic scale. In  magic the "will to know" is the centre round which the  personality is rearranged. As in mysticism, unconscious factors are  dragged from the hiddenness to form part of that personality. The  uprushes of thought, the abrupt intuitions which reach us from the  subliminal region, are developed, ordered, and controlled by rhythms  and symbols which have become traditional because the experience of  centuries has proved, though it cannot explain, their efficacy: and  powers of apprehension which normally lie below the threshold may thus  be liberated and enabled to report their discoveries.

[iii.vii-p38]"The fundamental principle," says A. E.  Waite, speaking of occult evocations, "was in the exercise of a  certain occult force resident in the magus, and strenuously exerted  for the establishment of such a correspondence between two planes of  nature as would effect his desired end. This exertion was termed the  evocation, conjuration, or calling of the spirit, but   that which in reality was raised was the energy of the inner  man   ; tremendously developed and exalted by combined will and aspiration,  this energy germinated by sheer force a new intellectual faculty of  sensible psychological perception. To assist and stimulate this energy  into the most powerful possible operation, artificial means were  almost invariably used. . . . The synthesis of these methods and  processes [p. 158] [iii.vii-Page_158] was called Ceremonial Magic,  which in effect was a tremendous forcing-house of the latent faculties  of man's spiritual nature."   [*321] 

[iii.vii-p40]This is the psychological explanation of those  apparently absurd rituals of preparation, doctrines of signs and  numbers, pentacles, charms, angelical names, the "power of the  word" which made up ceremonial magic. The power of such  artifices is known amongst the Indian mystics; who, recognizing in the    Mantra,    or occult and rhythmic formula, consciously held and repeated, an  invaluable help to the attainment of the true ecstatic state, are not  ashamed to borrow from the magicians. So, too, the modern American  schools of mental healing and New Thought recommend concentration upon  a carefully selected word as the starting-point of efficacious  meditation. This fact of the psychical effect of certain verbal  combinations, when allowed to dominate the field of consciousness, may  have some bearing upon that need of a formal liturgy which is felt by  nearly every great religion; for religion, on its ceremonial side, has  certain affinities with magic. It, too, seeks by sensible means to  stimulate supra-sensible energies. The true magic "word"  or spell is untranslatable; because its power resides only partially  in that outward sense which is apprehended by the reason, but chiefly  in the rhythm, which is addressed to the subliminal mind. Symbols,  religious and other, and symbolic acts which appear meaningless when  judged by the intellect alone, perform a similar office. They express  the deep-seated instinct of the human mind that it must have a focus  on which to concentrate its volitional powers, if those powers are to  be brought to their highest state of efficiency. The nature of the  focus matters little: its office matters much.

[iii.vii-p41]". . . All these figures, and acts analogous to  them," says Levi, "all these dispositions of numbers  and of characters [  i.e.    sacred words, charms, pentacles, etc.] are, as we have said, but  instruments for the education of the will, of which they fix and  determine the habits. They serve also to concentrate in action all the  powers of the human soul, and to strengthen the creative power of the  imagination. . . . A practice, even though it be superstitious and  foolish, may be efficacious because it is a realization of the will. .  . . We laugh at the poor woman who denies herself a ha'porth of  milk in the morning, that she may take a little candle to burn upon  the magic triangle in some chapel. But those who laugh are ignorant,  and the poor woman does not pay too dearly for the courage and  resignation which she thus obtains.   [*322]    [p. 159] [iii.vii-Page_159]

[iii.vii-p43]Magic symbols, therefore, from penny candles to  Solomon's seal, fall in modern technical language into two  classes. The first contains instruments of self-suggestion,  exaltation, and will direction. To this belong all spells, charms,  rituals, perfumes: from the magician's vervain wreath to the  "Youth! Health! Strength!" which the student of New  Thought repeats when she is brushing her hair in the morning. The  second class contains   autoscopes: i.e.   , material objects which focus and express the subconscious  perceptions of the operator. The dowser's divining rod,  fortuneteller's cards, and crystal-gazer's ball, are  characteristic examples. Both kinds are rendered necessary rather by  the disabilities of the human than by the peculiarities of the  superhuman plane: and the great adept may attain heights at which he  dispenses with these "outward and visible signs."  "Ceremonies being, as we have said, artificial methods of  creating certain habits of the will, they cease to be necessary when  these habits have become fixed."   [*323]    These facts, now commonplaces of psychology, have long been known and  used by students of magic. Those who judge the philosophy by the  apparent absurdity of its symbols and ceremonies should remember that  the embraces, gestures, grimaces, and other ritual acts by which we  all concentrate, liberate, or express love, wrath, or enthusiasm, will  ill endure the cold revealing light of a strictly rational  inquiry.

[iii.vii-p45](3) The dogmas of the "Astral Light" or  universal agent and the "power of the will" are completed  by a third: the doctrine of Analogy, of an implicit correspondence  between appearance and reality, the microcosm of man and the macrocosm  of the universe the seen and the unseen worlds. In this, occultism  finds the basis of its transcendental speculations. [iii.vii-p45.1]   Quod superius sicut quod inferius    --the first words of that Emerald Table which  was once attributed to Hermes Trismegistus himself--is an axiom  which must be agreeable to all Platonists. It plays a great part in  the theory of mysticism; which, whilst maintaining an awed sense of  the total "otherness" and incomprehensibility of the  Divine, has always assumed that the path of the individual soul  towards loving union with the Absolute is somehow analogous with the  path on which the universe moves to its consummation in God.

[iii.vii-p46]The notion of analogy ultimately determines the  religious concepts of every race, and resembles the verities of faith  in the breadth of its application. It embraces alike the appearances  of the visible world--which thus become the mirrors of the  invisible--the symbols of religion, the tiresome arguments of  Butler's "Analogy," the allegories of the Kabalah  and the spiritual alchemists, and that childish "doctrine of  signatures" on which [p. 160] [iii.vii-Page_160] much of  mediaeval science was built. "Analogy," says Levi,   [*324]    "is the last word of science and the first word of faith . . .  the   sole possible mediator    between the visible and the invisible, between the finite and the  infinite." Here Magic clearly defines her own limitations;  stepping incautiously from the useful to the universal, and laying  down a doctrine which no mystic could accept--which, carried to  its logical conclusion, would turn the adventure of the infinite into  a guessing game.

[iii.vii-p48]The argument by analogy is carried by the occultists  to lengths which cannot be described here. Armed with this torch, they  explore the darkest, most terrible mysteries of life: and do not  hesitate to cast the grotesque shadows of these mysteries upon the  unseen world. The principle of correspondence is no doubt sound so  long as it works within reasonable limits. It was admitted into the  system of the Kabalah, though that profound and astute philosophy was  far from giving to it the importance which it assumes in Hermetic  "science." It has been eagerly accepted by many of the  mystics. Boehme and Swedenborg availed themselves of its method in  presenting their intuitions to the world. It is implicitly  acknowledged by thinkers of many other schools: its influence  permeates the best periods of literature. Sir Thomas Browne spoke for  more than himself when he said, in a well-known passage of the  "Religio Medici": "The severe schools shall never  laugh me out of the philosophy of Hermes [  i.e.   , Trismegistus] that this visible world is but a picture of the  invisible, wherein, as in a portrait, things are not truly but in  equivocal shapes, and as they counterfeit some real substance in that  invisible framework." Such a sense of analogy, whatever the  "severe schools" may say, is indeed the foundation of  every perfect work of art. "Intuitive perception of the hidden  analogies of things," says Hazlitt in "English  Novelists," "or, as it may be called, his   instinct of the imagination,    is perhaps what stamps the character of genius on the productions of  art more than any other circumstance."

[iii.vii-p49]The central doctrine of magic may now be summed up  thus:--

[iii.vii-p50](1) That a supersensible and real "cosmic  medium" exists, which interpenetrates, influences, and supports  the tangible and apparent world, and is amenable to the categories  both of philosophy and of physics.

[iii.vii-p51](2) That there is an established analogy and  equilibrium between the real and unseen world, and the illusory  manifestations which we call the world of sense.

[iii.vii-p52](3) That this analogy may be discerned, and this  equilibrium controlled, by the disciplined will of man, which thus  becomes master of itself and of fate. [p. 161] [iii.vii-Page_161]

[iii.vii-p53]We must now examine in more detail the third of these  propositions--that which ascribes abnormal powers to the educated  and disciplined will--for this assumption lies at the root of all  magical practices, old and new. "Magical operations," says  Eliphas Levi, "are the exercise of a power which is  natural, but superior to the ordinary powers of nature. They are the  result of a science, and of habits, which exalt the human will above  its usual limits."   [*325]    This power of the will is now recognized as playing an important part  both in the healing of the body and the healing of the soul; for our  most advanced theories on these subjects are little more than the old  wine of magic in new bottles. The ancient occultists owed much of  their power, and also of their evil reputation, to the fact that they  were psychologists before their time. Effective methods of suggestion,  recipes for the alteration and exaltation of personality and  enhancement of will-power, the artificial production of hypnotic  states, photisms, automatism and ecstasy, with the opening up of the  subliminal field which accompanies these phenomena--concealed  from the profane by a mass of confusing allegories and  verbiage--form the backbone of all genuine occult rituals. Their  authors were aware that ceremonial magic has no objective importance,  but depends solely on its effect upon the operator's mind. That  this effect might be enhanced, it was given an atmosphere of sanctity  and mystery; its rules were strict, its higher rites difficult of  attainment. These rules and rites constituted at once a test of the  student's earnestness and a veil guarding the sanctuary from the  profane. The long and difficult preparations, majestic phrases, and  strange ceremonies of an evocation had power, not over the spirit of  the dead, but over the consciousness of the living; who was thus  caught up from the world of sense to a new plane of perception. Thus,  according to its apologists, the education of the genuine occult  student tends to awaken in him a new view and a new attitude. It  adjusts the machinery of his cinematograph to the registering of new  intervals in the stream of things, which passed it by before; and thus  introduces new elements into that picture by which ordinary men are  content to know and judge the--or rather   their--   universe.

[iii.vii-p55]So much for the principles which govern occult  education. Magic therapeutics, or as it is now called, "mental  healing," is but the application of these principles upon  another plane. It results, first, from a view of humanity which sees a  difference only of degree between diseases of body and of soul, and  can state seriously and in good faith that "moral maladies are  more contagious than physical, and there are some triumphs of  infatuation and fashion which are comparable to leprosy or  cholera."   [*326]    Secondly, it is [p. 162] [iii.vii-Page_162] worked by that  enhancement of will power, that ability to alter and control weaker  forms of life, which is claimed as the reward of the occult  discipline. "All the power of the occult healer lies in his  conscious will and all his art consists in producing faith in the  patient."   [*327] 

[iii.vii-p58]This simple truth was in the possession of occult  thinkers at a time when Church and State saw no third course between  the burning or beatification of its practitioners. Now, under the  polite names of mental hygiene, suggestion, and psycho-therapeutics,  it is steadily advancing to the front rank of medical shibboleths. Yet  it is still the same "magic art" which has been employed  for centuries, with varying ritual accompaniments, by the adepts of  occult science. The methods of Brother Hilarian Tissot, who is  described as curing lunacy and crime by "the unconscious use of  the magnetism of Paracelsus," who attributed his cases  "either to disorder of the will or to the perverse influence of  external wills," and would "regard all crimes as acts of  madness and treat the wicked as diseased,"   [*328]    anticipated in many respects those of the most modern  psychologists.

[iii.vii-p60]The doctrine of magic which has here been described  shows us the "Secret Wisdom" at its best and sanest. But  even on these levels, it is dogged by the defects which so decisively  separate the occultist from the mystic. The chief of these is the  peculiar temper of mind, the cold intellectual arrogance, the  intensely individual point of view which occult studies seem to induce  by their conscious quest of exclusive power and knowledge, their  implicit neglect of love. At bottom, every student of occultism is  striving towards a point at which he may be able to "touch the  button" and rely on the transcendental world "springing to  do the rest." In this hard-earned acquirement of power over the  Many, he tends to forget the One. In Levi's words, "Too  deep a study of the mysteries of nature may estrange from God the  careless investigator, in whom mental fatigue paralyses the ardours of  the heart."   [*329]    When he wrote this sentence Levi stood, as the greater  occultists have often done, at the frontiers of mysticism. The best of  the Hermetic philosophers, indeed, are hardly ever without such  mystical hankerings, such flashes of illumination; as if the  transcendental powers of man, once roused from sleep, cannot wholly  ignore the true end for which they were made.

[iii.vii-p62]In Levi's case, as is well known, the discord  between the occult and mystical ideals was resolved by his return to  the Catholic Church. Characteristically, he "read into"  Catholicism much [p. 163] [iii.vii-Page_163] that the orthodox  would hardly allow; so that it became for him, as it were, a romantic  gloss on the occult tradition. He held that the Christian Church,  nursing mother of the mystics, was also the heir of the magi; and that  popular piety and popular magic veiled the same ineffable truths. He  had more justification than at first appears probable for this  apparently wild and certainly heretical statement. Religion, as we  have seen, can never entirely divorce herself from magic: for her  rituals and sacraments must have, if they are to be successful in  their appeal to the mind, a certain magical character. All persons who  are naturally drawn towards the ceremonial aspect of religion are  acknowledging the strange power of subtle rhythms, symbolic words and  movements, over the human will. An "impressive service"  conforms exactly to the description which I have already quoted of a  magical rite: it is "a tremendous forcing-house of the latent  faculties of man's spiritual nature." Sacraments, too,  however simple their beginnings, always tend, as they evolve, to  assume upon the phenomenal plane a magical aspect--a fact which  does not invalidate their claim to be the vehicles of supernatural  grace. Those who have observed with understanding, for instance, the  Roman rite of baptism, with its spells and exorcisms, its truly  Hermetic employment of salt, anointing chrism and ceremonial lights,  must have seen in it a ceremony far nearer to the operations of white  magic than to the simple lustrations practiced by St. John the  Baptist.

[iii.vii-p63]There are obvious objections to the full working out  of this subject in a book which is addressed to readers of all shades  of belief; but any student who is interested in this branch of  religious psychology may easily discover for himself the occult  elements in the liturgies of the Christian--or indeed of any  other--Church. There are invocative arrangements of the Names of  God which appear alike in   grimoire    and in Missal. Sacred numbers, ritual actions, perfumes,  purifications, words of power, are all used, and rightly used by  institutional religion in her work of opening up the human mind to the  messages of the suprasensible world. In certain minor observances, and  charm-like prayers, we seem to stand on the very borderland between  magician and priest.

[iii.vii-p64]It is surely inevitable that this should be so. The  business of the Church is to appeal to the whole man, as she finds him  living in the world of sense. She would hardly be adequate to this  task did she neglect the powerful weapons which the occultist has  developed for his own ends. She, who takes the simplest and most  common gifts of nature and transmutes them into heavenly food, takes  also every discovery which the self has made concerning its own  potentialities, and turns them to her own high purposes. Founding her  external system on sacraments and symbols, on [p. 164] [iii.vii-Page_164] rhythmic invocations and ceremonial acts of  praise, insisting on the power of the pure and self-denying will and  the "magic chain" of congregational worship, she does but  join hands with those Magi whose gold, frankincense, and myrrh were  the first gifts that she received.

[iii.vii-p65]But she pays for this; sharing some of the limitations  of the system which her Catholic nature has compelled her to absorb.  It is true, of course, that she purges it of all its baser  elements--its arrogance, its curiosity--true also that she  is bound to adopt it, because it is the highest common measure which  she can apply to the spirituality of that world to which she is sent.  But she cannot--and her great teachers have always known that she  cannot--extract finality from a method which does not really seek  after ultimate things. This method may and does teach men goodness,  gives them happiness and health. It can even induce in them a certain  exaltation in which they become aware, at any rate for a moment, of  the existence of the supernatural world--a stupendous  accomplishment. But it will not of itself make them citizens of that  world: give to them the freedom of Reality.

[iii.vii-p66]"The work of the Church in the world,"  says Patmore, "is not to teach the mysteries of life, so much as  to persuade the soul to that arduous degree of purity at which God  Himself becomes her teacher. The work of the Church ends when the  knowledge of God begins."   [*330] 

[iii.vii-p68][p. 165] [iii.vii-Page_165]

Footnotes

^150:306 [iii.vii-p4.1][iii.vii-p5]          R. A. Vaughan, "Hours with the Mystics," vol. i. bk. i.    ch. v.

^150:307 [iii.vii-p5.1][iii.vii-p6]          In a list published by Papus from the archives of the Martinists,    we find such diverse names as Averroes, St. Thomas Aquinas, Vincent    of Beauvais, and Swedenborg, given as followers of the occult    tradition!

^150:308 [iii.vii-p6.1][iii.vii-p7]          See R. Steiner, "The Way of Initiation," p. 111.

^150:309 [iii.vii-p8.1][iii.vii-p9]              Supra,      pp. 70     seq     .

^151:310 [iii.vii-p9.1][iii.vii-p10]          A. E. Waite, "The Occult Sciences," p. 1.

^152:311 [iii.vii-p14.1][iii.vii-p15]          Steiner, "The Way of Initiation," p. 66.

^153:312 [iii.vii-p16.1][iii.vii-p17]          See E. Towne, "Joy Philosophy" (1903) and "Just    How to Wake the Solar Plexus" (1904); R. D. Stocker,    "New Thought Manual" (1906) and "Soul    Culture" (1905); Floyd Wilson, "Man Limitless"    (1905). The literature of these sects is enormous. For a critical    and entertaining account, see C. W. Ferguson, 'The Confusion    of Tongues." (1929).

^153:313 [iii.vii-p19.1][iii.vii-p20]          It must here be pointed out that the genuine    "Hermetica"--a body of ancient philosophic and    religious pieces collected under this general title--are    entirely unconnected with occultism. Cf. "Hermetica,"    ed. with English translation by W. Scott. 3 vols. 1924-8.

^154:314 [iii.vii-p20.1][iii.vii-p21]          A. E. Waite, a life-long student of these byeways of thought,    gives, as the main channels by which "an arcane knowledge is    believed to have been communicated to the West," Magic,    Alchemy, Astrology, the occult associations which culminated in    Freemasonry, and, finally, "an obscure sheaf of hieroglyphs    known as Tarot cards." He places in another class "the    bewitchments and other mummeries of Ceremonial Magic."    ("The Holy Kabbalah," pp. 518-19.)

^155:315 [iii.vii-p24.1][iii.vii-p25]          For a discussion of the Gnostic and Theosophic elements in    Blake's work see D. Surat, "Blake and Modern    Thought" (1929).

^155:316 [iii.vii-p25.1][iii.vii-p26]          A. E. Waite, "Doctrine and Literature of the Kabbalah,"    p. 48.

^156:317 [iii.vii-p30.1][iii.vii-p31]          I offer no opinion as to the truth or falsity of these    "occult" claims. For a more detailed discussion the    reader is referred to Steiner's curious little book,    "The Way of Initiation."

^156:318 [iii.vii-p32.1][iii.vii-p33]          C. W. Leadbeater, "The Science of the Sacraments," p.    38.

^156:319 [iii.vii-p33.1][iii.vii-p34]          Compare the following: "Imagine that all the world and the    starry hosts are waiting, alert and with shining eyes, to do your    bidding. Imagine that you are to touch the button now, and instantly    they will spring to do the rest. The instant you say, 'I     can and I will,'      the entire powers of the universe are to be set in motion"    (E. Towne, "Joy Philosophy," p. 52).

^157:320 [iii.vii-p35.1][iii.vii-p36]          "Rituel de la Haute Magie," pp. 35, 36.

^158:321 [iii.vii-p38.1][iii.vii-p39]          "The Occult Sciences," p. 14. But references in Mr.    Waite's most recent work to "the puerilities and    imbecility of ceremonial magic" suggest that he has modified    his views. Cf. "The Holy Kabbalah" (1929), p. 521.

^158:322 [iii.vii-p41.1][iii.vii-p42]          "Rituel de la Haute Magie," p. 71.

^159:323 [iii.vii-p43.1][iii.vii-p44]          "Rituel de la Haute Magie," p. 139.

^160:324 [iii.vii-p46.1][iii.vii-p47]          "Dogme de la Haute Magie," p. 361     et seq. 

^161:325 [iii.vii-p53.1][iii.vii-p54]          "Rituel de la Haute Magie," p. 32.

^161:326 [iii.vii-p55.1][iii.vii-p56]          "Dogme de la Haute Magie," p. 129.

^162:327 [iii.vii-p56.1][iii.vii-p57]          "Rituel," p. 312.

^162:328 [iii.vii-p58.1][iii.vii-p59]          "Dogma," p. 134.

^162:329 [iii.vii-p60.1][iii.vii-p61]          "Histoire de la Magie," p. 514.

^164:330 [iii.vii-p66.1][iii.vii-p67]          "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," "Knowledge    and Science," xxii.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [iv]   

[iv-p0.1]PART TWO: THE MYSTIC WAY

[iv-p1][p. 166] [iv-Page_166]

   [iv-p1.1] "As the Pilgrim passes while the Country  permanent remains
   So Men pass on; but the States remain permanent  forever."
  [iv-p2]Blake, "Jerusalem."

[iv-p3][p. 167] [iv-Page_167]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

I. Introductory

 [iv.i][iv.i-p1]We[iv.i-p1.1] are now to turn from general principles and study those principles in  action: to describe the psychological process, or "Mystic  Way," by which that peculiar type of personality which is able  to set up direct relations with the Absolute is usually developed. The  difficulty of this description will lie in the fact that all mystics  differ one from another; as all the individual objects of our  perception, "living" and "not living," do. The  creative impulse in the world, so far as we are aware of it, appears  upon ultimate analysis to be free and original not bound and  mechanical: to express itself, in defiance of the determinists, with a  certain artistic spontaneity. Man, when he picks out some point of  likeness as a basis on which to arrange its productions in groups, is  not discovering its methods; but merely making for his own convenience  an arbitrary choice of one or two--not necessarily  characteristic--qualities, which happen to appear in a certain  number of different persons or things. Hence the most scientific  classification is a rough-and-ready business at the best.   [*331] 

[iv.i-p3]When we come to apply such classification to so  delicate and elusive a series of psychological states as those which  accompany the "contemplative life," all the usual  difficulties are increased. No one mystic can be discovered in whom  all the observed characteristics of the transcendental consciousness  are resumed, and [p. 168] [iv.i-Page_168] who can on that  account be treated as typical. Mental states which are distinct and  mutually exclusive in one case, exist simultaneously in another. In  some, stages which have been regarded as essential are entirely  omitted: in others, their order appears to be reversed. We seem at  first to be confronted by a group of selves which arrive at the same  end without obeying any general law.

[iv.i-p4]Take, however, a number of such definitely mystical  selves and make of them, so to speak, a "composite  portrait": as anthropologists do when they wish to discover the  character of a race. From this portrait we may expect a type to  emerge, in which all the outstanding characteristics contributed by  the individual examples are present together, and minor variations are  suppressed. Such a portrait will of course be conventional: but it  will be useful as a standard, which can be constantly compared with,  and corrected by, isolated specimens.

[iv.i-p5]The first thing we notice about this composite  portrait is that the typical mystic seems to move towards his goal  through a series of strongly marked oscillations between "states  of pleasure" and "states of pain." The existence and  succession of these states--sometimes broken and confused,  sometimes crisply defined--can be traced, to a greater or less  degree, in almost every case of which we possess anything like a  detailed record. [iv.i-p5.1]   Gyrans gyrando radii spiritus     .    The soul, as it treads the ascending spiral of its road towards  reality, experiences alternately the sunshine and the shade. These  experiences are "constants" of the transcendental life.  "The Spiritual States of the Soul are all Eternal," said  Blake, with the true mystical genius for psychology.   [*332] 

[iv.i-p7]The complete series of these states--and it must  not be forgotten that few individuals present them all in perfection,  whilst in many instances several are blurred or appear to be  completely suppressed--will be, I think, most conveniently  arranged under five heads. This method of grouping means, of course,  the abandonment of the time-honoured threefold division of the Mystic  Way, and the apparent neglect of St. Teresa's equally celebrated  Seven Degrees of Contemplation; but I think that we shall gain more  than we lose by adopting it. The groups, however, must be looked upon  throughout as diagrammatic, and only as answering loosely and  generally to experiences which seldom present themselves in so rigid  and unmixed a form. These experiences, largely conditioned as they are  by surroundings and by temperament, exhibit all the variety and  spontaneity which are characteristic of life in its highest  manifestations: and, like biological specimens, they lose something of  their essential reality in being prepared for scientific  investigation. Taken all together, they constitute phases in a [p. 169] [iv.i-Page_169] single process of growth; involving the  movement of consciousness from lower to higher levels of reality, the  steady remaking of character in accordance with the "independent  spiritual world." But as the study of physical life is made  easier for us by an artificial division into infancy, adolescence,  maturity, and old age, so a discreet indulgence of the human passion  for map-making will increase our chances of understanding the nature  of the Mystic Way.

[iv.i-p8]Here, then, is the classification under which we shall  study the phases of the mystical life.

[iv.i-p9](1) The awakening of the Self to consciousness of  Divine Reality. This experience, usually abrupt and well-marked, is  accompanied by intense feelings of joy and exaltation.

[iv.i-p10](2) The Self, aware for the first time of Divine  Beauty, realizes by contrast its own finiteness and imperfection, the  manifold illusions in which it is immersed, the immense distance which  separates it from the One. Its attempts to eliminate by discipline and  mortification all that stands in the way of its progress towards union  with God constitute   Purgation:    a state of pain and effort.

[iv.i-p11](3) When by Purgation the Self has become detached  from the "things of sense," and acquired those virtues  which are the "ornaments of the spiritual marriage," its  joyful consciousness of the Transcendent Order returns in an enhanced  form. Like the prisoners in Plato's "Cave of  Illusion," it has awakened to knowledge of Reality, has  struggled up the harsh and difficult path to the mouth of the cave.  Now it looks upon the sun. This is   Illumination:    a state which includes in itself many of the stages of contemplation,  "degrees of orison," visions and adventures of the soul  described by St. Teresa and other mystical writers. These form, as it  were, a way within the Way: a moyen de parvenir,   a training devised by experts which will strengthen and assist the  mounting soul. They stand, so to speak, for education; whilst the Way  proper represents organic growth. Illumination is the  "contemplative state"   par excellence.    It forms, with the two preceding states, the "first mystic  life." Many mystics never go beyond it; and, on the other hand,  many seers and artists not usually classed amongst them, have shared,  to some extent, the experiences of the illuminated state. Illumination  brings a certain apprehension of the Absolute, a sense of the Divine  Presence: but not true union with it. It is a state of happiness.

[iv.i-p12](4) In the development of the great and strenuous  seekers after God, this is followed--or sometimes intermittently  accompanied--by the most terrible of all the experiences of the  Mystic Way: the final and complete purification of the Self, which is  called by some contemplatives the "mystic pain" or  "mystic death," [p. 170] [iv.i-Page_170] by others  the Purification of the Spirit or   Dark Night of the Soul.    The consciousness which had, in Illumination, sunned itself in the  sense of the Divine Presence, now suffers under an equally intense  sense of the Divine Absence: learning to dissociate the personal  satisfaction of mystical vision from the reality of mystical life. As  in Purgation the senses were cleansed and humbled, and the energies  and interests of the Self were concentrated upon transcendental  things: so now the purifying process is extended to the very centre of  I-hood, the will. The human instinct for personal happiness must be  killed. This is the "spiritual crucifixion" so often  described by the mystics: the great desolation in which the soul seems  abandoned by the Divine. The Self now surrenders itself, its  individuality, and its will, completely. It desires nothing, asks  nothing, is utterly passive, and is thus prepared for

[iv.i-p13](5)   Union:    the true goal of the mystic quest. In this state the Absolute Life is  not merely perceived and enjoyed by the Self, as in Illumination: but  is   one    with it. This is the end towards which all the previous oscillations  of consciousness have tended. It is a state of equilibrium, of purely  spiritual life; characterized by peaceful joy, by enhanced powers, by  intense certitude. To call this state, as some authorities do, by the  name of Ecstasy, is inaccurate and confusing: since the term Ecstasy  has long been used both by psychologists and ascetic writers to define  that short and rapturous trance--a state with well-marked  physical and psychical accompaniments--in which the  contemplative, losing all consciousness of the phenomenal world, is  caught up to a brief and immediate enjoyment of the Divine Vision.  Ecstasies of this kind are often experienced by the mystic in  Illumination, or even on his first conversion. They cannot therefore  be regarded as exclusively characteristic of the Unitive Way. In some  of the greatest mystics--St. Teresa is an example--the  ecstatic trance seems to diminish rather than increase in frequency  after the state of union has been attained: whilst others achieve the  heights by a path which leaves on one side all abnormal phenomena.

[iv.i-p14]Union must be looked upon as the true goal of mystical  growth; that permanent establishment of life upon transcendent levels  of reality, of which ecstasies give a foretaste to the soul. Intense  forms of it, described by individual mystics, under symbols such as  those of Mystical Marriage, Deification, or Divine Fecundity, all  prove on examination to be aspects of this same experience "seen  through a temperament."

[iv.i-p15]It is right, however, to state here that Oriental  Mysticism insists upon a further stage beyond that of union, which  stage it regards as the real goal of the spiritual life. This is the  total annihilation or reabsorption of the individual soul in the  Infinite. [p. 171] [iv.i-Page_171] Such an annihilation is said  by the Sufis to constitute the "Eighth Stage of Progress,"  in which alone they truly attain to God. Thus stated, it appears to  differ little from the Buddhist's Nirvana, and is the logical  corollary of that pantheism to which the Oriental mystic always tends.  Thus Jalalu d'Din:

   [iv.i-p15.1] "O, let me not exist! for Non-Existence
   Proclaims in organ tones, 'To Him we shall  return.'"   [*333]  
  [iv.i-p17]It is at least doubtful, however, whether the  interpretation which has been put by European students upon such  passages as this be correct. The language in which Al Ghazzali  attempts to describe the Eighth Stage is certainly more applicable to  the Unitive Life as understood by Christian contemplatives, than to  the Buddhistic annihilation of personality. "The end of  Sufi-ism," he says, "is total absorption in God. This is  at least the relative end to that part of their doctrine which I am  free to reveal and describe. But   in reality it is but the beginning    of the Sufi life, for those intuitions and other things which precede  it are, so to speak, but the porch by which they enter. . . . In this  state some have imagined themselves to be amalgamated with God, others  to be identical with Him, others again to be associated with Him: but   all this is sin   ."   [*334] 

[iv.i-p19]The doctrine of annihilation as the end of the  soul's ascent, whatever the truth may be as to the Moslem  attitude concerning it, is decisively rejected by all European  mystics, though a belief in it is constantly imputed to them by their  enemies: for their aim is not the suppression of life, but its  intensification, a change in its form. This change, they say in a  paradox which is generally misunderstood, consists in the perfecting  of personality by the utter surrender of self. It is true that the  more Orientally-minded amongst them, such as Dionysius the Areopagite,  do use language of a negative kind which seems almost to involve a  belief in the annihilation rather than the transformation of the self  in God: but this is because they are trying to describe a condition of  supersensible vitality from the point of view of the normal  consciousness to which it can only seem a Nothing, a Dark, a  Self-loss. Further it will be found that this language is often an  attempt to describe the conditions of transitory perception, not those  of permanent existence: the characteristics, that is to say, of the  Ecstatic Trance, in which for a short time the whole self is lifted to  transcendent levels, and the Absolute is apprehended by a total  suspension of the surface consciousness. Hence the Divine Dark, the  Nothing, is not a state of non-being to which the mystic aspires  [p. 172] [iv.i-Page_172] to attain: it is rather a paradoxical  description of his experience of that Undifferentiated Godhead, that  Supernal Light whence he may, in his ecstasies, bring down fire from  heaven to light the world.

[iv.i-p20]In the mystics of the West, the highest forms of  Divine Union impel the self to some sort of active, rather than of  passive life: and this is now recognized by the best authorities as  the true distinction between Christian and non-Christian mysticism.  "The Christian mystics," says Delacroix, "move from  the Infinite to the Definite; they aspire to infinitize life and to  define Infinity; they go from the conscious to the subconscious, and  from the subconscious to the conscious. The obstacle in their path is  not consciousness in general, but   self   -consciousness, the consciousness of the Ego. The Ego is the  limitation, that which opposes itself to the Infinite: the states of  consciousness free from self, lost in a vaster consciousness, may  become modes of the Infinite, and states of the Divine  Consciousness."   [*335]    So Starbuck: "The individual learns to transfer himself from a  centre of self-activity into an organ of revelation of universal  being, and to live a life of affection for and one-ness with, the  larger life outside."   [*336] 

[iv.i-p23]Hence, the ideal of the great contemplatives, the end  of their long education, is to become "modes of the  Infinite." Filled with an abounding sense of the Divine Life, of  ultimate and adorable reality, sustaining and urging them on, they  wish to communicate the revelation, the more abundant life, which they  have received. Not spiritual marriage, but divine fecundity is to be  their final state. In a sense St. Teresa in the Seventh Habitation,  Suso when his great renunciation is made, have achieved the quest, yet  there is nothing passive in the condition to which they have come. Not  Galahad, but the Grail-bearer is now their type: and in their life,  words or works they are impelled to exhibit that "Hidden  Treasure which desires to be found."

[iv.i-p24]"You may think, my daughters," says St.  Teresa, "that the soul in this state [of union] should be so  absorbed that she can occupy herself with nothing. You deceive  yourselves. She turns with greater ease and ardour than before to all  that which belongs to the service of God, and when these occupations  leave her free again, she remains in the enjoyment of that  companionship."   [*337] 

[iv.i-p26]No temperament is less slothful than the mystical one;  and the "quiet" to which the mystics must school  themselves in the early stages of contemplation is often the hardest  of their tasks. The abandonment of bodily and intellectual activity is  only [p. 173] [iv.i-Page_173] undertaken in order that they may,  in the words of Plotinus, "energize enthusiastically" upon  another plane. Work they must but this work may take many  forms--forms which are sometimes so wholly spiritual that they  are not perceptible to practical minds. Much of the misunderstanding  and consequent contempt of the contemplative life comes from the  narrow and superficial definition of "work" which is set  up by a muscular and wage-earning community.

[iv.i-p27]All records of mysticism in the West, then, are also  the records of supreme human activity. Not only of "wrestlers in  the spirit" but also of great organizers, such as St. Teresa and  St. John of the Cross; of missionaries preaching life to the  spiritually dead, such as St. Francis of Assisi, St. Ignatius Loyola,  Eckhart, Suso Tauler, Fox; of philanthropists, such as St. Catherine  of Genoa or St. Vincent de Paul; poets and prophets, such as Mechthild  of Magdeburg, Jacopone da Todi and Blake, finally, of some immensely  virile souls whose participation in the Absolute Life has seemed to  force on them a national destiny. Of this St. Bernard, St. Catherine  of Siena, and Saint Joan of Arc are the supreme examples. "The  soul enamoured of My Truth," said God's voice to St.  Catherine of Siena, "never ceases to serve the whole world in  general."   [*338] 

[iv.i-p29]Utterly remade in the interests of Reality, exhibiting  that dual condition of fruition and activity which Ruysbroeck  described as the crowning stage of human evolution, the "Supreme  summit of the Inner Life,"   [*339]    all these lived, as it were, with both hands towards the finite and  towards the Infinite, towards God and man. It is true that in nearly  every case such "great actives" have first left the world,  as a necessary condition of establishing communion with that Absolute  Life which reinforced their own: for a mind distracted by the many  cannot apprehend the One. Hence something equivalent to the solitude  of the wilderness is an essential part of mystical education. But,  having established that communion, re-ordered their inner lives upon  transcendent levels--being united with their Source not merely in  temporary ecstasies, but in virtue of a permanent condition of the  soul, they were impelled to abandon their solitude; and resumed, in  some way, their contact with the world in order to become the medium  whereby that Life flowed out to other men. To go up alone into the  mountain and come back as an ambassador to the world, has ever been  the method of humanity's best friends. This systole-and-diastole  motion of retreat as the preliminary to a return remains the true  ideal of Christian Mysticism in its highest development. Those in  [p. 174] [iv.i-Page_174] whom it is not found, however great in  other respects they may be, must be considered as having stopped short  of the final stage.

[iv.i-p31]Thus St. Catherine of Siena spent three years in  hermit-like seclusion in the little room which we still see in her  house in the Via Benincasa, entirely cut off from the ordinary life of  her family. "Within her own house," says her legend,  "she found the desert; and a solitude in the midst of  people."   [*340]    There Catherine endured many mortifications, was visited by ecstasies  and visions: passed, in fact, through the states of Purgation and  Illumination, which existed in her case side by side. This life of  solitude was brought to an abrupt end by the experience which is  symbolized in the vision of the Mystic Marriage, and the Voice which  then said to her, "Now will I wed thy soul, which shall ever be  conjoined and united to Me!" Catherine, who had during her long  retreat enjoyed illumination to a high degree, now entered upon the  Unitive State, in which the whole of her public life was passed. Its  effect was immediately noticeable. She abandoned her solitude, joined  in the family life, went out into the city to serve the poor and sick,  attracted and taught disciples, converted sinners, and began that  career of varied and boundless activity which has made her name one of  the greatest in the history of the fourteenth century. Nor does this  mean that she ceased to live the sort of life which is characteristic  of mystical consciousness: to experience direct contact with the  Transcendental World, to gaze into "the Abyss of Love  Divine." On the contrary, her practical genius for affairs, her  immense power of ruling men, drew its strength from the long series of  visions and ecstasies which accompanied and supported her labours in  the world. She "descended into the valley of lilies to make  herself more fruitful," says her legend.   [*341]    The conscious vehicle of some "power not herself," she  spoke and acted with an authority which might have seemed strange  enough in an uneducated daughter of the people, were it not justified  by the fact that all who came into contact with her submitted to its  influence.

[iv.i-p34]Our business, then, is to trace from its beginning a  gradual and complete change in the equilibrium of the self. It is a  change whereby that self turns from the unreal world of sense in which  it is normally immersed, first to apprehend, then to unite itself with  Absolute Reality: finally, possessed by and wholly surrendered to this  Transcendent Life, becomes a medium whereby the spiritual world is  seen in a unique degree operating directly in the world of sense. In  other words, we are to see the human mind advance from the mere  perception of phenomena, through the [p. 175] [iv.i-Page_175]  intuition--with occasional contact--of the Absolute under  its aspect of Divine Transcendence, to the entire realization of, and  union with, Absolute Life under its aspect of Divine Immanence.

[iv.i-p35]The completed mystical life, then, is more than  intuitional: it is theopathetic. In the old, frank language of the  mystics, it is the   deified life   .

[iv.i-p36][p. 176] [iv.i-Page_176]

Footnotes

^167:331 [iv.i-p1.2][iv.i-p2]          Science seems more and more inclined to acquiesce in this judgment.    See especially A. N. Whitehead: "Man and the Modern    World" and "Religion in the Making."

^168:332 [iv.i-p5.2][iv.i-p6]          "Jerusalem," pt. iii.

^171:333 [iv.i-p15.4][iv.i-p16]          Quoted by R. A. Nicholson, "The Mystics of Islam," p.    168.

^171:334 [iv.i-p17.1][iv.i-p18]          Schmolders, "Les Ecoles Philosophiques chez les    Arabes," p. 61.

^172:335 [iv.i-p20.1][iv.i-p21]          "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 235.

^172:336 [iv.i-p21.1][iv.i-p22]          "The Psychology of Religion," p. 147.

^172:337 [iv.i-p24.1][iv.i-p25]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Setimas, cap.    i.

^173:338 [iv.i-p27.1][iv.i-p28]          Dialogo, cap. vii.

^173:339 [iv.i-p29.1][iv.i-p30]          "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii. cap.    lxxiii.

^174:340 [iv.i-p31.1][iv.i-p32]          E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 15.

^174:341 [iv.i-p32.1][iv.i-p33]          S. Catherine Senensis Vitae (Acta SS. Aprilis t. iii.), ii. ii.     section 4.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

II. The Awakening of the Self

 [iv.ii][iv.ii-p1]First[iv.ii-p1.1] in the sequence of the mystic states, we must consider that decisive  event, the awakening of the transcendental consciousness.

[iv.ii-p2]This awakening, from the psychological point of view,  appears to be an intense form of the phenomenon of  "conversion"; and closely akin to those deep and permanent  conversions of the adult type which some religious psychologists call  "sanctification."   [*342]    It is a disturbance of the equilibrium of the self, which results in  the shifting of the field of consciousness from lower to higher  levels, with a consequent removal of the centre of interest from the  subject to an object now brought into view: the necessary beginning of  any process of transcendence. It must not, however, be confused or  identified with religious conversion as ordinarily understood: the  sudden and emotional acceptance of theological beliefs which the self  had previously either rejected or treated as conventions dwelling upon  the margin of consciousness and having no meaning for her actual life.  The mechanical process may be much the same; but the material  involved, the results attained, belong to a higher order of  reality.

[iv.ii-p4]"Conversion," says Starbuck, in words  which are really far more descriptive of mystical awakening than of  the revivalistic phenomena encouraged by American Protestantism,  "is primarily an unselfing. The first birth of the individual is  into his own little world. He is controlled by the deep-seated  instincts of self-preservation and self-enlargement--instincts  which are, doubtless, a direct [p. 177] [iv.ii-Page_177]  inheritance from his brute ancestry. The universe is organized around  his own personality as a centre." Conversion, then, is  "the larger world-consciousness now pressing in on the  individual consciousness. Often it breaks in suddenly and becomes a  great new revelation. This is the first aspect of conversion: the  person emerges from a smaller limited world of existence into a larger  world of being. His life becomes swallowed up in a larger  whole."   [*343] 

[iv.ii-p6]All conversion entails the abrupt or gradual emergence  of intuitions from below the threshold, the consequent remaking of the  field of consciousness, an alteration in the self's attitude to  the world. "It is," says Pratt, "a change of  taste--the most momentous one that ever occurs in human  experience."   [*344]    But in the mystic this process is raised to the nth degree of  intensity, for in him it means the first emergence of that passion for  the Absolute which is to constitute his distinctive character: an  emergence crucial in its effect on every department of his life. Those  to whom it happens, often enough, are already "religious":  sometimes deeply and earnestly so. Rulman Merswin, St. Catherine of  Genoa, George Fox, Lucie-Christine--all these had been bred up in  piety, and accepted in its entirety the Christian tradition. They were  none the less conscious of an utter change in their world when this  opening of the soul's eye took place.

[iv.ii-p8]Sometimes the emergence of the mystical consciousness  is gradual, unmarked by any definite crisis. The self slides gently,  almost imperceptibly, from the old universe to the new. The records of  mysticism, however, suggest that this is exceptional: that travail is  the normal accompaniment of birth. In another type, of which George  Fox is a typical example, there is no conversion in the ordinary  sense; but a gradual and increasing lucidity, of which the beginning  has hardly been noticed by the self, intermittently accompanies the  pain, misery of mind, and inward struggles characteristic of the  entrance upon the Way of Purgation. Conversion and purification then  go hand in hand, finally shading off into the serenity of the  Illuminated State. Fox's "Journal" for the year 1647  contains a vivid account of these "showings" or growing  transcendental perceptions of a mind not yet at one with itself, and  struggling towards clearness of sight. "Though my exercises and  troubles," he says, "were very great, yet were they not so  continual but I had some intermissions, and was sometimes brought into  such a heavenly joy that I thought I had been in Abraham's  bosom. . . . Thus in the deepest miseries, and in the greatest sorrows  and temptations that many times [p. 178] [iv.ii-Page_178] beset  me, the Lord in His mercy did keep me. I found that there were two  thirsts in me, the one after the creatures to get help and strength  there; and the other after the Lord, the Creator. . . . It was so with  me, that there seemed to be two pleadings in me. . . . One day when I  had been walking solitarily abroad and was come home, I was wrapped up  in the love of God, so that I could not but admire the greatness of  his love. While I was in that condition it was opened unto me by the  eternal Light and Power, and I saw clearly therein. . . . But O! then  did I see my troubles, trials, and temptations more clearly than ever  I had done."   [*345] 

[iv.ii-p10]The great oscillations of the typical mystic between  joy and pain are here replaced by a number of little ones. The  "two thirsts" of the superficial and spiritual  consciousness assert themselves by turns. Each step towards the vision  of the Real brings with it a reaction. The nascent transcendental  powers are easily fatigued, and the pendulum of self takes a shorter  swing. "I was swept up to Thee by Thy Beauty, and torn away from  Thee by my own weight," says St. Augustine, crystallizing the  secret of this experience in an unforgettable phrase.   [*346] 

[iv.ii-p12]Commonly, however, if we may judge from those  first-hand accounts which we possess, mystic conversion is a single  and abrupt experience, sharply marked off from the long, dim struggles  which precede and succeed it. It usually involves a sudden and acute  realization of a splendour and adorable reality in the world--or  sometimes of its obverse, the divine sorrow at the heart of  things--never before perceived. In so far as I am acquainted with  the resources of language, there are no words in which this  realization can be described. It is of so actual a nature that in  comparison the normal world of past perception seems but twilit at the  best. Consciousness has suddenly changed its rhythm and a new aspect  of the universe rushes in. The teasing mists are swept away, and  reveal, if only for an instant, the sharp outline of the Everlasting  Hills. "He who knows this will know what I say, and will be  convinced that the soul has then another life."   [*347] 

[iv.ii-p14]In most cases, the onset of this new consciousness  seems to the self so sudden, so clearly imposed from without rather  than developed from within, as to have a supernatural character. The  typical case is, of course, that of St. Paul: the sudden light, the  voice, the ecstasy, the complete alteration of life. We shall see,  however, when we come to study the evidence of those mystics who have  left a detailed record of their preconverted state, that [p. 179] [iv.ii-Page_179] the apparently abrupt conversion is really, as  a rule, the sequel and the result of a long period of restlessness,  uncertainty, and mental stress. The deeper mind stirs uneasily in its  prison, and its emergence is but the last of many efforts to escape.  The temperament of the subject, his surroundings, the vague but  persistent apprehensions of a supersensual reality which he could not  find yet could not forget; all these have prepared him for it.   [*348] 

[iv.ii-p16]When, however, the subconscious intuitions, long ago  quickened, are at last brought to birth and the eyes are opened on new  light--and it is significant that an actual sense of blinding  radiance is a constant accompaniment of this state of  consciousness--the storm and stress, the vague cravings and  oscillations of the past life are forgotten. In this abrupt  recognition of reality "all things are made new": from  this point the life of the mystic begins. Conversion of this sort has,  says De Sanctis, three marked characteristics: a sense of liberation  and victory: a conviction of the nearness of God: a sentiment of love  towards God.   [*349]    We might describe it as a sudden, intense, and joyous perception of  God immanent in the universe; of the divine beauty and unutterable  power and splendour of that larger life in which the individual is  immersed, and of a new life to be lived by the self in correspondence  with this now dominant fact of existence. "Suddenly," says  the French contemplative Lucie-Christine of the beginning of her  mystical life, "I saw before my inward eyes these words--  God only . . .    they were at the same time a Light, an Attraction and a Power. A  Light which showed me how I could belong completely to God alone in  this world, and I saw that hitherto I had not well understood this; an  Attraction by which my heart was subdued and delighted; a Power which  inspired me with a generous resolution and somehow placed in my hands  the means of carrying it out."   [*350] 

[iv.ii-p19]I will here set down for comparison a few instances of  such mystical conversion; quoting, where this is available, the actual  description left by the subject of his own experience, or in default  of it, the earliest authentic account. In these cases, when grouped  together, we shall see certain constant characteristics, from which it  may be possible to deduce the psychological law to which they owe  their peculiar form. [p. 180] [iv.ii-Page_180]

[iv.ii-p20]First in point of time, and perhaps also in  importance, amongst those I have chosen, is the case of that great  poet and contemplative, that impassioned lover of the Absolute, St.  Francis of Assisi. The fact that St. Francis wrote little and lived  much, that his actions were of unequalled simplicity and directness,  long blinded his admirers to the fact that he is a typical mystic: the  only one, perhaps, who forced the most trivial and sordid  circumstances of sensual life to become perfect expressions of  Reality.

[iv.ii-p21]Now the opening of St. Francis's eyes, which  took place in A.D. 1206 when he was twenty-four years old, had been  preceded by a long, hard struggle between the life of the world and  the persistent call of the spirit. His mind, in modern language, had  not unified itself. He was a high-spirited boy, full of vitality: a  natural artist, with all the fastidiousness which the artistic  temperament involves. War and pleasure both attracted him, and upon  them, says his legend, he "miserably squandered and wasted his  time."   [*351]    Nevertheless, he was vaguely dissatisfied. In the midst of  festivities, he would have sudden fits of abstraction: abortive  attempts of the growing transcendental consciousness, still imprisoned  below the threshold but aware of and in touch with the Real, to force  itself to the surface and seize the reins. "Even in  ignorance," says Thomas of Celano again, "he was being led  to perfect knowledge." He loved beauty, for he was by nature a  poet and a musician, and shrank instinctively from contact with  ugliness and disease. But something within ran counter to this  temperamental bias, and sometimes conquered it. He would then  associate with beggars, tend the leprous, perform impulsive acts of  charity and self-humiliation.   [*352] 

[iv.ii-p24]When this divided state, described by the legend as  "the attempt to flee God's hand," had lasted for  some years, it happened one day that he was walking in the country  outside the gates of Assisi, and passed the little church of S.  Damiano, "the which" (I again quote from Thomas of  Celano's "Second Life") "was almost ruinous  and forsaken of all men. And, being led by the Spirit, he went in to  pray; and he fell down before the Crucifix in devout supplication, and    having been smitten by unwonted visitations, found himself another  man than he who had gone in." 

[iv.ii-p25]Here, then, is the first stage of conversion. The  struggle between two discrepant ideals of life has attained its term.  A sudden and apparently "irrational" impulse to some  decisive act reaches the surface-consciousness from the seething  deeps. The impulse is followed; and the swift emergence of the  transcendental sense [p. 181] [iv.ii-Page_181] results. This  "unwonted visitation" effects an abrupt and involuntary  alteration in the subject's consciousness: whereby he literally  "finds himself another man." He is as one who has slept  and now awakes. The crystallization of this new, at first fluid  apprehension of Reality in the form of vision and audition: the  pointing of the moral, the direct application of truth to the awakened  self, follow. "And whilst he was thus moved, straightway--a  thing unheard of for long ages!--the painted image of Christ  Crucified spoke to him from out its pictured lips. And, calling him by  his name, "Francis," it said, "go, repair My house,  the which as thou seest is falling into decay." And Francis  trembled, being utterly amazed, and almost as it were carried away by  these words. And he prepared to obey, for he was wholly set on the  fulfilling of this commandment. But   forasmuch as he felt that the change he had undergone was  ineffable,    it becomes us to be silent concerning it. . . ." From this time  he "gave untiring toil to the repair of that Church. For though  the words which were said to him concerned that divine Church which  Christ bought with His own Blood, he would not hasten to such heights,  but little by little from things of the flesh would pass to those of  the Spirit."   [*353] 

[iv.ii-p27]In a moment of time, Francis's whole universe  has suffered complete rearrangement. There are no hesitations, no  uncertainties. The change, which he cannot describe, he knows to be  central for life. Not for a moment does he think of disobeying the  imperative voice which speaks to him from a higher plane of reality  and demands the sacrifice of his career.

[iv.ii-p28]Compare now with the experience of St. Francis that of  another great saint and mystic, who combined, as he did, the active  with the contemplative life. Catherine of Genoa, who seems to have  possessed from childhood a religious nature, was prepared for the  remaking of her consciousness by years of loneliness and depression,  the result of an unhappy marriage. She, like St. Francis--but in  sorrow rather than in joy--had oscillated between the world,  which did not soothe her, and religion, which helped her no more. At  last, she had sunk into a state of dull wretchedness, a hatred alike  of herself and of life.

[iv.ii-p29]Her emancipation was equally abrupt. In the year 1474,  she being twenty-six years old, "The day after the feast of St.  Benedict (at the instance of her sister that was a nun), Catherine  went to make her confession to the confessor of that nunnery; but she  was not disposed to do it. Then said her sister, 'At least go  and recommend yourself to him, because he is a most worthy  religious'; and in fact he was a very holy man. And suddenly, as  she knelt before him, she received in her heart the wound of the  unmeasured Love [p. 182] [iv.ii-Page_182] of God, with so clear a  vision of her own misery and her faults, and of the goodness of God,  that she almost fell upon the ground. And by these sensations of  infinite love, and of the offenses that had been done against this  most sweet God, she was so greatly drawn by purifying affection away  from the poor things of this world that she was almost beside herself,  and for this she cried inwardly with ardent love, 'No more  world! no more sin!' And at this point if she had possessed a  thousand worlds, she would have thrown all of them away. . . . And she  returned home, kindled and deeply wounded with so great a love of God,  the which had been shown her inwardly, with the sight of her own  wretchedness, that she seemed beside herself. And she shut herself in  a chamber, the most secluded she could find, with burning sighs. And  in this moment she was inwardly taught the whole practice of orison:  but her tongue could say naught but this--'O Love, can it  be that thou has called me with so great a love, and made me to know  in one instant that which worlds cannot express?'" This  intuition of the Absolute was followed by an interior vision of Christ  bearing the Cross, which further increased her love and  self-abasement. "And she cried again, 'O Love, no more  sins! no more sins!' And her hatred of herself was more than she  could endure."   [*354] 

[iv.ii-p31]Of this experience Von Hugel says, "If the  tests of reality in such things are their persistence and large and  rich spiritual applicability and fruitfulness, then something  profoundly real and important took place in the soul of that sad and  weary woman of six-and-twenty, within that convent-chapel, at that  Annunciation-tide."   [*355]    It is certain that for St. Catherine, as for St. Francis, an utterly  new life did, literally, begin at this point. The centre of interest  was shifted and the field of consciousness remade. She "knew in  an instant that which words cannot express." Some veil about her  heart was torn away; so abruptly, that it left a wound behind. For the  first time she saw and knew the Love in which life is bathed; and all  the energy and passion of a strong nature responded to its call.

[iv.ii-p33]The conversion of Madame Guyon to the mystic life, as  told by herself in the eighth chapter of Part I. of her  Autobiography--"How a holy Religious caused her to find God  within her heart, with Admirable Results," is its characteristic  title--is curiously like a dilute version of this experience of  St. Catherine's. It, too, followed upon a period of mental  distress; also the result of an uncongenial marriage. But since Madame  Guyon's unbalanced, diffuse, and sentimental character entirely  lacks the richness and dignity, the repressed ardours and exquisite  delicacy of [p. 183] [iv.ii-Page_183] St. Catherine's mind,  so, too, her account of her own interior processes is marred by a  terrible and unctuous interest in the peculiar graces vouchsafed to  her.   [*356] 

[iv.ii-p35]Madame Guyon's value to the student of mysticism  partly consists in this feeble quality of her surface-intelligence,  which hence had little or no modifying or contributory effect upon her  spiritual life and makes her an ideal "laboratory  specimen" for the religious psychologist. True to her great  principle of passivity or "quiet," it lets the  uncriticized interior impulses have their way; thus we are able to  observe their workings uncomplicated by the presence of a vigorous  intellect or a disciplined will. The wind that bloweth where it  listeth whistles through her soul: and the response which she makes is  that of a weathercock rather than a windmill. She moves to every  current; she often mistakes a draught for the divine breath; she feels  her gyrations to be of enormous importance. But in the description of  her awakening to the deeper life, even her effusive style acquires a  certain dignity.   [*357] 

[iv.ii-p37]Madame Guyon had from her childhood exhibited an  almost tiresome taste for pious observances. At twelve years old she  studied St. Francois de Sales and St. Jeanne Francoise de  Chantal; begged her confessor to teach her the art of mental prayer;  and when he omitted to do so, tried to teach herself, but without  result.   [*358]    She wished at this time to become a nun of the Visitation, as St.  Catherine at the same age wanted to be an Augustinian canoness; but as  the longings of little girls of twelve for the cloister are seldom  taken seriously, we are not surprised to find the refusal of her  parents' consent chronicled in the chapter which is headed   "    [iv.ii-p38.1]   Diverses croix chez M. son pere     ."    Growing up into an unusually beautiful young woman, she went into  society, and for a short time enjoyed life in an almost worldly way.  Her marriage with Jacques Guyon, however--a marriage of which she  signed the articles without even being told the bridegroom's  name--put an end to her gaiety. "The whole town was pleased  by this marriage; and in all this rejoicing only I was sad . . .  hardly was I married, when the remembrance of my old desire to be a  nun overcame me."   [*359] 

[iv.ii-p40]Her early married life was excessively unhappy. She  was soon [p. 184] [iv.ii-Page_184] driven to look for comfort in  the practices of religion. "Made to love much, and finding  nothing to love around her, she gave her love to God," says  Guerrier tersely.   [*360]    But she was not satisfied: like most of her fellow-contemplatives,  she was already vaguely conscious of something that she missed, some  vital power unused, and identified this something with the  "orison of quiet," the "practice of the presence of  God" which mystically minded friends had described to her. She  tried to attain to it deliberately, and naturally failed. "I  could not give myself by multiplicity that which Thou Thyself givest,  and which is only experienced in simplicity."   [*361] 

[iv.ii-p43]When these interior struggles had lasted for nearly  two years, and Madame Guyon was nineteen, the long desired, almost  despaired of, apprehension came--as it did to St.  Catherine--suddenly, magically almost; and under curiously  parallel conditions. It was the result of a few words spoken by a  Franciscan friar whom a "secret force" acting in her  interest had brought into the neighbourhood, and whom she had been  advised to consult. He was a recluse, who disliked hearing the  confessions of women, and appears to have been far from pleased by her  visit; an annoyance which he afterwards attributed to her fashionable  appearance, "which filled him with apprehension."  "He hardly came forward, and was a long time without speaking to  me. I, however, did not fail to speak to him and to tell him in a few  words my difficulties on the subject of orison. He at once replied,  'Madame, you are seeking without that which you have within.  Accustom yourself to seek God in your own heart, and you will find  him.' Having said this, he left me. The next morning he was  greatly astonished when I again visited him and told him the effect  which these words had had upon my soul: for, indeed, they were as an  arrow, which pierced my heart through and through. I felt in this  moment a   profound wound,    which was full of delight and of love--a wound so sweet that I  desired that it might never heal. These words had put into my heart  that which I sought for so many years, or, rather, they caused me to  find that which was there. O, my Lord, you were within my heart, and  you asked of me only that I should return within, in order that I  might feel your presence. O, Infinite Goodness, you were so near, and  I running here and there to seek you, found you not!" She, too,  like St. Catherine, learned in this instant the long-sought practice  of orison, or contemplation. "From the moment of which I have  spoken, my orison was emptied of all form, species, and images;  nothing of my orison passed through the mind; but it was an orison of  joyous possession in the Will, where the taste for God was so great,  pure, [p. 185] [iv.ii-Page_185] and simple that it attracted and  absorbed the two other powers of the soul in a profound recollection  without action or speech."   [*362] 

[iv.ii-p45]Take now the case of a less eminent mystic, who has  also left behind him a vivid personal description of his entrance upon  the Mystic Way. Rulman Merswin was a wealthy, pious, and respected  merchant of Strassburg. In the year 1347, when he was about thirty-six  years old, he retired from business in order that he might wholly  devote himself to religious matters. It was the time of that spiritual  revival within the Catholic Church in Germany which, largely  influenced by the great Rhenish mystics Suso and Tauler, is identified  with the "Friends of God"; and Merswin himself was one of  Tauler's disciples.   [*363] 

[iv.ii-p47]One evening, in the autumn which followed his  retirement, "about the time of Martinmas," he was  strolling in his garden alone. Meditating as he walked, a picture of  the Crucifix suddenly presented itself to his mind. In such an  imaginary vision as this there is nothing, of course, that we can call  abnormal. The thoughts of a devout Catholic, influenced by Tauler and  his school, must often have taken such a direction during his solitary  strolls. This time, however, the mental image of the Cross seems to  have released subconscious forces which had long been gathering way.  Merswin was abruptly filled with a violent hatred of the world and of  his own free-will. "Lifting his eyes to heaven he solemnly swore  that he would utterly surrender his own will, person, and goods to the  service of God."   [*364] 

[iv.ii-p49]This act of complete surrender, releasing as it were  the earthbound self, was at once followed by the onset of pure  mystical perception. "The reply from on high came quickly. A  brilliant light shone about him: he heard in his ears a divine voice  of [p. 186] [iv.ii-Page_186] adorable sweetness; he felt as if he  were lifted from the ground and carried several times completely round  his garden."   [*365]    Optical disturbance, auditions, and the sense of levitation, are of  course frequent physical accompaniments of these shiftings of the  level of consciousness. There are few cases in which one or other is  not present; and in some we find all. Coming to himself after this  experience, Merswin's heart was filled by a new consciousness of  the Divine; and by a transport of intense love towards God which made  him undertake with great energy the acts of mortification which he  believed necessary to the purification of his soul. From this time  onwards, his mystical consciousness steadily developed. That it was a  consciousness wholly different in kind from the sincere piety which  had previously caused him to retire from business in order to devote  himself to religious truth, is proved by the name of   Conversion    which he applies to the vision of the garden; and by the fact that he  dates from this point the beginning of his real life.

[iv.ii-p51]The conversion of Merswin's greater  contemporary, Suso, seems to have been less abrupt. Of its first stage  he speaks vaguely at the beginning of his autobiography, wherein he  says that "he began to be converted when in the eighteenth year  of his age."   [*366]    He was at this time, as St. Francis had been, restless, dissatisfied;  vaguely conscious of something essential to his peace, as yet unfound.  His temperament, at once deeply human and ardently spiritual,  passionately appreciative of sensuous beauty yet unable to rest in it,  had not "unified itself": nor did it do so completely  until after a period of purgation which is probably unequalled for its  austerity in the history of the mysticism of the West. "He was  kept of God in this, that when he turned to those things that most  enticed him he found neither happiness nor peace therein. He was  restless, and-it seemed to him that something which was as yet unknown  could alone give peace to his heart. And he suffered greatly of this  restlessness. . . . God at last delivered him by a complete  conversion. His brothers in religion were astonished by so quick a  change: for the event took them unawares. Some said of it one thing,  and some another: but none could know the reason of his conversion. It  was God Who,   by a      hidden light,    had caused this return to Himself."   [*367] 

[iv.ii-p54]This secret conversion was completed by a more violent  uprush of the now awakened and active transcendental powers. Suso,  whom one can imagine as a great and highly nervous artist if his  [p. 187] [iv.ii-Page_187] genius had not taken the channel of  sanctity instead, was subject all his life to visions of peculiar  richness and beauty. Often these visions seem to have floated up, as  it were, from the subliminal region without disturbing the course of  his conscious life; and to be little more than pictorial images of his  ardour towards and intuition of, divine realities. The great ecstatic  vision--or rather apprehension--with which the series opens,  however, is of a very different kind; and represents the  characteristic experience of Ecstasy in its fullest form. It is  described with a detail and intensity which make it a particularly  valuable document of the mystical life. It is doubtful whether Suso  ever   saw    more than this: the course of his long education rather consisted in  an adjustment of his nature to the Reality which he then  perceived.

[iv.ii-p55]"In the first days of his conversion it happened  upon the Feast of St. Agnes, when the Convent had breakfasted at  midday, that the Servitor went into the choir. He was alone, and he  placed himself in the last stall on the prior's side. And he was  in much suffering, for a heavy trouble weighed upon his heart. And  being there alone, and devoid of all consolations--no one by his  side, no one near him--of a sudden his soul was rapt in his body,  or out of his body. Then did he see and hear that which no tongue can  express.

[iv.ii-p56]"That which the Servitor saw had no form neither  any manner of being; yet he had of it a joy such as he might have  known in the seeing of the shapes and substances of all joyful things.  His heart was hungry, yet satisfied, his soul was full of contentment  and joy: his prayers and hopes were all fulfilled. And the Friar could  do naught but contemplate this Shining Brightness, and he altogether  forgot himself and all other things. Was it day or night? He knew not.  It was, as it were, a manifestation of the sweetness of Eternal Life  in the sensations of silence and of rest. Then he said, 'If that  which I see and feel be not the Kingdom of Heaven, I know not what it  can be: for it is very sure that the endurance of all possible pains  were but a poor price to pay for the eternal possession of so great a  joy.'"

[iv.ii-p57]The physical accompaniments of ecstasy were also  present. "This ecstasy lasted from half an hour to an hour, and  whether his soul were in the body or out of the body he could not  tell. But when he came to his senses it seemed to him that he returned  from another world. And so greatly did his body suffer in this short  rapture that it seemed to him that none, even in dying, could suffer  so greatly in so short a time. The Servitor came to himself moaning,  and he fell down upon the ground like a man who swoons. And he cried  inwardly, heaving great sighs from the depth of his soul and saying,  'Oh, my God, where was I and where [p. 188] [iv.ii-Page_188] am I?' And again, 'Oh, my  heart's joy, never shall my soul forget this hour!' He  walked, but it was but his body that walked, as a machine might do.  None knew from his demeanour that which was taking place within. But  his soul and his spirit were full of marvels; heavenly lightnings  passed and repassed in the deeps of his being, and it seemed to him  that he walked on air. And all the powers of his soul were full of  these heavenly delights. He was like a vase from which one has taken a  precious ointment, but in which the perfume long remains."

[iv.ii-p58]Finally, the last phrases of the chapter seem to  suggest the true position of this exalted pleasure-state as a first  link in the long chain of mystical development. "This foretaste  of the happiness of heaven," he says, "the which the  Servitor enjoyed for many days, excited in him a most lively desire  for God."   [*368] 

[iv.ii-p60]Mystical activity, then, like all other activities of  the self, opens with that sharp stimulation of the will, which can  only be obtained through the emotional life.

[iv.ii-p61]Suso was a scholar, and an embryo ecclesiastic. During  the period which elapsed between his conversion and his description of  it, he was a disciple of Meister Eckhart, a student of Dionysius and  St. Thomas Aquinas. His writings show familiarity with the categories  of mystical theology; and naturally enough this circumstance, and also  the fact that they were written for purposes of edification, may have  dictated to some extent the language in which his conversion-ecstasy  is described. As against this, I will give two first-hand descriptions  of mystical conversion in which it is obvious that theological  learning plays little or no part. Both written in France within a few  years of one another, they represent the impact of Reality on two  minds of very different calibre. One is the secret document in which a  great genius set down, in words intended only for his own eyes, the  record of a two hours' ecstasy. The other is the plain,  unvarnished statement of an uneducated man of the peasant class. The  first is, of course, the celebrated Memorial, or Amulet, of Pascal;  the second is the Relation of Brother Lawrence.

[iv.ii-p62]The Memorial of Pascal is a scrap of parchment on  which, round a rough drawing of the Flaming Cross, there are written a  few strange phrases, abrupt and broken words; all we know about one of  the strangest ecstatic revelations chronicled in the history of the  mystic type. After Pascal's death a servant found a copy of this  little document, now lost, sewn up in his doublet. He seems always to  have worn it upon his person: a perpetual memorial of the supernal  experience, the initiation into Reality, which it describes. Though  Bremand has shown that the opening [p. 189] [iv.ii-Page_189] of  Pascal's spiritual eyes had begun, on his own declaration,  eleven months earlier, [iv.ii-p62.1] "d'une  maniere douce et obligeante,"   [*369]    the conversion thus prepared was only made actual by this abrupt  illumination; ending a long period of spiritual stress, in which  indifference to his ordinary interests was counterbalanced by an utter  inability to feel the attractive force of that Divine Reality which  his great mind discerned as the only adequate object of desire.

[iv.ii-p64]The Memorial opens thus:--

[iv.ii-p65]"L'an de  grace 1654

[iv.ii-p66]lundi, 23 novembre, jour de Saint Clement,  pape

[iv.ii-p67]et martyr, et autres au martyrologe,

[iv.ii-p68]veille de Saint Chrysogone, martyr et autres

[iv.ii-p69]depuis environ dix heures et demie du soir  jusques

[iv.ii-p70]environ minuit et demie,

[iv.ii-p71]Feu."

[iv.ii-p72]"From half-past ten till half-past twelve,  Fire!" That is all, so far as description is concerned; but  enough, apparently, to remind the initiate of all that passed. The  rest tells us only the passion of joy and conviction which this  nameless revelation--this long, blazing vision of  Reality--brought in its train. It is but a series of amazed  exclamations, crude, breathless words, placed there helter-skelter,  the artist in him utterly in abeyance; the names of the overpowering  emotions which swept him, one after the other, as the Fire of Love  disclosed its secrets, evoked an answering flame of humility and  rapture in his soul.

   [iv.ii-p72.1] "Dieu  d'Abraham, Dieu d'Isaac, Dieu de Jacob,
   Non des philosophes et des savants.
   Certitude. Certitude. Sentiment. Joie.  Paix".
  [iv.ii-p73]"Not the God of philosophers and of  scholars!" cries in amazement this great scholar and philosopher  abruptly turned from knowledge to love.

[iv.ii-p74]"Oubli du monde et de tout hormis Dieu,"  he says again, seeing his universe suddenly swept clean of all but  this Transcendent Fact. Then, [iv.ii-p74.1] "Le  monde ne t'a point connu,   mais je t'ai connu.    Joie! joie joie! pleurs de joie!" Compare with  the classic style, the sharp and lucid definition of the  "Pensees," the irony and glitter of the  "Provinciales," these little broken phrases--this  child-like stammering speech--in which a supreme master of  language has tried to tell his wonder and his delight. I know few  things in the history of mysticism at once more convincing, more  poignant than this hidden talisman; upon which the brilliant [p. 190] [iv.ii-Page_190] scholar and stylist, the merciless disputant,  has jotted down in hard, crude words, which yet seem charged with  passion--the inarticulate language of love--a memorial of  the certitude, the peace, the joy, above all, the reiterated,  all-surpassing joy, which accompanied his ecstatic apprehension of  God.

[iv.ii-p75]" [iv.ii-p75.1] Mon Dieu, me  quitterez vous?" he says again; the fire  apparently beginning to die down, the ecstasy drawing to an end.  " [iv.ii-p75.2] Que je n'en sois pas  separe eternellement!" "Are  you going to leave me? Oh, let me not be separated from you for  ever!--the one unendurable thought which would, said Aquinas, rob  the Beatific Vision of its glory, were we not sure that it can never  fade.   [*370]    But the rhapsody is over, the vision of the Fire has gone; and the  rest of the Memorial clearly contains Pascal's meditations upon  his experience, rather than a transcript of the experience itself. It  ends with the watchword of all mysticism, Surrender--"  [iv.ii-p76.1] Renonciation, totale et  douce" in Pascal's words--the only  way, he thinks, in which he can avoid continued separation from  Reality.   [*371] 

[iv.ii-p78]Pascal's vision of Light, Life, and Love was  highly ecstatic; an indescribable, incommunicable experience, which  can only be suggested by his broken words of certitude and joy. By his  simple contemporary, Brother Lawrence, that Transcendent Reality Who  "is not the God of philosophers and scholars," was  perceived in a moment of abrupt intuition, peculiarly direct,  unecstatic and untheological in type, but absolutely enduring in its  results. Lawrence was an uneducated young man of the peasant class;  who first served as a soldier, and afterwards as a footman in a great  French family, where he annoyed his masters by breaking everything.  When he was between fifty and sixty years of age, he entered the  Carmelite Order as a lay brother; and the letters, "spiritual  maxims," and conversations belonging to this period of his life  were published after his death in 1691. "He told me," says  the anonymous reporter of the conversations, supposed to be M.  Beaufort, who was about 1660 Grand Vicar to the Cardinal de Noailles,  "that God had done him a singular favour in his conversion at  the age of eighteen. That in the winter, seeing a tree stripped of its  leaves, and considering that within a little time the leaves would be  renewed, and after that the flowers and fruit appear, he received a  high view of the Providence and Power of God, which has never since  been effaced from his soul. That this [p. 191] [iv.ii-Page_191]  view had set him perfectly loose from the world and kindled in him  such a love for God that he could not tell whether it had increased in  above forty years that he had lived since."   [*372] 

[iv.ii-p80]Such use of visible nature as the stuff of ontological  perceptions, the medium whereby the self reaches out to the Absolute,  is not rare in the history of mysticism. The mysterious vitality of  trees, the silent magic of the forest, the strange and steady cycle of  its life, possess in a peculiar degree this power of unleashing the  human soul: are curiously friendly to its cravings, minister to its  inarticulate needs. Unsullied by the corroding touch of consciousness,  that life can make a contact with the "great life of the  All"; and through its mighty rhythms man can receive a message  concerning the true and timeless World of "all that is, and was,  and evermore shall be." Plant life of all kinds, indeed, from  the "flower in the crannied wall" to the "Woods of  Westermain" can easily become, for selves of a certain type, a  "mode of the Infinite." So obvious does this appear when  we study the history of the mystics, that Steiner has drawn from it  the hardly warrantable inference that "plants are just those  natural phenomena whose qualities in the higher world are similar to  their qualities in the physical world."   [*373] 

[iv.ii-p82]Though the conclusion be not convincing, the fact  remains. The flowery garment of the world is for some mystics a medium  of ineffable perception, a source of exalted joy, the veritable  clothing of God. I need hardly add that such a state of things has  always been found incredible by common sense. "The tree which  moves some to tears of joy," says Blake, who possessed in an  eminent degree this form of sacramental perception, "is in the  Eyes of others only a green thing that stands in the Way."   [*374] 

[iv.ii-p84]Such a perception of the Divine in Nature, of the true  and holy meaning of that rich, unresting life in which we are  immersed, is really a more usual feature of Illumination than of  Conversion. All the most marked examples of it must be referred to  that state; and will be discussed when we come to its consideration.  Sometimes, however, as in the case of Brother Lawrence, the first  awakening of the self to consciousness of Reality does take this form.  The Uncreated Light manifests Itself in and through created things.  This characteristically immanental discovery of the Absolute occurs  chiefly in two classes: in unlettered men who have lived close to  Nature, and to whom her symbols are more familiar than those of the  Churches or the schools, and in temperaments of the mixed or mystical  type, who are nearer to the poet than to the true contemplative, for  whom as a rule the Absolute [p. 192] [iv.ii-Page_192] "hath  no image." "It was like entering into another world, a new  state of existence," says a witness quoted by Starbuck, speaking  of his own conversion. "Natural objects were glorified. My  spiritual vision was so clarified that I saw beauty in every material  object in the universe. The woods were vocal with heavenly  music." "Oh, how I was changed! Everything became new. My  horses and hogs and everybody became changed!" exclaims with  naive astonishment another in the same collection.   [*375]    "When I went in the morning into the fields to work,"  says a third, "the glory of God appeared in all His visible  creation. I well remember we reaped oats, and how every straw and head  of the oats seemed, as it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow glory, or  to glow, if I may so express it, in the glory of God."   [*376] 

[iv.ii-p87]Amongst modern men, Walt Whitman possessed in a  supreme degree the permanent sense of this glory, the "light  rare, untellable, lighting the very light."   [*377]    But evidences of its existence, and the sporadic power of  apprehending it, are scattered up and down the literature of the  world. Its discovery constitutes the awakening of the mystical  consciousness in respect of the World of Becoming: a sharp and sudden  break with the old and obvious way of seeing things. The human  cinematograph has somehow changed its rhythm, and begins to register  new and more real aspects of the external world. With this, the  self's first escape from the limitations of its conventional  universe, it receives an immense assurance of a great and veritable  life surrounding, sustaining, explaining its own. Thus Richard  Jefferies says, of the same age as that at which Suso and Brother  Lawrence awoke to sudden consciousness of Reality, "I was not  more than eighteen when an inner and esoteric meaning began to come to  me from all the visible universe." "I now became lost, and  absorbed into the being or existence of the universe . . . and losing  thus my separateness of being, came to seem like a part of the  whole." "I feel on the margin of a life unknown, very  near, almost touching it--on the verge of powers which, if I  could grasp, would give men an immense breadth of existence."   [*378] 

[iv.ii-p90]What was this "life unknown" but the Life  known to the great mystics, which Richard Jefferies apprehended in  these moments of insight, yet somehow contrived to miss?

[iv.ii-p91]Such participation in the deep realities of the World  of Becoming, the boundless existence of a divine whole--which a  modern [p. 193] [iv.ii-Page_193] psychologist has labelled and  described as "Cosmic Consciousness"   [*379]   --whilst it is not the final object of the mystic's  journey, is a constant feature of it. It may represent one-half of his  characteristic consciousness: an entrance into communion with the  second of the Triune Powers of God, the Word which "is through  all things everlastingly." Jefferies stood, as so many  mystically minded men have done, upon the verge of such a  transcendental life. The "heavenly door," as Rolle calls  it, was ajar but not pushed wide. He peeped through it to the greater  world beyond; but, unable to escape from the bonds of his selfhood, he  did not pass through to live upon the independent spiritual plane.

[iv.ii-p93]Rolle, Jefferies's fellow countryman, and his  predecessor by close upon six hundred years in the ecstatic love and  understanding of natural things, shall be our last example of the  mystical awakening. He, like his spiritual brother St. Francis, and  other typical cases, had passed through a preliminary period of  struggle and oscillation between worldly life and a vague but growing  spirituality: between the superficial and the deeper self. "My  youth was fond, my childhood vain, my young age unclean,"   [*380]    but "when I should flourish unhappily, and youth of wakeful age  was now come, the grace of my Maker was near, the which lust of  temporal shape restrained, and unto ghostly supplications turned my  desires, and the soul, from low things lifted, to heaven has  borne."   [*381] 

[iv.ii-p96]The real "life-changing," however, was  sharply and characteristically marked off from this preparatory state.  Rolle associates it with the state which he calls "Heat":  the form in which his ardour of soul was translated to the surface  consciousness. "Heat soothly I call when the mind truly is  kindled in Love Everlasting, and the heart on the same manner to burn  not hopingly but verily is felt. The heart truly turned into fire,  gives feeling of burning love."   [*382]    This burning heat is not merely a mental experience. In it we seem to  have an unusual but not unique form of psychophysical parallelism: a  bodily expression of the psychic travail and distress accompanying the  "New Birth."   [*383]    "More have I marvelled than I show, forsooth," he says in  his prologue, "when I first felt my heart wax warm, and truly,   not imaginingly, but as it were with a sensible fire   , burned. I was forsooth marvelled, as this burning burst up in my  soul, and of an unwonted solace; for [p. 194] [iv.ii-Page_194] in  my ignorance of such healing abundance, oft have I groped my breast,  seeing whether this burning were of any bodily cause outwardly. But  when I knew that only it was kindled of ghostly cause inwardly, and  this burning was naught of fleshly love or desire, in this I conceived  it was the gift of my Maker."   [*384]    Further on, he gives another and more detailed account. "From  the beginning, forsooth, of my life-changing and of my mind, to the  opening of the heavenly door which Thy Face showed, that the heart  might behold heavenly things and see by what way its Love it might  seek and busily desire, three years are run except three months or  four. The door, forsooth, biding open, a year near-by I passed unto  the time in which the heat of Love Everlasting was verily felt in  heart. I sat forsooth in a chapel and whilst with sweetness of prayer  and meditation greatly I was delighted, suddenly in me I felt a merry  heat and unknown. But at first I wondered, doubting of whom it should  be; but a long time I am assured that not of the Creature but of my  Maker it was, for more hot and gladder I found it."   [*385] 

[iv.ii-p101]To this we must add a passage which I cannot but think  one of the most beautiful expressions of spiritual joy to be found in  mystical literature. Based though it certainly is upon a passage in  St. Augustine--for the nightingale is not a Yorkshire  bird--its sketch of the ideal mystic life, to the cultivation of  which he then set himself, reveals in a few lines the most charming  aspect of Rolle's spirituality, its poetic fervour, its capacity  for ardent love.

[iv.ii-p102]"In the beginning truly of my conversion and  singular purpose, I though I would be like the little bird that for  love of her lover longs, but in her longing she is gladdened when he  comes that she loves. And joying she sings, and singing she longs, but  in sweetness and heat. It is said the nightingale to song and melody  all night is given, that she may please him to whom she is joined. How  muckle more with greatest sweetness to Christ my Jesu should I sing,  that is spouse of my soul by all this present life, that is night in  regard of clearness to come."   [*386] 

[iv.ii-p104]Glancing back at the few cases here brought together,  we can see in them, I think, certain similarities and diversities  which are often of great psychological interest and importance: and  have their influence upon the subsequent development of the mystic  life. We see in particular at this point--before purification, or  the remaking of character, begins--the reaction of the natural  self, its heart and its mind, upon that uprush of new truth which  operates "mystical conversion." This reaction is highly  significant, [p. 195] [iv.ii-Page_195] and gives us a clue not  only to the future development of the mystic, but to the general  nature of man's spiritual consciousness.

[iv.ii-p105]We have said   [*387]    that this consciousness in its full development seems to be extended  not in one but in two directions. These directions, these two  fundamental ways of apprehending Reality may be called the eternal and  temporal, transcendent and immanent, absolute and dynamic aspects of  Truth. They comprise the twofold knowledge of a God Who is both Being  and Becoming near and far: pairs of opposites which the developed  mystical experience will carry up into a higher synthesis. But the  first awakening of the mystic sense, the first breaking in of the  suprasensible upon the soul, commonly involves the emergence of one  only of these complementary forms of perception. One side always wakes  first: the incoming message always choosing the path of least  resistance. Hence mystical conversion tends to belong to one of two  distinctive types: tends also, as regards its expression, to follow  that temperamental inclination to objectivize Reality as a Place, a  Person, or a State which we found to govern the symbolic systems of  the mystics.   [*388] 

[iv.ii-p108]There is first, then, the apprehension of a splendour  without: an expansive, formless, ineffable vision, a snatching up of  the self, as it were, from knowledge of this world to some vague yet  veritable knowledge of the next. The veil parts, and the Godhead is  perceived as transcendent to, yet immanent in, the created universe.  Not the personal touch of love transfiguring the soul, but the  impersonal glory of a transfigured world, is the dominant note of this  experience: and the reaction of the self takes the form of awe and  rapture rather than of intimate affection. Of such a kind was the  conversion of Suso, and in a less degree of Brother Lawrence. Of this  kind also were the Light which Rulman Merswin saw, and the mystical  perception of the Being of the universe reported by Richard Jefferies  and countless others.

[iv.ii-p109]This experience, if it is to be complete, if it is to  involve the definite emergence of the self from "the prison of  I-hood," its setting out upon the Mystic Way, requires an act of  concentration on the self's part as the complement of its  initial act of expansion. It must pass beyond the stage of  metaphysical rapture or fluid splendour, and crystallize into a willed  response to the Reality perceived; a definite and personal relation  must be set up between the self and the Absolute Life. To be a  spectator of Reality is not enough. The awakened subject is not merely  to perceive transcendent life, but to participate therein; and for  this, a drastic and costly life-changing is required. In  Jefferies's case this crystallization, this heroic effort  towards participation did not take place, and [p. 196] [iv.ii-Page_196] he never therefore laid hold of "the  glory that has been revealed." In Suso's it did,  "exciting in him a most lively desire for God."

[iv.ii-p110]In most cases this crystallization, the personal and  imperative concept which the mind constructs from the general and  ineffable intuition of Reality, assumes a theological character. Often  it presents itself to the consciousness in the form of visions or  voices: objective, as the Crucifix which spoke to St. Francis, or  mental, as the visions of the Cross experienced by Rulman Merswin and  St. Catherine of Genoa. Nearly always, this concept, this intimate  realization of the divine, has reference to the love and sorrow at the  heart of things, the discord between Perfect Love and an imperfect  world; whereas the complementary vision of Transcendence strikes a  note of rapturous joy. "The beatings of the Heart of God sounded  like so many invitations which thus spake: Come and do penance, come  and be reconciled, come and be consoled, come and be blessed; come, My  love, and receive all that the Beloved can give to His beloved. . . .  Come, My bride, and enjoy My Godhead."   [*389] 

[iv.ii-p112]It is to this personal touch, to the individual appeal  of an immediate Presence, not to the great light and the Beatific  Vision, that the awakened self makes its most ardent, most heroic  response. Not because he was rapt from himself, but because the figure  on the Cross called him by name, saying, "Repair My  Church" did St. Francis, with that simplicity, that disregard of  worldly values which constituted his strength, accept the message in a  literal sense and set himself instantly to the work demanded; bringing  stones, and, in defiance alike of comfort and convention, building up  with his own hands the crumbling walls.

[iv.ii-p113]In many conversions to the mystic life, the revelation  of an external splendour, the shining vision of the transcendent  spiritual world, is wholly absent. The self awakes to that which is  within, rather than to that which is without: to the immanent not the  transcendent God, to the personal not the cosmic relation. Where those  who look out receive the revelation of Divine Beauty, those who look  in receive rather the wound of Divine Love: another aspect of the  "triple star." Emotional mystics such as Richard Rolle and  Madame Guyon give us this experience in an extreme form. We find in  St. Catherine of Genoa a nobler example of the same type of response.  That inward revelation in its anguish and abruptness, its rending  apart of the hard tissues of I-hood and vivid disclosures of the  poverty of the finite self, seemed, says the legend of St. Catherine  "the wound of Unmeasured Love," an image in which we seem  to hear the very accents of the saint. "A wound full of  delight," says the effusive Madame Guyon, "I wished that  it [p. 197] [iv.ii-Page_197] might never heal." Rolle calls  this piercing rapture a great heat: the heat which is to light the  Fire of Love. "As it were if the finger were put in fire, it  should be clad with feeling of burning so the soul with love (as  aforesaid) set afire, truly feels most very heat."   [*390] 

[iv.ii-p115]Love, passionate and all-dominant, here takes the  place of that joyous awe which we noticed as the characteristic  reaction upon reality in conversions of the Transcendent type. In the  deep and strong temperaments of the great mystics this love passes  quickly--sometimes instantly--from the emotional to the  volitional stage. Their response to the voice of the Absolute is not  merely an effusion of sentiment, but an act of will: an act often of  so deep and comprehensive a kind as to involve the complete change of  the outward no less than of the inward life. "Divine  love," says Dionysius "draws those whom it seizes beyond  themselves: and this so greatly that they belong no longer to  themselves but wholly to the Object loved."   [*391] 

[iv.ii-p117]Merswin's oath of self-surrender: St. Catherine  of Genoa's passionate and decisive "No more world! no more  sins!": St. Francis's naive and instant devotion to  church-restoration in its most literal sense: these things are  earnests of the reality of the change. They represent--symbolize  as well as they can upon the sensual plane--the spontaneous  response of the living organism to a fresh external stimulus: its  first effort of adjustment to the new conditions which that stimulus  represents. They complete the process of conversion; which is not  one-sided, not merely an infusion into the surface-consciousness of  new truth, but rather the beginning of a life-process, a breaking down  of the old and building up of the new. A never to be ended  give-and-take is set up between the individual and the Absolute. The  Spirit of Life has been born: and the first word it learns to say is   Abba,    Father. It aspires to its origin, to Life in its most intense  manifestation: hence all its instincts urge it to that activity which  it feels to be inseparable from life. It knows itself a member of that  mighty family in which the stars are numbered: the family of the sons  of God, who, free and creative, sharing the rapture of a living,  striving Cosmos, "shout for joy."

[iv.ii-p118]So, even in its very beginning, we see how active, how  profoundly organic, how deeply and widely alive is the true  contemplative life; how truly on the transcendent as on the phenomenal  plane, the law of living things is action and reaction, force and  energy. The awakening of the self is to a new and more active plane of  being, new and more personal relations with Reality; hence to a new  and more real work which it must do.

[iv.ii-p119][p. 198] [iv.ii-Page_198]

Footnotes

^176:342 [iv.ii-p2.1][iv.ii-p3]          See Starbuck, "The Psychology of Religion," cap.    xxix.

^177:343 [iv.ii-p4.1][iv.ii-p5]              Op. cit.,      cap. xii.

^177:344 [iv.ii-p6.1][iv.ii-p7]          J. B. Pratt, "The Religious Consciousness," cap. xiii.    The whole chapter deserve careful study.

^178:345 [iv.ii-p8.1][iv.ii-p9]          Journal of George Fox, cap. i.

^178:346 [iv.ii-p10.1][iv.ii-p11]          Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xvii. We can surely trace the influence    of such an experience in St. Paul's classic description of the    "endopsychic conflict": [iv.ii-p11.1][iv.ii-p11.1].

^178:347 [iv.ii-p12.1][iv.ii-p13]          Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

^179:348 [iv.ii-p14.1][iv.ii-p15]          "It is certain," says De Sanctis, "that when we    attempt to probe deeper in our study of sudden converts, we discover    that the [iv.ii-p15.1]    coup de foudre         ,      which in the main is observable in only a small minority of    conversions, is in fact the least significant, though the most    Esthetic, moment of the conversion." ("Religious    Conversion," Eng. trans., p. 65. Compare St. Augustine's    Confessions, with their description of the years of uncertainty and    struggle which prepared him for the sudden and final "Tolle,    lege!" that initiated him into the long-sought life of    Reality.)

^179:349 [iv.ii-p16.1][iv.ii-p17]              Op. cit.     , p. 171.

^179:350 [iv.ii-p17.1][iv.ii-p18]          "Journal Spirituel de Lucie-Christine," p. 11.

^180:351 [iv.ii-p21.1][iv.ii-p22]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. 1.

^180:352 [iv.ii-p22.1][iv.ii-p23]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap. v. Compare P. Sabatier.    "Vie de S. Francois d'Assise," cap. ii.,    where the authorities are fully set out.

^181:353 [iv.ii-p25.1][iv.ii-p26]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap. vi.

^182:354 [iv.ii-p29.1][iv.ii-p30]          "Vita e Dottrina di Santa Caterina da Genova," cap    ii.

^182:355 [iv.ii-p31.1][iv.ii-p32]          Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion,"    vol. ii p. 29.

^183:356 [iv.ii-p33.1][iv.ii-p34]          It is clear from the heading of cap. x. (pt. i.) of her    Autobiography that Madame Guyon's editors were conscious, if    she was not, of some of the close coincidences between her    experiences and those of St. Catherine of Genoa. The parallel    between their early years is so exact and descends to such minute    details that I am inclined to think that the knowledge of this    resemblance, and the gratification with which she would naturally    regard it, has governed or modified her memories of this past. Hence    a curious and hitherto unnoticed case of "unconscious    spiritual plagiarism."

^183:357 [iv.ii-p35.1][iv.ii-p36]          For a thoroughly hostile account see Leuba: 'The Psychology    of Religious Mysticism," cap. iv.

^183:358 [iv.ii-p37.1][iv.ii-p38]          Vie, pt. i. cap. iv.

^183:359 [iv.ii-p38.2][iv.ii-p39]              Op. cit.,      pt. i. cap. vi.

^184:360 [iv.ii-p40.1][iv.ii-p41]          "Madame Guyon," p. 36.

^184:361 [iv.ii-p41.1][iv.ii-p42]         Vie, pt. i. cap. viii.

^185:362 [iv.ii-p43.1][iv.ii-p44]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

^185:363 [iv.ii-p45.1][iv.ii-p46]          One of the best English accounts of this movement and the great    personalities concerned in it is in Rufus Jones, "Studies in    Mystical Religion," cap. xiii.

^185:364 [iv.ii-p47.1][iv.ii-p48]          A. Jundt, "Rulman Merswin," p. 19. M. Jundt has    condensed his account which I here translate, from Merswin's    autobiographical story of his conversion, published in     Breitrage zu den theologischen Wissenschaften     , v    .      (Jena, 1854). Our whole knowledge of Merswin's existence    depends on the group of documents which includes this confession,    the "Book of Two Men," the "Vision of Nine    Rocks," and his other reputed works. The authenticity of these    documents has been much questioned, and they have doubtless suffered    severely from the editorial energy of his followers. Some critics    even regard them as pious fictions, useless as evidence of the    incidents of Merswin's life. With this view, upheld by Karl    Reider ("Der Gottesfreund von Oberland," 1905), I cannot    agree. A possible solution of the many difficulties is that of M.    Jundt, who believes that we have in Merswin and the mysterious    "Friend of God of the Oberland," who pervades his    spiritual career, a remarkable case of dissociated personality.    Merswin's peculiar psychic make up, as described in his    autobiography, supports this view: the adoption of which I shall    assume in future references to his life. It is incredible that the    vivid account of his conversion which I quote should be merely    "tendency-literature," without basis in fact. Compare    Jundt's monograph, and also Rufus Jones,     op. cit.      pp    .      245-253, where the whole problem is discussed.

^186:365 [iv.ii-p49.1][iv.ii-p50]          Jundt,     op. cit., loc. cit. 

^186:366 [iv.ii-p51.1][iv.ii-p52]          "Leben und Schriften" (Diepenbrock), cap. i.    Suso's autobiography is written in the third person. He refers    to himself throughout under the title of "Servitor of the    Eternal Wisdom."

^186:367 [iv.ii-p52.1][iv.ii-p53]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

^188:368 [iv.ii-p58.1][iv.ii-p59]          Leben, cap. iii.

^189:369 [iv.ii-p62.2][iv.ii-p63]          Bremond, "Histoire Litterario du Sentiment Religieux en    France." vol. iv. pp. 359     seq. 

^190:370 [iv.ii-p75.3][iv.ii-p76]          "Summa contra Gentiles," I. iii. cap. lxii.

^190:371 [iv.ii-p76.2][iv.ii-p77]          The complete test of the     Memorial      isprinted, among other places, in Faugere's edition of    the "Pensees, Fragments et Lettres de Blaise    Pascal," 2nd ed., Paris, 1897. Tome i. p. 269; and is    reproduced in facsimile by Bremond     loc. cit.      Bremond holds that the     Memorial      is the record of two distinct experiences: a "mystical    experience in the proper meaning of the word," and an    "affective meditation arising from it." This view does    not seem incompatible with my original description, which I    therefore retain. (Note to 12th ed.)

^191:372 [iv.ii-p78.1][iv.ii-p79]          Brother Lawrence, "The Practice of the Presence of    God," p. 9.

^191:373 [iv.ii-p80.1][iv.ii-p81]          "The Way of Initiation," p. 134.

^191:374 [iv.ii-p82.1][iv.ii-p83]          "Letters of William Blake," p. 62.

^192:375 [iv.ii-p84.1][iv.ii-p85]          "The Psychology of Religion," p. 120.

^192:376 [iv.ii-p85.1][iv.ii-p86]          James, "Varieties of Religion Experience," p. 253. This    phenomenon receives brilliant literary expression in John    Masefield's poem "The Everlasting Mercy"    (1911).

^192:377 [iv.ii-p87.1][iv.ii-p88]          Whitman, "The Prayer of Colombus."

^192:378 [iv.ii-p88.1][iv.ii-p89]          "The Story of My Heart," pp. 8, 9, 45, 181.

^193:379 [iv.ii-p91.1][iv.ii-p92]          Bucke, "Cosmic Consciousness, a Study in the Evolution of the    Human Mind." Philadelphia. 1905.

^193:380 [iv.ii-p93.1][iv.ii-p94]          "Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xii.

^193:381 [iv.ii-p94.1][iv.ii-p95]              Ibid.     , bk. i. cap. xv.

^193:382 [iv.ii-p96.1][iv.ii-p97]              Ibid.,      cap. xiv.

^193:383 [iv.ii-p97.1][iv.ii-p98]          Hilton and the author of "The Cloud of Unknowing" both    refer to "sensible heat" as a well-known but dubious    concomitant of spiritual experience. Compare the confession of a    modern convert, "I was siezed and possessed by an interior    flame, for which nothing had prepared me;     waves of fire      succeeding one another for more than two hours."    ("Madeleine Semer, Convertie et Mystique,"    1874-1921, p. 71.)

^194:384 [iv.ii-p98.1][iv.ii-p99]          "Fire of Love," bk. i. Prologue.

^194:385 [iv.ii-p99.1][iv.ii-p100]              Ibid     ., bk. i. cap. xv.

^194:386 [iv.ii-p102.1][iv.ii-p103]              Ibid     ., bk. ii. cap. xii.

^195:387 [iv.ii-p105.1][iv.ii-p106]              Supra     , p. 35.

^195:388 [iv.ii-p106.1][iv.ii-p107]              Ibid     ., p. 128.

^196:389 [iv.ii-p110.1][iv.ii-p111]          St. Mechthild of Hackborn, "Liber Specialis Gratiae,"    I. ii. cap. i

^197:390 [iv.ii-p113.1][iv.ii-p114]          "The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. i.

^197:391 [iv.ii-p115.1][iv.ii-p116]          Dionysius the Areopagite, "De Divinis Nominibus," iv.    13.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

III. The Purification of the Self

 [iv.iii][iv.iii-p1]Here[iv.iii-p1.1], then, stands the newly awakened self: aware, for the first time, of  reality, responding to that reality by deep movements of love and of  awe. She sees herself, however, not merely to be thrust into a new  world, but set at the beginning of a new road. Activity is now to be  her watchword, pilgrimage the business of her life. "That a  quest there is, and an end, is the single secret spoken." Under  one symbol or another, the need of that long slow process of  transcendence, of character building, whereby she is to attain  freedom, become capable of living upon high levels of reality, is  present in her consciousness. Those in whom this growth is not set  going are no mystics, in the exact sense in which that word is here  used; however great their temporary illumination may have been.

[iv.iii-p2]What must be the first step of the self upon this road  to perfect union with the Absolute? Clearly, a getting rid of all  those elements of normal experience which are not in harmony with  reality: of illusion, evil, imperfection of every kind. By false  desires and false thoughts man has built up for himself a false  universe: as a mollusk by the deliberate and persistent absorption of  lime and rejection of all else, can build up for itself a hard shell  which shuts it from the external world, and only represents in [p. 199] [iv.iii-Page_199] a distorted and unrecognisable form the ocean  from which it was obtained. This hard and wholly unnutritious shell,  this one-sided secretion of the surface-consciousness, makes as it  were a little cave of illusion for each separate soul. A literal and  deliberate getting out of the cave must be for every mystic, as it was  for Plato's prisoners, the first step in the individual hunt for  reality.

[iv.iii-p3]In the plain language of old-fashioned theology  "man's sin is stamped upon man's universe." We  see a sham world because we live a sham life. We do not know  ourselves; hence do not know the true character of our senses and  instincts; hence attribute wrong values to their suggestions and  declarations concerning our relation to the external world. That  world, which we have distorted by identifying it with our own  self-regarding arrangements of its elements, has got to reassume for  us the character of Reality, of God. In the purified sight of the  great mystics it did reassume this character: their shells were opened  wide, they knew the tides of the Eternal Sea. This lucid apprehension  of the True is what we mean when we speak of the Illumination which  results from a faithful acceptance of the trials of the Purgative  Way.

[iv.iii-p4]That which we call the "natural" self as  it exists in the "natural" world--the "old  Adam" of St. Paul--is wholly incapable of supersensual  adventure. All its activities are grouped about a centre of  consciousness whose correspondences are with the material world. In  the moment of its awakening, it is abruptly made aware of this  disability. It knows itself finite. It now aspires to the infinite. It  is encased in the hard crust of individuality: it aspires to union  with a larger self. It is fettered: it longs for freedom. Its every  sense is attuned to illusion: it craves for harmony with the Absolute  Truth. "God is the only Reality," says Patmore, "and  we are real only as far as we are in His order and He is in us."   [*392]    Whatever form, then, the mystical adventure may take it, must begin  with a change in the attitude of the subject; a change which will  introduce it into the order of Reality, and enable it to set up  permanent relations with an Object which is not normally part of its  universe. Therefore, though the end of mysticism is not adequately  defined as goodness, it entails the acquirement of goodness. The  virtues are the "ornaments of the spiritual marriage"  because that marriage is union with the Good no less than with the  Beautiful and the True.

[iv.iii-p6]Primarily, then, the self must be purged of all that  stands between it and goodness: putting on the character of reality  instead of the character of illusion or "sin." It longs  ardently to do this from the first moment in which it sees itself in  the all-revealing radiance of the Uncreated Light. "When love  [p. 200] [iv.iii-Page_200] openeth the inner eyes of the soul for  to see this truth," says Hilton, "with other circumstances  that come withal then beginneth the soul for sooth to be vastly meek.  For then by the sight of God it feeleth and seeth itself as it is, and  then doth the soul forsake the beholding and leaning to itself."   [*393] 

[iv.iii-p8]So, with Dante, the first terrace of the Mount of  Purgatory is devoted to the cleansing of pride and the production of  humility: the inevitable--one might almost say  mechanical--result of a vision, however fleeting, of Reality, and  an undistorted sight of the earthbound self. All its life that self  has been measuring its candlelight by other candles. Now for the first  time it is out in the open air and sees the sun. "This is the  way," said the voice of God to St. Catherine of Siena in  ecstasy. "If thou wilt arrive at a perfect knowledge and  enjoyment of Me, the Eternal Truth, thou shouldst never go outside the  knowledge of thyself; and by humbling thyself in the valley of  humility thou wilt know Me and thyself, from which knowledge thou wilt  draw all that is necessary. . . . In self knowledge, then, thou wilt  humble thyself; seeing that, in thyself, thou dost not even  exist."   [*394] 

[iv.iii-p10]The first thing that the self observes, when it turns  back upon itself in that awful moment of lucidity--enters, as St.  Catherine says, into "the cell of  self-knowledge,"--is the horrible contrast between its  clouded contours and the pure sharp radiance of the Real; between its  muddled faulty life, its perverse self-centred drifting, and the clear  onward sweep of that Becoming in which it is immersed. It is then that  the outlook of rapture and awe receives the countersign of repentance.  The harbinger of that new self which must be born appears under the  aspect of a desire: a passionate longing to escape from the suddenly  perceived hatefulness of selfhood, and to conform to Reality, the  Perfect which it has seen under its aspect of Goodness, of Beauty, or  of Love--to be worthy of it, in fact to be   real.    "This showing," says Gerlac Petersen of that experience,  "is so vehement and so strong that the whole of the interior  man, not only of his heart but of his body, is marvellously moved and  shaken, and faints within itself, unable to endure it. And by this  means, his interior aspect is made clear without any cloud, and  conformable in its own measure to Him whom he seeks."   [*395] 

[iv.iii-p12]The lives of the mystics abound in instances of the  "vehemence of this showing": of the deep-seated sense of  necessity which urges the newly awakened self to a life of discomfort  and conflict, often to intense poverty and pain, as the only way of  replacing false experience by true. Here the transcendental  consciousness, exalted [p. 201] [iv.iii-Page_201] by a clear  intuition of its goal, and not merely "counting" but   perceiving    the world to be obviously well lost for such a prize, takes the  reins. It forces on the unwilling surface mind a sharp vision of its  own disabilities, its ugly and imperfect life; and the thirst for  Perfection which is closely bound up with the mystic temperament makes  instant response. "No more sins!" was the first cry of St.  Catherine of Genoa in that crucial hour in which she saw by the light  of love her own self-centred and distorted past. She entered forthwith  upon the Purgative Way, in which for four years she suffered under a  profound sense of imperfection, endured fasting, solitude and  mortification; and imposed upon herself the most repulsive duties in  her efforts towards that self-conquest which should make her  "conformable in her own measure" to the dictates of that  Pure Love which was the aspect of reality that she had seen. It is the  inner conviction that this conformity--this transcendence of the  unreal--is possible and indeed normal which upholds the mystic  during the terrible years of Purgation: so that "not only  without heaviness, but with a joy unmeasured he casts back all thing  that may him let."   [*396] 

[iv.iii-p14]To the true lover of the Absolute, Purgation no less  than Illumination is a privilege, a dreadful joy. It is an earnest of  increasing life. "Let me suffer or die!" said St. Teresa:  a strange alternative in the ears of common sense, but a forced option  in the spiritual sphere. However harsh its form, however painful the  activities to which it spurs him, the mystic recognizes in this  breakup of his old universe an essential part of the Great Work: and  the act in which he turns to it is an act of loving desire, no less  than an act of will. "Burning of love into a soul truly taken  all vices purgeth: . . . for whilst the true lover with strong and  fervent desire into God is borne, all things him displease that from  the sight of God withdrawn."   [*397]    His eyes once opened, he is eager for that costly ordering of his  disordered loves which alone can establish his correspondences with  Transcendental Life. "Teach me, my only joy," cries Suso,  "the way in which I may bear upon my body the marks of Thy  Love." "Come, my soul, depart from outward things and  gather thyself together into a true interior silence, that thou mayst  set out with all thy courage and bury and lose thyself in the desert  of a deep contrition."   [*398] 

[iv.iii-p17]It is in this torment of contrition, this acute  consciousness of unworthiness, that we have the first swing back of  the oscillating self from the initial state of mystic pleasure to the  complementary state of pain. It is, so to speak, on its transcendental  side, the reflex [p. 202] [iv.iii-Page_202] action which follows  the first touch of God. Thus, we read that Rulman Merswin,  "swept away by the transports of Divine Love," did not  surrender himself to the passive enjoyment of this first taste of  Absolute Being, but was impelled by it to diligent and instant  self-criticism. He was "seized with a hatred of his body, and  inflicted on himself such hard mortifications that he fell ill."   [*399]    It is useless for lovers of healthy-mindedness to resent this and  similar examples of self-examination and penance: to label them morbid  or mediaeval. The fact remains that only such bitter knowledge of  wrongness of relation, seen by the light of ardent love, can spur the  will of man to the hard task of readjustment.

[iv.iii-p19]"I saw full surely," says Julian of  Norwich, "that it behoveth needs to be that we should be in  longing and in penance, until the time that we be led so deep into God  that we verily and truly know our own soul."   [*400] 

[iv.iii-p21]Dante's whole journey up the Mount of Purgation  is the dramatic presentation of this one truth. So, too, the  celebrated description of Purgatory attributed to St. Catherine of  Genoa   [*401]    is obviously founded upon its author's inward experience of  this Purgative Way. In it, she applies to the souls of the dead her  personal consciousness of the necessity of purification; its place in  the organic process of spiritual growth. It is, as she acknowledges at  the beginning, the projection of her own psychological adventures upon  the background of the spiritual world: its substance being simply the  repetition after death of that eager and heroic acceptance of  suffering, those drastic acts of purification, which she has herself  been compelled to undertake under the whip of the same psychic  necessity--that of removing the rust of illusion, cleansing the  mirror in order that it may receive the divine light. "It  is," she says, "as with a covered object, the object  cannot respond to the rays of the sun, not because the sun ceases to  shine--for it shines without intermission--but because the  covering intervenes. Let the covering be destroyed, and again the  object will be exposed to the sun, and will answer to the rays which  beat against it in proportion as the work of destruction advances.  Thus the souls are covered by a rust--that is, by sin--which  is gradually consumed away by the fire of purgatory. The more it is  consumed, the more they respond to God their true Sun. Their happiness  increases as the rust falls off and lays them open to the divine ray .  . . the instinctive tendency to seek happiness in [p. 203] [iv.iii-Page_203] God develops itself, and goes on increasing  through the fire of love which draws it to its end with such  impetuosity and vehemence that any obstacle seems intolerable; and the  more clear its vision, the more extreme its pain."   [*402] 

[iv.iii-p24][iv.iii-p24.1]"Mostratene la via di  gire al monte!"  cry the souls of the newly-dead  in Dante's vision,   [*403]    pushed by that "instinctive tendency" towards the  purifying flames. Such a tendency, such a passionate desire, the  aspiring self must have. No cool, well-balanced knowledge of the need  of new adjustments will avail to set it on the Purgative Way. This is  a heroic act, and demands heroic passions in the soul.

[iv.iii-p26]"In order to overcome our desires," says  St. John of the Cross, who is the classic authority upon this portion  of the mystic quest, "and to renounce all those things, our love  and inclination for which are wont so to inflame the will that it  delights therein, we require a more ardent fire and a nobler  love--that of the Bridegroom. Finding her delight and strength in  Him, the soul gains the vigour and confidence which enable her easily  to abandon all other affections. It was necessary, in her struggle  with the attractive force of her sensual desires, not only to have  this love for the Bridegroom, but also to be filled with a burning  fervour, full of anguish . . . if our spiritual nature were not on  fire with other and nobler passions we should never cast off the yoke  of the senses, nor be able to enter on their night, neither should we  have the courage to remain in the darkness of all things, and in  denial of every desire."   [*404] 

[iv.iii-p28]"We must be filled with a burning fervour full  of anguish." Only this deep and ardent passion for a perceived  Object of Love can persuade the mystic to those unnatural acts of  abnegation by which he kills his lesser love of the world of sense,  frees himself from the "remora of desire," unifies all his  energies about the new and higher centre of his life. His business, I  have said, is transcendence: a mounting up, an attainment of a higher  order of reality. Once his eyes have been opened on Eternity, his  instinct for the Absolute roused from its sleep, he sees union with  that Reality as his duty no less than his joy: sees too, that this  union can only be consummated on a plane where illusion and selfhood  have no place.

[iv.iii-p29]The inward voice says to him perpetually, at the least  seasonable moments, [iv.iii-p29.1]"Dimitte omnia  transitoria, quaere aeterna."   [*405]    Hence the purgation of the senses, and of the character which they  have helped to build is always placed first in order in the Mystic  Way; though sporadic flashes of illumination and ecstasy may, and  often [p. 204] [iv.iii-Page_204] do, precede and accompany it.  Since spiritual no less than physical existence, as we know it, is an  endless Becoming, it too has no end. In a sense the whole of the  mystical experience in this life consists in a series of  purifications, whereby the Finite slowly approaches the nature of its  Infinite Source: climbing up the cleansing mountain pool by pool, like  the industrious fish in Rulman Merswin's vision, until it  reaches its Origin. The greatest of the contemplative saints, far from  leaving purgation behind them in their progress, were increasingly  aware of their own inadequateness, the nearer they approached to the  unitive state: for the true lover of the Absolute, like every other  lover, is alternately abased and exalted by his unworthiness and his  good fortune. There are moments of high rapture when he knows only  that the banner over him is Love: but there are others in which he  remains bitterly conscious that in spite of his uttermost surrender  there is within him an ineradicable residuum of selfhood, which  "stains the white radiance of eternity."

[iv.iii-p31]In this sense, then, purification is a perpetual  process. That which mystical writers mean, however, when they speak of  the Way of Purgation, is rather the slow and painful completion of  Conversion. It is the drastic turning of the self from the unreal to  the real life: a setting of her house in order, an orientation of the  mind to Truth. Its business is the getting rid, first of self-love;  and secondly of all those foolish interests in which the  surface-consciousness is steeped.

[iv.iii-p32]"The essence of purgation," says Richard  of St. Victor, "is self-simplification." Nothing can  happen until this has proceeded a certain distance: till the involved  interests and tangled motives of the self are simplified, and the  false complications of temporal life are recognized and cast away.

[iv.iii-p33]"No one," says another authority in this  matter, "can be enlightened unless he be first cleansed or  purified and stripped."   [*406]    Purgation, which is the remaking of character in conformity with  perceived reality, consists in these two essential acts: the cleansing  of that which is to remain, the stripping of that which is to be done  away. It may best be studied, therefore, in two parts: and I think  that it will be in the reader's interest if we reverse the order  which the "Theologia Germanica" adopts, and first consider  Negative Purification, or self-stripping, and next Positive  Purification, or character-adjustment. These, then, are the branches  into which this subject will here be split. (1) The Negative aspect,  the stripping or purging away of those superfluous, unreal, and  harmful things which dissipate the precious energies of the self. This  is the business of Poverty, or   Detachment   . (2) The Positive aspect: [p. 205] [iv.iii-Page_205] a raising to  their highest term, their purest state, of all that remains--the  permanent elements of character. This is brought about by   Mortification,    the gymnastic of the soul: a deliberate recourse to painful  experiences and difficult tasks.

   

[iv.iii-p34.1]I. Detachment

[iv.iii-p35]Apart from the plain necessity of casting out  imperfection and sin, what is the type of "good character"  which will best serve the self in its journey towards union with the  Absolute?

[iv.iii-p36]The mystics of all ages and all faiths agree in their  answer. Those three virtues which the instinct of the Catholic Church  fixed upon as the necessities of the cloistered life--the great  Evangelical counsel of voluntary Poverty with its departments,  Chastity, the poverty of the senses, and Obedience, the poverty of the  will--are also, when raised to their highest term and transmuted  by the Fire of Love, the essential virtues of the mystical quest.

[iv.iii-p37]By   Poverty    the mystic means an utter self-stripping, the casting off of  immaterial as well as material wealth, a complete detachment from all  finite things. By   Chastity    he means an extreme and limpid purity of soul, cleansed from personal  desire and virgin to all but God: by   Obedience,    that abnegation of selfhood, that mortification of the will, which  results in a complete self-abandonment, a "holy  indifference" to the accidents of life. These three aspects of  perfection are really one: linked together as irrevocably as the three  aspects of the self. Their common characteristic is this: they tend to  make the subject regard itself, not as an isolated and interesting  individual, possessing desires and rights, but as a scrap of the  Cosmos, an ordinary bit of the Universal Life, only important as a  part of the All, an expression of the Will Divine. Detachment and  purity go hand in hand, for purity is but detachment of the heart; and  where these are present they bring with them that humble spirit of  obedience which expresses detachment of will. We may therefore treat  them as three manifestations of one thing: which thing is Inward  Poverty. "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the  Kingdom of Heaven," is the motto of all pilgrims on this  road.

[iv.iii-p38]"God is pure Good in Himself," says  Eckhart, "therefore will He dwell nowhere but in a pure soul.  There He can pour Himself out: into that He can wholly flow. What is  Purity? It is that a man should have turned himself away from all  creatures and have set his heart so entirely on the Pure Good that no  creature is to him a comfort, that he has no desire for aught  creaturely, save so far as he may apprehend therein the Pure Good,  which is God. And as little as the bright eye can endure aught foreign  in it, so [p. 206] [iv.iii-Page_206] little can the pure soul bear  anything in it, any stain on it, that comes between it and God. To it  all creatures are pure to enjoy; for it enjoyeth all creatures in God,  and God in all creatures."   [*407] 

[iv.iii-p40]"To it all creatures are pure to enjoy!"  This is hardly the popular concept of the mystic; which credits him,  in the teeth of such examples as St. Francis, St. Mechthild of  Magdeburg, Rolle, Suso, and countless others, with a hearty dread of  natural things. Too many examples of an exaggerated  asceticism--such as the unfortunate story told of the holy  Cure d'Ars, who refused to smell a rose for fear of  sin--have supported in this respect the vulgar belief; for it is  generally forgotten that though most mystics have practised asceticism  as a means to an end, all ascetics are not mystics. Whatever may be  the case with other deniers of the senses, it is true that the soul of  the great mystic, dwelling on high levels of reality, his eyes set on  the Transcendental World, is capable of combining with the perfection  of detachment that intense and innocent joy in natural things, as  veils and vessels of the divine, which results from seeing "all  creatures in God and God in all creatures." "Whoso knows  and loves the nobleness of My Freedom," said the voice of God to  Mechthild of Magdeburg, "cannot bear to love Me alone, he must  love also Me in the creatures."   [*408]    That all-embracing love is characteristic of the illumination which  results from a faithful endurance of the Purgative Way; for the  corollary of "blessed are the pure in heart" is not merely  a poetic statement. The annals of mysticism prove it to be a  psychological law.

[iv.iii-p42]How then is this contradiction to be resolved: that  the mystic who has declared the fundamental necessity of  "leaving all creatures" yet finds them pure to enjoy? The  answer to the riddle lies in the ancient paradox of Poverty: that we  only enjoy true liberty in respect of such things as we neither  possess nor desire. "That thou mayest have pleasure in  everything, seek pleasure in nothing. That thou mayest know  everything, seek to know nothing. That thou mayest possess all things,  seek to possess nothing. . . . In detachment the spirit finds quiet  and repose, for coveting nothing, nothing wearies it by elation, and  nothing oppresses it by dejection, because it stands in the centre of  its own humility. For as soon as it covets anything, it is immediately  fatigued thereby."   [*409] 

[iv.iii-p44]It is not love but lust--the possessive case, the  very food of selfhood--which poisons the relation between the  self and the external world and "immediately fatigues" the  soul. Divide the world into "mine" and "not  mine," and unreal standards are [p. 207] [iv.iii-Page_207]  set up, claims and cravings begin to fret the mind. We are the slaves  of our own property. We drag with us not a treasure, but a chain.  "Behold," says the "Theologia Germanica,"  "on this sort must we cast all things from us and strip  ourselves of them: we must refrain from claiming anything for our own.  When we do this, we shall have the best, fullest, clearest, and  noblest knowledge that a man can have, and also the noblest and purest  love and desire."   [*410]    "Some there are," says Plotinus, "that for all  their effort have not attained the Vision. . . . They have received  the authentic Light, all their soul has gleamed as they have drawn  near, but they come with a load on their shoulders which holds them  back from the place of Vision. They have not ascended in the pure  integrity of their being, but are burdened with that which keeps them  apart. They are not yet made one within."   [*411]    Accept Poverty, however, demolish ownership, the verb "to  have" in every mood and tense, and this downward drag is at an  end. At once the Cosmos belongs to you, and you to it. You escape the  heresy of separateness, are "made one," and merged in  "the greater life of the All." Then, a free spirit in a  free world, the self moves upon its true orbit; undistracted by the  largely self-imposed needs and demands of ordinary earthly  existence.

[iv.iii-p47]This was the truth which St. Francis of Assisi  grasped, and applied with the energy of a reformer and the delicate  originality of a poet to every circumstance of the inner and the outer  life. This noble liberty it is which is extolled by his spiritual  descendant, Jacopone da Todi, in one of his most magnificent  odes:--

   [iv.iii-p47.1] "Poverta, alto  sapere,
   a nulla cosa sojacere,
   en desprezo possedere
   tutte le cose create. . . .
   Dio non alberga en core stretto,
   tant'e grande quant' hai  affetto,
   povertate ha si gran petto
   che ci alberga deitate. . . .
   Povertate e nulla avere
   e nulla cosa poi volere;
   ad omne cosa possedere
   en spirito de libertate."   [*412]  
  [iv.iii-p51][p. 208] [iv.iii-Page_208] "My little  sisters the birds," said St. Francis, greatest adept of that  high wisdom, "Brother Sun, Sister Water, Mother Earth."   [*413]    Not my servants, but my kindred and fellow-citizens; who may safely  be loved so long as they are not desired. So, in almost identical  terms, the dying Hindu ascetic:--

   [iv.iii-p52.1] "Oh Mother Earth, Father Sky,
   Brother Wind, Friend Light, Sweetheart Water,
   Here take my last salutation with folded hands!
   For to-day I am melting away into the Supreme
   Because my heart became pure,
   And all delusion vanished,
   Through the power of your good company."
  [iv.iii-p53]It is the business of Lady Poverty to confer on her  lovers this freedom of the Universe, to eradicate delusion, cut out  the spreading growth of claimfulness, purify the heart, and initiate  them into the "great life of the All." Well might St.  Francis desire marriage with that enchantress, who gives back ten-fold  all that she takes away. "Holy poverty," he said,  "is a treasure so high excelling and so divine that we be not  worthy to lay it up in our vile vessels; since this is that celestial  virtue whereby all earthly things and fleeting are trodden underfoot,  and whereby all hindrances are lifted from the soul, so that freely  she may join herself to God Eternal."   [*414] 

[iv.iii-p55]Poverty, then, prepares man's spirit for that  union with God to which it aspires. She strips off the clothing which  he so often mistakes for himself, transvaluates all his values, and  shows him things as they are. "There are," says Eckhart,  "four ascending degrees of such spiritual poverty. 1. The  soul's contempt of all things that are not God. 2. Contempt of  herself and her own works. 3. Utter self-abandonment. 4. Self-loss in  the incomprehensible Being of God."   [*415]    So, in the "Sacrum Commercium," when the friars, climbing  "the steeps of the hill," found Lady Poverty at the summit  "enthroned only in her nakedness," she "preventing  them with the blessings of sweetness," said, "Why hasten  ye so from the vale of tears to the mount of light? If, peradventure,  it is me that ye seek, lo, I am but as you behold, a little poor one,  stricken with storms and far from any consolation." Whereto the  brothers answer, "  Only admit us to thy peace; and we shall be saved   ."   [*416] 

[iv.iii-p58]The same truth: the saving peace of utter detachment  from everything but Divine Reality--a detachment which makes  those [p. 209] [iv.iii-Page_209] who have it the citizens of the  world, and enabled the friars to say to Lady Poverty as they showed  her from the hill of Assisi the whole countryside at her feet,  [iv.iii-p58.1]"Hoc est claustrum nostrum,  Domina,"   [*417]   --is taught by Meister Eckhart in a more homely parable.

[iv.iii-p60]"There was a learned man who, eight years long,  desired that God would show him a man who would teach him the truth.  And once when he felt a very great longing, a voice from God came to  him and said, 'Go to the church, and there shalt thou find a man  who shalt show thee the way to blessedness.' And he went thence  and found a poor man whose feet were torn and covered with dust and  dirt: and all his clothes were hardly worth three farthings. And he  greeted him, saying:--

[iv.iii-p61]"'God give you good day!'

[iv.iii-p62]"He answered: 'I have never had a bad  day.'

[iv.iii-p63]"'God give you good luck.'

[iv.iii-p64]"'I have never had ill luck.'

[iv.iii-p65]"'May you be happy! but why do you answer  me thus?'

[iv.iii-p66]"'I have never been unhappy.'

[iv.iii-p67]"'Pray explain this to me, for I cannot  understand it.'

[iv.iii-p68]"The poor man answered, 'Willingly. You  wished me good day. I never had a bad day; for if I am hungry I praise  God; if it freezes, hails, snows, rains, if the weather is fair or  foul, still I praise God; am I wretched and despised, I praise God,  and so I have never had an evil day. You wished that God would send me  luck. But I never had ill luck, for I know how to live with God, and I  know that what He does is best; and what God gives me or ordains for  me, be it good or ill, I take it cheerfully from God as the best that  can be, and so I have never had ill luck. You wished that God would  make me happy. I was never unhappy; for my only desire is to live in  God's will, and I have so entirely yielded my will to  God's, that what God wills, I will.'

[iv.iii-p69]"'But if God should will to cast you into  hell,' said the learned man, 'what would you do  then?'

[iv.iii-p70]"'Cast me into hell? His goodness forbids!  But if He did cast me into hell, I should have two arms to embrace  Him. One arm is true humility, that I should lay beneath Him, and be  thereby united to His holy humanity. And with the right arm of love,  which is united with His holy divinity, I should so embrace Him that  He would have to go to hell with me. And I would rather be in hell and  have God, then in heaven and not have God.'

[iv.iii-p71]"Then the Master understood that true  abandonment with utter humility is the nearest way to God.

[iv.iii-p72]"The Master asked further: 'Whence are you  come?' [p. 210] [iv.iii-Page_210]

[iv.iii-p73]"'From God.'

[iv.iii-p74]"'Where did you find God?'

[iv.iii-p75]"'When I forsook all creatures.'

[iv.iii-p76]"'Where have you left God?'

[iv.iii-p77]"'In pure hearts, and in men of good  will.'

[iv.iii-p78]"The Master asked: 'What sort of man are  you?'

[iv.iii-p79]"'I am a king.'

[iv.iii-p80]"'Where is your kingdom?'

[iv.iii-p81]"'My soul is my kingdom, for I can so rule  my senses inward and outward, that all the desires and power of my  soul are in subjection, and this kingdom is greater than a kingdom on  earth.'   [*418] 

[iv.iii-p83]"'What brought you to this  perfection?'

[iv.iii-p84]"'My silence, my high thoughts, and my  union with God. For I could not rest in anything that was less than  God. Now I have found God; and in God have eternal rest and  peace.'"   [*419] 

[iv.iii-p86]Poverty, then, consists in a breaking down of  man's inveterate habit of trying to rest in, or take seriously,  things which are "less than God":   i.e.   , which do not possess the character of reality. Such a habit is the  most fertile of all causes of "world-weariness,"  disillusion and unrest: faults, or rather spiritual diseases, which  the mystics never exhibit, but which few who are without all mystic  feeling can hope to escape. Hence the sharpened perceptions of the  contemplatives have always seen poverty as a counsel of prudence, a  higher form of common sense. It was not with St. Francis, or any other  great mystic, a first principle, an end in itself. It was rather a  logical deduction from the first principle of their science--the  paramount importance to the soul of an undistracted vision of  reality.

[iv.iii-p87]Here East and West are in agreement: "Their  science," says Al Ghazzali of the Sufis, who practised, like the  early Franciscans, a complete renunciation of worldly goods,  "has for its object the uprooting from the soul of all violent  passions, the extirpation from it of vicious desires and evil  qualities; so that the heart may become detached from all that is not  God, and give itself for its only occupation meditation upon the  Divine Being."   [*420] 

[iv.iii-p89]All those who have felt themselves urged towards the  attainment of this transcendental vision, have found that possessions  interrupt the view; that claims, desires, attachments become centres  of conflicting interest in the mind. They assume a false air of  importance, force themselves upon the attention, and complicate [p. 211] [iv.iii-Page_211] life. Hence, in the interest of  self-simplification, they must be cleared away: a removal which  involves for the real enthusiast little more sacrifice than the weekly  visit of the dustman. "Having entirely surrendered my own  free-will," says Al Ghazzali of his personal experience,"  my heart no longer felt any distress in renouncing fame, wealth, or  the society of my children."   [*421] 

[iv.iii-p91]Others have reconciled self-surrender with a more  moderate abandonment of outward things; for possessions take different  rank for almost every human soul. The true rule of poverty consists in  giving up those things which enchain the spirit, divide its interests,  and deflect it on its road to God--whether these things be  riches, habits, religious observances, friends, interests, distastes,  or desires--not in mere outward destitution for its own sake. It  is attitude, not act, that matters; self-denudation would be  unnecessary were it not for our inveterate tendency to attribute false  value to things the moment they become our own. "What is poverty  of spirit but meekness of mind, by which a man knows his own  infirmity?" says Rolle, "seeing that to perfect stableness  he may not come but by the grace of God, all thing that him might let  from that grace he forsakes, and only in joy of his Maker he sets his  desire. And as of one root spring many branches, so of wilful poverty  on this wise taken proceed virtues and marvels untrowed. Not as some,  that change their clothes and not their souls; riches soothly it seems  these forsake, and vices innumerable they cease not to gather. . . .  If thou truly all thing for God forsake,   see more what thou despised than what thou forsaketh.   "   [*422] 

[iv.iii-p93]The Poverty of the mystics, then, is a mental rather  than a material state. Detachment of the will from all desire of  possessions is the inner reality, of which Franciscan poverty is a  sacrament to the world. It is the poor in spirit, not the poor in  substance, who are to be spiritually blessed. "Let all things be  forsaken of me," says Gerlac Petersen, "so that being poor  I may be able in great inward spaciousness, and without any hurt, to  suffer want of all those things which the mind of man can desire; out  of or excepting God Himself."   [*423] 

[iv.iii-p95]"The soul," says St. John of the Cross,  "is not empty, so long as the desire for sensible things  remains. But the absence of this desire for things produces emptiness  and liberty of soul; even when there is an abundance of  possessions."   [*424] 

[iv.iii-p97]Every person in whom the mystical instinct awakes soon  discovers in himself certain tastes or qualities which interrupt the  [p. 212] [iv.iii-Page_212] development of that instinct. Often  these tastes and qualities are legitimate enough upon their own plane;  but they are a drain upon the energy of the self, preventing her from  attaining that intenser life for which she was made and which demands  her undivided zest. They distract her attention, fill the field of  perception, stimulate her instinctive life: making of the  surface-consciousness so active a thing that it can hardly be put to  sleep. "Where can he have that pure and naked vision of  unchangeable Truth whereby he see into all things," says  Petersen again, "who is so busied in other things, not perhaps  evil, which operate . . . upon his thoughts and imagination and  confuse and enchain his mind . . . that his sight of that unique One  in Whom all things are is overclouded?"   [*425] 

[iv.iii-p99]The nature of these distracting factors which  "confuse and enchain the mind" will vary with almost every  individual. It is impossible to predict what those things will be  which a self must give up, in order that the transcendental  consciousness may grow. "It makes little difference whether a  bird be held by a slender thread or by a rope; the bird is bound, and  cannot fly until the cord that holds it is broken. It is true that a  slender thread is more easily broken; still notwithstanding, if it is  not broken the bird cannot fly. This is the state of a soul with  particular attachments: it never can attain to the liberty of the  divine union, whatever virtues it may possess. Desires and attachments  affect the soul as the remora is said to affect a ship; that is but a  little fish, yet when it clings to the vessel it effectually hinders  its progress."   [*426] 

[iv.iii-p101]Thus each adventurer must discover and extirpate all  those interests which nourish selfhood, however innocent or even  useful these interests may seem in the eyes of the world. The only  rule is the ruthless abandonment of everything which is in the way.  "When any man God perfectly desires to love, all things as well  inward as outward that to God's love are contrary and from His  love do let, he studies to do away."   [*427]    This may mean the prompt and utter self-stripping of St. Francis of  Assisi, who cast off his actual clothing in his relentless  determination to have nothing of his own:   [*428]    the reluctant bit-by-bit renunciations which at last set his follower  Angela of Foligno free, or the drastic proceedings of Antoinette  Bourignan, who found that a penny was enough to keep her from God.

[iv.iii-p104]"Being one night in a most profound  Penitence," says the biographer of this extraordinary woman,  "she said from the bottom [p. 213] [iv.iii-Page_213] of her  Heart, 'O my Lord! what must I do to please Thee? For I have  nobody to teach me. Speak to my soul and it will hear  Thee.'" At that instant she heard, as if another had  spoken within her "Forsake all earthly things. Separate thyself  from the love of the creatures. Deny thyself." From this time,  the more she entered into herself the more she was inclined to abandon  all. But she had not the courage necessary for the complete  renunciation towards which her transcendental consciousness was  pressing her. She struggled to adjust herself to the inner and the  outer life, but without success. For such a character as hers,  compromise was impossible. "She asked always earnestly, When  shall I be perfectly thine, O my God? and she thought He still  answered her,   When thou shalt no longer possess anything, and shalt die to  thyself.    And where shall I do that, Lord? He answered,   In the Desert."    At last the discord between her deeper and her superficial self  became intolerable. Reinforced by the miseries of an unsympathetic  home, still more by a threat of approaching marriage, the impulse to  renunciation got its way. She disguised herself in a hermit's  dress--she was only eighteen, and had no one to help or advise  her--and "went out of her chamber about Four in the  Morning, taking nothing but one Penny to buy Bread for that Day and it  being said to her in the going out,   Where is thy Faith? In a Penny?    she threw it away. . . . Thus she went away wholly delivered from the  heavy burthen of the Cares and Good Things of this World."   [*429] 

[iv.iii-p106]An admirable example of the mystic's attitude  towards the soul-destroying division of interests, the natural but  hopeless human struggle to make the best of both worlds, which sucks  at its transcendental vitality, occurs in St. Teresa's purgative  period. In her case this war between the real and the superficial self  extended over many years; running side by side with the state of  Illumination, and a fully developed contemplative life. At last it was  brought to an end by a "Second Conversion" which unified  her scattered interests and set her firmly and for ever on the Unitive  Way. The virile strength of Teresa's character, which afterwards  contributed to the greatness of her achievement, opposed the invading  transcendental consciousness; disputed every inch of territory;  resisted every demand made upon it by the growing spiritual self. Bit  by bit it was conquered, the sphere of her deeper life enlarged; until  the moment came in which she surrendered, once for all, to her true  destiny.   [*430]    [p. 214] [iv.iii-Page_214]

[iv.iii-p108]During the years of inward stress, of penance and  growing knowledge of the Infinite, which she spent in the Convent of  the Incarnation, and which accompanied this slow remaking of  character, Teresa's only self-indulgence--as it seems, a  sufficiently innocent one--was talking to the friends who came  down from Avila to the convent-parlour, and spoke to her through the   grille.    Her confessors, unaccustomed to the education of mystical genius, saw  nothing incompatible between this practice and the pursuit of a high  contemplative life. But as her transcendental consciousness, her  states of orison grew stronger, Teresa felt more and more the  distracting influence of these glimpses of the outer world. They were  a drain upon the energy which ought to be wholly given to that new,  deep, more real life which she felt stirring within her, and which  could only hope to achieve its mighty destiny by complete  concentration upon the business in hand. No genius can afford to  dissipate his energies: the mystic genius least of all. Teresa knew  that so long as she retained these personal satisfactions, her life  had more than one focus; she was not whole-hearted in her surrender to  the Absolute. But though her inward voices, her deepest instincts,  urged her to give them up, for years she felt herself incapable of  such a sacrifice. It was round the question of their retention or  surrender that the decisive battle of her life was fought.

[iv.iii-p109]"The devil," says her great Augustinian  eulogist, Fray Luis de Leon, in his vivid account of these long  interior struggles, "put before her those persons most  sympathetic by nature; and God came, and in the midst of the  conversation discovered Himself aggrieved and sorrowful. The devil  delighted in the conversation and pastime, but when she turned her  back on them and betook herself to prayer, God redoubled the delight  and favours, as if to show her how false was the lure which charmed  her at the grating, and that His sweetness was the veritable  sweetness. . . . So that these two inclinations warred with each other  in the breast of this blessed woman, and the authors who inspired them  each did his utmost to inflame her most, and the oratory blotted out  what the grating wrote, and at times the grating vanquished and  diminished the good fruit produced by prayer, causing agony and grief  which disquieted and perplexed her soul: for though she was resolved  to belong entirely to God, she knew not how to shake herself free from  the world: and at times she persuaded herself that she could enjoy  both, which ended mostly, as she says, in complete enjoyment of  neither. For the amusements of the locutorio were embittered and  turned into wormwood by the memory of the secret and sweet intimacy  with God; and in the same way when she retired to be with God, and  commenced to speak with Him, [p. 215] [iv.iii-Page_215] the  affections and thoughts which she carried with her from the grating  took possession of her."   [*431] 

[iv.iii-p111]Compare with these violent oscillations between the  superficial and mystical consciousness--characteristic of  Teresa's strong volitional nature, which only came to rest after  psychic convulsions which left no corner of its being  unexplored--the symbolic act of renunciation under which  Antoinette Bourignan's "interior self" vanquished  the surface intelligence and asserted its supremacy. Teresa must give  up her passionate delight in human friendship. Antoinette, never much  tempted in that direction, must give up her last penny. What society  was to Teresa's generous, energetic nature, prudence was to the  temperamentally shrewd and narrow Antoinette: a distraction, a check  on the development of the all-demanding transcendental genius, an  unconquered relic of the "lower life."

[iv.iii-p112]Many a mystic, however, has found the perfection of  detachment to be consistent with a far less drastic renunciation of  external things than that which these women felt to be essential to  their peace. The test, as we have seen, does not lie in the nature of  the things which are retained, but in the reaction which they  stimulate in the self. "Absolute poverty is thine," says  Tauler, "when thou canst not remember whether anybody has ever  owed thee or been indebted to thee for anything; just as all things  will be forgotten by thee in the last journey of death."   [*432]    Poverty, in this sense, may be consistent with the habitual and  automatic use of luxuries which the abstracted self never even  perceives. Thus we are told that St. Bernard was reproached by his  enemies with the inconsistency of preaching evangelical poverty whilst  making his journeys from place to place on a magnificently caparisoned  mule, which had been lent to him by the Cluniac monks. He expressed  great contrition: but said that he had never noticed what it was that  he rode upon.   [*433] 

[iv.iii-p115]Sometimes, the very activity which one self has  rejected as an impediment becomes for another the channel of spiritual  perception. I have mentioned the Cure d'Ars, who, among  other inhibitions, refused to allow himself to smell a rose. Yet St.  Francis preached to the flowers,   [*434]    and ordered a plot to be set aside for their cultivation when the  convent garden was made, "in order that all who saw them might  remember the Eternal Sweetness."   [*435]    [p. 216] [iv.iii-Page_216] So, too, we are told of his spiritual  daughter, St. Douceline, that "out of doors one day with her  sisters, she heard a bird's note. 'What a lovely  song!' she said: and the song drew her straight way to God. Did  they bring her a flower,   its      beauty had a like effect   ."   [*436]    "To look on trees, water, and flowers," says St. Teresa  of her own beginnings of contemplation, "helped her to recollect  the Presence of God."   [*437]    Here we are reminded of Plato. "The true order of going is to  use the beauties of Earth as steps along which one mounts upwards for  the sake of that other Beauty." This, too, is the true order of  Holy Poverty: the selfless use, not the selfish abuse of lovely and  natural things.

[iv.iii-p120]To say that some have fallen short of this difficult  ideal and taken refuge in mere abnegation is but to say that  asceticism is a human, not a superhuman art, and is subject to  "the frailty of the creature." But on the whole, these  excesses are mainly found amongst saintly types who have not exhibited  true mystic intuition. This intuition, entailing as it does communion  with intensest Life, gives to its possessors a sweet sanity, a  delicate balance, which guards them, as a rule, from such conceptions  of chastity as that of the youthful saint who shut himself in a  cupboard for fear he should see his mother pass by: from the obedience  which identifies the voice of the director with the voice of God; from  detachment such as that exhibited by the Blessed Angela of Foligno,  who, though a true mystic, viewed with almost murderous satisfaction  the deaths of relatives who were "impediments."   [*438]    The detachment of the mystic is just a restoration to the liberty in  which the soul was made: it is a state of joyous humility in which he  cries, "Nought I am, nought I have, nought I lack." To  have arrived at this is to have escaped from the tyranny of selfhood:  to be initiated into the purer air of that universe which knows but  one rule of action--that which was laid down once for all by St.  Augustine when he said, in the most memorable and misquoted of  epigrams: "Love, and do what you like."

   

[iv.iii-p121.1]2. Mortification

[iv.iii-p122]By mortification, I have said, is to be understood the  positive aspect of purification: the remaking in relation to reality  of the permanent elements of character. These elements, so far, have  [p. 217] [iv.iii-Page_217] subserved the interests of the old  self, worked for it in the world of sense. Now they must be adjusted  to the needs of the new self and to the transcendent world in which it  moves. Their focal point is the old self; the "natural  man" and his self-regarding instincts and desires. The object of  mortification is to kill that old self, break up his egoistic  attachments and cravings, in order that the higher centre, the  "new man," may live and breathe. As St. Teresa discovered  when she tried to reconcile the claims of worldly friendships and  contemplation, one or other must go: a house divided against itself  cannot stand. "Who hinders thee more," says Thomas a  Kempis, "than the unmortified affections of thy own heart? . . .  if we were perfectly dead unto ourselves, and not entangled within our  own breasts, then should we be able to taste Divine things, and to  have some experience of heavenly contemplation."   [*439] 

[iv.iii-p124]In psychological language, the process of  mortification is the process of setting up "new paths of neural  discharge." That is to say, the mystic life has got to express  itself in action: and for this new paths must be cut and new habits  formed--all, in spite of the new self's enthusiasm,  "against the grain"--resulting in a complete  sublimation of personality. The energy which wells up incessantly in  every living being must abandon the old road of least resistance and  discharge itself in a new and more difficult way. In the terms of the  hormic psychology, the conative drive of the psyche must be  concentrated on new objectives; and the old paths, left to themselves,  must fade and die. When they are dead, and the new life has triumphed,  Mortification is at an end. The mystics always know when this moment  comes. Often an inner voice then warns them to lay their active  penances aside.

[iv.iii-p125]Since the greater and stronger the mystic, the  stronger and more stubborn his character tends to be, this change of  life and turning of energy from the old and easy channels to the new  is often a stormy matter. It is a period of actual battle between the  inharmonious elements of the self, its lower and higher springs of  action: of toil, fatigue, bitter suffering, and many disappointments.  Nevertheless, in spite of its etymological associations, the object of  mortification is not death but life: the production of health and  strength, the health and strength of the human consciousness viewed  [iv.iii-p125.1]  sub specie aeternitatis     .    "In the truest death of all created things, the sweetest and  most natural life is hidden."   [*440] 

[iv.iii-p127]"This dying," says Tauler again,  "has many degrees, and so has this life. A man might die a  thousand deaths in one day and find at once a joyful life  corresponding to each of them. This is as [p. 218] [iv.iii-Page_218] it must be: God cannot deny or refuse this to  death. The stronger the death the more powerful and thorough is the  corresponding life; the more intimate the death, the more inward is  the life. Each life brings strength, and strengthens to a harder  death. When a man dies to a scornful word, bearing it in God's  name, or to some inclination inward or outward, acting or not acting  against his own will, be it in love or grief, in word or act, in going  or staying; or if he denies his desires of taste or sight, or makes no  excuses when wrongfully accused; or anything else, whatever it may be,  to which he has not yet died, it is harder at first to one who is  unaccustomed to it and unmortified than to him who is mortified. . . .  A great life makes reply to him who dies in earnest even in the least  things, a life which strengthens him immediately to die a greater  death; a death so long and strong, that it seems to him hereafter more  joyful, good and pleasant to die than to live, for he finds life in  death and light shining in darkness."   [*441] 

[iv.iii-p129]No more than detachment, then, is mortification an end  in itself. It is a process, an education directed towards the  production of a definite kind of efficiency, the adjustment of human  nature to the demands of its new life. Severe, and to the outsider  apparently unmeaning--like their physical parallels the exercises  of the gymnasium--its disciplines, faithfully accepted, do  release the self from the pull of the lower nature, establish it on  new levels of freedom and power. "Mortification," says the  Benedictine contemplative Augustine Baker, "tends to subject the  body to the spirit and the spirit to God. And this it does by crossing  the inclinations of sense, which are quite contrary to those of the  Divine Spirit . . . by such crossing and afflicting of the body,  self-love and self-will (the poison of our spirits) are abated, and in  time in a sort destroyed; and instead of them there enter into the  soul the Divine love and Divine will, and take possession  thereof."   [*442]    This transformation accomplished, mortification may end, and often  does, with startling abruptness. After a martyrdom which lasted  sixteen years, says Suso--speaking as usual in the third  person--of his own experience, "On a certain Whitsun Day a  heavenly messenger appeared to him, and ordered him in God's  name to continue it no more. He at once ceased, and threw all the  instruments of his sufferings [irons, nails, hair-shirt, etc.] into a  river."   [*443]    From this time onward, austerities of this sort had no part in  Suso's life.

[iv.iii-p132]The Franco-Flemish mystic who wrote, and the English  contemplative [p. 219] [iv.iii-Page_219] who translated,  "The Mirror of Simple Souls," have between them described  and explained in bold and accurate language the conditions under which  the soul is enabled to abandon that "hard service of the  virtues" which has absorbed it during the Purgative Way. The  statement of the "French Book" is direct and  uncompromising: well calculated to startle timid piety.  "Virtues, I take leave of you for evermore!" exclaims the  Soul. "Now shall mine heart be more free and more in peace than  it hath been before. I wot well your service is too travaillous. . . .  Some time I laid mine heart in you without any dissevering: ye wot  well this: I was in all things to you obedient. O I was then your  servant, but now I am delivered out of your thraldom."

[iv.iii-p133]To this astounding utterance the English translator  has added a singularly illuminating gloss. "I am stirred  here," he says, "to say more to the matter, as thus:  First: when a soul giveth her to perfection, she laboureth busily day  and night to get virtues, by counsel of reason, and striveth with  vices at every thought, at every word and deed that she perceiveth  cometh of them, and busily searcheth vices, them to destroy. Thus the  virtues be mistresses, and every virtue maketh her to war with its  contrary, the which be vices. Many sharp pains and bitterness of  conscience feeleth the soul in this war. . . . But so long one may  bite on the bitter bark of the nut, that at last he shall come to the  sweet kernel. Right so, ghostly to understand, it fareth by these  souls that be come to peace. They have so long striven with vices and  wrought by virtues, that they be come to the nut kernel, that is, to  the love of God, which is sweetness. And when the soul hath deeply  tasted this love, so that this love of God worketh and hath his usages  in her soul, then the soul is wondrous light and gladsome. . . . Then  is she mistress and lady over the virtues, for she hath them all  within herself. . . . And then this soul taketh leave of virtues, as  of the thraldom and painful travail of them that she had before, and  now she is lady and sovereign, and they be subjects."   [*444] 

[iv.iii-p135]Jacopone da Todi speaks to the same effect:--

   [iv.iii-p135.1] "La guerra e  terminata
   de le virtu battaglia,
   de la mente travaglia
   cosa nulla contende".   [*445]  
  [iv.iii-p137]Thus, St. Catherine of Genoa, after a penitential  period of four years, during which she was haunted by a constant sense  of sin, and occupied by incessant mortifications, found that  "all thought [p. 220] [iv.iii-Page_220] of such  mortifications was   in an instant    taken from her mind: in such a manner that, had she even wished to  continue such mortifications, she would have been unable to do so . .  . the sight of her sins was now taken from her mind, so that  henceforth she did not catch a glimpse of them: it was as though they  had all been cast into the depths of the sea."   [*446]    In other words, the new and higher centre of consciousness, finally  established, asserted itself and annihilated the old. [iv.iii-p138.1]"La guerra e teminata,"all  the energy of a strong nature flows freely in the new channels; and  mortification ceases, mechanically, to be possible to the now unified,  sublimated, or "regenerated" self.

[iv.iii-p139]Mortification takes its name from the reiterated  statement of all ascetic writers that the senses, or "body of  desire," with the cravings which are excited by different  aspects of the phenomenal world, must be mortified or killed; which  is, of course, a description of psychological necessities from their  special point of view. All those self-regarding instincts--so  ingrained that they have become automatic--which impel the self  to choose the more comfortable part, are seen by the awakened  intuition of the embryo mystic as gross infringements of the law of  love. "This is the travail that a man behoveth, to draw out his  heart and his mind from the fleshly love and the liking of all earthly  creatures, from vain thoughts and from fleshly imaginations, and out  from the love and the vicious feeling of himself, that his soul should  find no rest in no fleshly thought, nor earthly affection."   [*447]    The rule of Poverty must be applied to the temper of normal  consciousness as well as to the tastes and possessions of the self.  Under this tonic influence, real life will thrive, unreal life will  wither and die.

[iv.iii-p141]This mortifying process is necessary, not because the  legitimate exercise of the senses is opposed to Divine Reality, but  because those senses have usurped a place beyond their station; become  the focus of energy, steadily drained the vitality of the self.  "The dogs have taken the children's meat." The  senses have grown stronger than their masters, monopolized the field  of perception, dominated an organism which was made for greater  activities, and built up those barriers of individuality which must be  done away if true personality is to be achieved, and with it some  share in the boundless life of the One. It is thanks to this wrong  distribution of energy, this sedulous feeding of the cuckoo in the  nest, that "in order to approach the Absolute, mystics must  withdraw from everything, even themselves."   [*448]    "The soul is plunged in utter [p. 221] [iv.iii-Page_221]  ignorance, when she supposes that she can attain to the high estate of  union with God before she casts away the desire of all things, natural  and supernatural, which she may possess," says St. John of the  Cross, "because the distance between them and that which takes  place in the state of pure transformation in God is infinite."   [*449]    Again, "until the desires be lulled to sleep by the  mortification of sensuality, and sensuality itself be mortified in  them, so that it shall war against the spirit no more, the soul cannot  go forth in perfect liberty to union with the Beloved."   [*450] 

[iv.iii-p145]The death of selfhood in its narrow individualistic  sense is, then, the primary object of mortification. All the twisted  elements of character which foster the existence of this unreal yet  complex creature are to be pruned away. Then, as with the trees of the  forest, so with the spirit of man, strong new branches will spring  into being, grow towards air and light. "I live, yet not  I" is to be the declaration of the mystic who has endured this  "bodily death." The self-that-is-to-be will live upon a  plane where her own prejudices and preferences are so uninteresting as  to be imperceptible. She must be weaned from these nursery toys: and  weaning is a disagreeable process. The mystic, however, undertakes it  as a rule without reluctance: pushed by his vivid consciousness of  imperfection, his intuition of a more perfect state, necessary to the  fulfilment of his love. Often his entrance upon the torments of the  Purgative Way, his taking up of the spiritual or material instruments  of mortification, resembles in ardour and abruptness that  "heroic plunge into Purgatory" of the newly dead when it  perceives itself in the light of Love Divine, which is described in  the "Treatise" of St. Catherine of Genoa as its nearest  equivalent. "As she, plunged in the divine furnace of purifying  love, was united to the Object of her love, and satisfied with all he  wrought in her, so she understood it to be with the souls in  Purgatory."   [*451] 

[iv.iii-p147]This "divine furnace of purifying love"  demands from the ardent soul a complete self-surrender, and voluntary  turning from all impurity, a humility of the most far-reaching kind:  and this means the deliberate embrace of active suffering, a  self-discipline in dreadful tasks. As gold in the refiner's  fire, so "burning of love into a soul truly taken all vices  purgeth." Detachment may be a counsel of prudence, a practical  result of seeing the true values of things; but the pain of  mortification is seized as a splendid opportunity, a love token,  timidly offered by the awakened spirit to that all-demanding Lover  from Whom St. Catherine of Siena heard the terrible words "I,  Fire, the Acceptor of sacrifices, ravishing [p. 222] [iv.iii-Page_222] away from them their darkness, give the  light."   [*452]    "Suffering is the ancient law of love," says the Eternal  Wisdom to Suso, "there is no quest without pain, there is no  lover who is not also a martyr. Hence it is inevitable that he who  would love so high a thing as Wisdom should sometimes suffer  hindrances and griefs."   [*453] 

[iv.iii-p150]The mystics have a profound conviction that Creation,  Becoming, Transcendence, is a painful process at the best. Those who  are Christians point to the Passion of Christ as a proof that the  cosmic journey to perfection, the path of the Eternal Wisdom, follows  of necessity the Way of the Cross. That law of the inner life, which  sounds so fantastic and yet is so bitterly true--"No  progress without pain"--asserts itself. It declares that  birth pangs must be endured in the spiritual as well as in the  material world: that adequate training must always hurt the athlete.  Hence the mystics' quest of the Absolute drives them to an eager  and heroic union with the reality of suffering, as well as with the  reality of joy.   [*454] 

[iv.iii-p152]This divine necessity of pain, this necessary sharing  in the travail of a World of Becoming, is beautifully described by  Tauler in one of those "internal conversations" between  the contemplative soul and its God, which abound in the works of the  mystics and are familiar to all readers of "The Imitation of  Christ." "A man once thought," says Tauler,  "that God drew some men even by pleasant paths, while other were  drawn by the path of pain. Our Lord answered him thus, 'What  think ye can be pleasanter or nobler than to be made most like unto  Me? that is by suffering. Mark, to whom was ever offered such a  troubled life as to Me? And in whom can I better work in accordance  with My true nobility than in those who are most like Me? They are the  men who suffer. . . . Learn that My divine nature never worked so  nobly in human nature as by suffering; and because suffering is so  efficacious, it is sent out of great love. I understand the weakness  of human nature at all times, and out of love and righteousness I lay  no heavier load on man than he can bear. The crown must be firmly  [p. 223] [iv.iii-Page_223] pressed down that is to bud and blossom  in the Eternal Presence of of My Heavenly Father. He who desires to be  wholly immersed in the fathomless sea of My Godhead must also be  deeply immersed in the deep sea of bitter sorrow. I am exalted far  above all things, and work supernatural and wonderful works in Myself:  the deeper and more supernaturally a man crushes himself beneath all  things the more supernaturally will he be drawn far above all  things.'"   [*455] 

[iv.iii-p154]Pain, therefore, the mystics always welcome and often  court: sometimes in the crudely physical form which Suso describes so  vividly and horribly in the sixteenth chapter of his Life, more  frequently in those refinements of torture which a sensitive spirit  can extract from loneliness, injustice, misunderstanding--above  all, from deliberate contact with the repulsive accidents of life. It  would seem from a collation of the evidence that the typical mystical  temperament is by nature highly fastidious. Its passionate  apprehension of spiritual beauty, its intuitive perception of divine  harmony, is counterbalanced by an instinctive loathing of ugliness, a  shrinking from the disharmonies of squalor and disease. Often its  ideal of refinement is far beyond the contemporary standards of  decency: a circumstance which is alone enough to provide ample  opportunity of wretchedness. This extreme sensitiveness, which forms  part of the normal psychophysical make-up of the mystic, as it often  does of the equally highly-strung artistic type, is one of the first  things to be seized upon by the awakened self as a disciplinary  instrument. Then humility's axiom, "Naught is too low for  love" is forced to bear the less lovely gloss, "Naught  must be too disgusting."

[iv.iii-p155]Two reasons at once appear for this. One is the  contempt for phenomena, nasty as well as nice--the longing to be  free from all the fetters of sense--which often goes with the  passion for invisible things. Those mystics to whom the attractions of  earth are only illusion, are inconsistent if they attribute a greater  reality to the revolting and squalid incidents of life. St. Francis  did but carry his own principles to their logical conclusion, when he  insisted that the vermin were as much his brothers as the birds. Real  detachment means the death of preferences of all kinds: even of those  which seem to other men the very proofs of virtue and fine taste.

[iv.iii-p156]The second reason is nobler. It is bound up with that  principle of self-surrender which is the mainspring of the mystic  life. To the contemplative mind, which is keenly conscious of unity in  multiplicity--of Gods in the world--all disinterested  service is service of the Absolute which he loves: and the harder it  is, the more opposed to his self-regarding and aesthetic instincts,  the [p. 224] [iv.iii-Page_224] more nearly it approaches his  ideal. The point to which he aspires--though he does not always  know it--is that in which all disharmony, all appearance of  vileness, is resolved in the concrete reality which he calls the Love  of God. Then, he feels dimly, everything will be seen under the aspect  of a cosmic and charitable beauty; exhibiting through the woof of  corruption the web of eternal life.

[iv.iii-p157]It is told of St. Francis of Assisi, in whom the love  of lovely things was always paramount, how he forced himself to visit  the lepers whose sight and smell disgusted him: how he served them and  even kissed them.   [*456]    "Then as he departed, in very truth that which had aforetime  been bitter unto him, to wit, the sight and touch of lepers, now  changed into sweetness. For, as he confessed, the sight of lepers had  been so grievous unto him that he had been minded to avoid not only  seeing them, but even going nigh their dwelling. And if at any time he  chanced to pass their abodes, or to see them, albeit he were moved by  compassion to do them an alms through another person, yet alway would  he turn aside his face, stopping his nostrils with his hand. But  through the grace of God he became so intimate a friend of the lepers  that, even as he recorded in his will, he did sojourn with them and  did humbly serve them."

[iv.iii-p159]Also, after his great renunciation of all property,  he, once a prosperous young man who had been "dainty in his  father's home," accustomed himself to take a bowl and beg  scraps of food from door to door: and here too, as in the case of the  lepers, that which at first seemed revolting became to him sweet.  "And when he would have eaten that medley of various  meats," says the legend, "at first he shrank back, for  that he had never been used willingly even to see, much less to eat,  such scraps. At length, conquering himself, he began to eat; and it  seemed to him that in eating no rich syrup had he ever tasted aught so  delightsome."   [*457] 

[iv.iii-p161]The object, then, of this self-discipline is, like the  object of all purgation, freedom: freedom from the fetters of the  senses, the "remora of desire," from the results of  environment and worldly education, from pride and prejudice,  preferences and distaste: from selfhood in every form. Its effect is a  sharp reaction to the joy of self-conquest. The very act that had once  caused in the enchained self a movement of loathing becomes not merely  indifferent, but an occasion of happiness. So Margery Kempe "had  great mourning and sorrowing if she might not kiss a leper when she  met them in the way for the love of our Lord,   which was all    [p. 225] [iv.iii-Page_225]   contrary to her disposition    in the years of her youth and prosperity, for then she abhorred them  most."   [*458] 

[iv.iii-p163]I spare the sensitive reader a detailed account of the  loathsome ordeals by which St. Catherine of Genoa and Madame Guyon  strove to cure themselves of squeamishness and acquire this liberty of  spirit.   [*459]    They, like St. Francis, St. Elizabeth of Hungary, and countless other  seekers for the Real, sought out and served with humility and love the  sick and the unclean; deliberately associated themselves with life in  its meanest forms; compelled themselves to contact with the most  revolting substances; and mortified the senses by the traditional  ascetic expedient of deliberately opposing all--even their most  natural and harmless--inclinations. "In the first four  years after she received the sweet wound from her Lord," says  the Life of St. Catherine of Genoa, she "made great penances: so  that all her senses were mortified. And first, so soon as she  perceived that her nature desired anything at once she deprived it  thereof, and did so that it should receive all those things that it  abhorred. She wore harsh hair, ate no meat nor any other thing that  she liked; ate no fruit, neither fresh nor dried . . . and she lived  greatly submitted to all persons, and always sought to do all those  things which were contrary to her own will; in such a way that she was  always inclined to do more promptly the will of others than her  own." . . . "And while she worked such and so many  mortifications of all her senses it was several times asked of her  'Why do you do this?' And she answered 'I do not  know, but I feel myself drawn inwardly to do this . . . and I think it  is God's will.'"   [*460] 

[iv.iii-p166]St. Ignatius Loyola, in the world a highly bred  Spanish gentleman of refined personal habits, found in those habits an  excellent opportunity of mortification. "As he was somewhat nice  about the arrangement of his hair, as was the fashion of those days  and became him not ill, he allowed it to grow naturally, and neither  combed it nor trimmed it nor wore any head covering by day or night.  For the same reason he did not pare his finger or toe nails; for on  these points he had been fastidious to an extreme."   [*461] 

[iv.iii-p168]Madame Guyon, a delicate girl of the leisured class,  accustomed to the ordinary comforts of her station, characteristically  chose the most crude and immoderate forms of mortification in her  efforts towards the acquirement of "indifference." But the  peculiar psychic constitution which afterwards showed itself in the  forms [p. 226] [iv.iii-Page_226] of automatism and clairvoyance,  seems to have produced a partial anesthesia. "Although I had a  very delicate body, the instruments of penitence tore my flesh  without, as it seemed to me, causing pain. I wore girdles of hair and  of sharp iron, I often held wormwood in my mouth." "If I  walked, I put stones in my shoes. These things, my God, Thou didst  first inspire me to do, in order that I might be deprived even of the  most innocent satisfactions."   [*462] 

[iv.iii-p170]In the earlier stages of their education, a constant  agere contra,   even in apparently indifferent things, seems essential to the  mystics; till the point is reached at which the changes and chances of  mortal life are accepted with a true indifference and do not trouble  the life of the soul. This established ascendancy of the  "interior man," the transcendental consciousness, over  "sensitive nature"--the self in its reactions to the  ups and downs and manifold illusions of daily life--is the very  object of Purgation. It is, then, almost impossible that any mystic,  whatever his religion, character or race, should escape its battles:  for none at the beginning of their growth are in a position to  dispense with its good offices. Neoplatonists and Mahommedans, no less  than the Christian ascetics, are acquainted with the Purgative Way.  All realize the first law of Spiritual Alchemy, that you must tame the  Green Lion before you give him wings. Thus in 'Attar's  allegory of the Valleys, the valley of self-stripping and renunciation  comes first.   [*463]    So too Al Ghazzali, the Persian contemplative, says of the period  immediately following his acceptance of the principles of Sufi ism and  consequent renunciation of property, "I went to Syria, where I  remained more than two years; without any other object than that of  living in seclusion and solitude, conquering my desires, struggling  with my passions, striving to purify my soul, to perfect my character,  and to prepare my heart to meditate upon God." At the end of  this period of pure purgation circumstances forced him to return to  the world; much to his regret, since he "had not yet attained to  the perfect ecstatic state, unless it were in one or two isolated  moments."   [*464] 

[iv.iii-p173]Such gleams of ecstatic vision, distributed through  the later stages of purification, seem to be normal features of  mystical development. Increasing control of the lower centres, of the  surface intelligence and its scattered desires, permits the emergence  of the transcendental perceptions. We have seen that Fox in his early  stages displayed just such an alternation between the light and shade  of the mystic way.   [*465]    So too did that least ascetic of visionaries, Jacob Boehme.  "Finding within myself a [p. 227] [iv.iii-Page_227] powerful  contrarium, namely the desires that belong to the flesh and  blood," he says, "I began to fight a hard battle against  my corrupted nature, and with the aid of God I made up my mind to  overcome the inherited evil will, to break it, and to enter wholly  into the Love of God. . . . This, however, was not possible for me to  accomplish, but I stood firmly by my earnest resolution, and fought a  hard battle with myself. Now while I was wrestling and battling, being  aided by God, a wonderful light arose within my soul. It was a light  entirely foreign to my unruly nature, but in it I recognized the true  nature of God and man, and the relation existing between them, a thing  which heretofore I had never understood, and for which I would never  have sought."   [*466] 

[iv.iii-p176]In these words Boehme bridges the gap between  Purgation and Illumination: showing these two states or ways as  coexisting and complementary one to another, the light and dark sides  of a developing mystic consciousness. As a fact, they do often exist  side by side in the individual experience:   [*467]    and any treatment which exhibits them as sharply and completely  separated may be convenient for purposes of study, but becomes at best  diagrammatic if considered as a representation of the mystic life. The  mystical consciousness, as we have seen, belongs--from the  psychological point of view--to that mobile or  "unstable" type in which the artistic temperament also  finds a place. It sways easily between the extremes of pleasure and  pain in its gropings after transcendental reality. It often attains  for a moment to heights in which it is not able to rest: is often  flung from some rapturous vision of the Perfect to the deeps of  contrition and despair.

[iv.iii-p178]The mystics have a vivid metaphor by which to describe  that alternation between the onset and the absence of the joyous  transcendental consciousness which forms as it were the characteristic  intermediate stage between the bitter struggles of pure Purgation, and  the peace and radiance of the Illuminative Life. They call it  [iv.iii-p178.1]   Ludus Amoris     ,    the "Game of Love" which God plays with the desirous  soul. It is the "game of chess," says St. Teresa,  "in which game Humility is the Queen without whom none can  checkmate the Divine King."   [*468]    "Here," says Martensen, "God plays a blest game  with the soul."   [*469]    The "Game of Love" is a reflection in consciousness of  that state of struggle, oscillation and unrest which precedes the  first unification of the self. It ceases when this has taken place and  the new level of reality has been [p. 228] [iv.iii-Page_228]  attained. Thus St. Catherine of Siena, that inspired psychologist, was  told in ecstasy, "With the souls who have arrived at perfection,  I play no more the Game of Love, which consists in leaving and  returning again to the soul; though thou must understand that it is  not, properly speaking, I, the immovable GOD, Who thus elude them, but  rather the sentiment that My charity gives them of Me."   [*470]    In other terms, it is the imperfectly developed spiritual perception  which becomes tired and fails, throwing the self back into the  darkness and aridity whence it has emerged. So we are told of Rulman  Merswin   [*471]    that after the period of harsh physical mortification which succeeded  his conversion came a year of "delirious joy alternating with  the most bitter physical and moral sufferings." It is, he says,  "the Game of Love which the Lord plays with His poor sinful  creature." Memories of all his old sins still drove him to  exaggerated penances: morbid temptations "made me so ill that I  feared I should lose my reason." These psychic storms reacted  upon the physical organism. He had a paralytic seizure, lost the use  of his lower limbs, and believed himself to be at the point of death.  When he was at his worst, however, and all hope seemed at an end, an  inward voice told him to rise from his bed. He obeyed, and found  himself cured. Ecstasies were frequent during the whole of this  period. In these moments of exaltation he felt his mind to be  irradiated by a new light, so that he knew, intuitively, the direction  which his life was bound to take, and recognized the inevitable and  salutary nature of his trials. "God showed Himself by turns  harsh and gentle: to each access of misery succeeded the rapture of  supernatural grace." In this intermittent style, torn by these  constant fluctuations between depression and delight, did Merswin, in  whom the psychic instability of the artistic and mystic types is  present in excess, pass through the purgative and illuminated states.   [*472]    They appear to have coexisted in his consciousness, first one and  then the other emerging and taking control. Hence he did not attain  the peaceful condition which is characteristic of full illumination,  and normally closes the "First Mystic Life"; but passed  direct from these violent alternations of mystical pleasure and  mystical pain to the state which he calls "the school of  suffering love." This, as we shall see when we come to its  consideration, is strictly analogous to that [p. 229] [iv.iii-Page_229] which other mystics have called the  "Dark Night of the Soul," and opens the "Second  Mystic Life" or Unitive Way.

[iv.iii-p184]Such prolonged coexistence of alternating pain and  pleasure states in the developing soul, such delay in the attainment  of equilibrium, is not infrequent, and must be taken into account in  all analyses of the mystic type. Though it is convenient for purposes  of study to practise a certain dissection, and treat as separate  states which are, in the living subject, closely intertwined, we  should constantly remind ourselves that such a proceeding is  artificial. The struggle of the self to disentangle itself from  illusion and attain the Absolute is a life-struggle. Hence, it will  and must exhibit the freedom and originality of life: will, as a  process, obey artistic rather than scientific laws. It will sway now  to the light and now to the shade of experience: its oscillations will  sometimes be great, sometimes small. Mood and environment, inspiration  and information, will all play their part.

[iv.iii-p185]There are in this struggle three factors.

[iv.iii-p186](1) The unchanging light of Eternal Reality: that Pure  Being "which ever shines and nought shall ever dim."

[iv.iii-p187](2) The web of illusion, here thick, there thin; which  hems in, confuses, and allures the sentient self.

[iv.iii-p188](3) That self, always changing, moving,  struggling--always, in fact,   becoming--   alive in every fibre, related at once to the unreal and to the real;  and, with its growth in true being, ever more conscious of the  contrast between them.

[iv.iii-p189]In the ever-shifting relations between these three  factors, the consequent energy engendered, the work done, we may find  a cause of the innumerable forms of stress and travail which are  called in their objective form the Purgative Way. One only of the  three is constant: the Absolute to which the soul aspires. Though all  else may fluctuate, that goal is changeless. That Beauty so old and so  new, "with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of  turning," which is the One of Plotinus, the All of Eckhart and  St. John of the Cross, the Eternal Wisdom of Suso, the Unplumbed Abyss  of Ruysbroeck, the Pure Love of St. Catherine of Genoa, awaits  yesterday, to-day, and for ever the opening of Its creature's  eyes.

[iv.iii-p190]In the moment of conversion those eyes were opened for  an instant: obtained, as it were, a dazzling and unforgettable glimpse  of the Uncreated Light. They must learn to stay open: to look  steadfastly into the eyes of Love: so that, in the beautiful imagery  of the mystics, the "faithful servant" may become the  "secret friend."   [*473]    Then it is, says Boehme, that "the divine glimpse and [p. 230] [iv.iii-Page_230] beam of joy ariseth in the soul, being a new  eye, in which the dark, fiery soul conceiveth the Ens and Essence of  the divine light."   [*474]    So hard an art is not at once acquired in its perfection. It is in  accordance with all that we know of the conditions of development that  a partial achievement should come first; bewildering moments of  lucidity, splendid glimpses, whose brevity is due to the weakness of  the newly opened and unpractised "eye which looks upon  Eternity," the yet undisciplined strength of the "eye  which looks upon Time." Such is that play of light and dark, of  exaltation and contrition, which often bridges the gap between the  Purgative and the Illuminative states. Each by turn takes the field  and ousts the other; for "these two eyes of the soul of man  cannot both perform their work at once."   [*475] 

[iv.iii-p194]To use another and more domestic metaphor, that Divine  Child which was, in the hour of the mystic conversion, born in the  spark of the soul, must learn like other children to walk. Though it  is true that the spiritual self must never lose its sense of utter  dependence on the Invisible; yet within that supporting atmosphere,  and fed by its gifts, it must "find its feet." Each effort  to stand brings first a glorious sense of growth, and then a fall:  each fall means another struggle to obtain the difficult balance which  comes when infancy is past. There are many eager trials, many hopes,  many disappointments. At last, as it seems suddenly, the moment comes:  tottering is over, the muscles have learnt their lesson, they adjust  themselves automatically, and the new self suddenly finds  itself--it knows not how--standing upright and secure. That  is the moment which marks the boundary between the purgative and the  illuminative states.

[iv.iii-p195]The process of this passage of the "new"  or spiritual man from his awakening to the illuminated life, has been  set out by Jacob Boehme in language which is at once poetic and  precise. "When Christ the Corner-Stone [  i.e.   , the divine principle latent in man] stirreth himself in the  extinguished Image of Man in his hearty Conversion and  Repentance," he says, "then Virgin Sophia appeareth in the  stirring of the Spirit of Christ in the extinguished Image, in her  Virgin's attire before the Soul; at which the Soul is so amazed  and astonished in its Uncleanness that all its Sins immediately awake  in it, and it trembleth before her; for then the judgment passeth upon  the Sins of the Soul, so that it even goeth back in its unworthiness,  being ashamed in the Presence of its fair Love, and entereth into  itself, feeling and acknowledging itself utterly unworthy to receive  such a Jewel. This is understood by those who are of our tribe and  have tasted of this heavenly [p. 231] [iv.iii-Page_231] Gift, and  by none else. But the noble Sophia draweth near in the Essence of the  Soul, and kisseth it in friendly Manner, and tinctureth its dark Fire  with her Rays of Love, and shineth through it with her bright and  powerful Influence. Penetrated with the strong Sense and Feeling of  which, the Soul skippeth in its Body for great Joy, and in the  strength of this Virgin Love exulteth, and praiseth the great God for  his blest Gift of Grace. I will set down here a short description how  it is when the Bride thus embraceth the Bridegroom, for the  consideration of the Reader, who perhaps hath not yet been in this  wedding chamber. It may be he will be desirous to follow us, and to  enter into the Inner Choir, where the Soul joineth hands and danceth  with Sophia, or the Divine Wisdom."   [*476] 

[iv.iii-p197][p. 232] [iv.iii-Page_232]

Footnotes

^199:392 [iv.iii-p4.1][iv.iii-p5]          "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower," "Magna    Moralia," xxii.

^200:393 [iv.iii-p6.1][iv.iii-p7]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxxvii.

^200:394 [iv.iii-p8.1][iv.iii-p9]          Dialogo, cap. iv.

^200:395 [iv.iii-p10.1][iv.iii-p11]          "Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium." cap. xi.

^201:396 [iv.iii-p12.1][iv.iii-p13]          Richard Rolle, "The Mending of Life," cap. i.

^201:397 [iv.iii-p14.1][iv.iii-p15]              Ibid     ., "The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap, xxiii.

^201:398 [iv.iii-p15.1][iv.iii-p16]          "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. v.

^202:399 [iv.iii-p17.1][iv.iii-p18]          Jundt, "Rulman Merswin," p. 19.

^202:400 [iv.iii-p19.1][iv.iii-p20]          Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lvi.

^202:401 [iv.iii-p21.1][iv.iii-p22]          I offer no opinion upon the question of authorship. Those    interested may consult Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element    of Religion," vol. i., Appendix. Whoever may be responsible    for its present form, the Treatise is clearly founded upon    first-hand mystic experience: which is all that our present purpose    requires.

^203:402 [iv.iii-p22.1][iv.iii-p23]          "Trattato di Purgatorio," caps. ii. and iii.

^203:403 [iv.iii-p24.2][iv.iii-p25]          Purg. ii., 60.

^203:404 [iv.iii-p26.1][iv.iii-p27]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo I. i. cap. xiv.

^203:405 [iv.iii-p29.2][iv.iii-p30]          "De Imitatione Christi," I. iii. cap. i.

^204:406 [iv.iii-p33.1][iv.iii-p34]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. xiv.

^206:407 [iv.iii-p38.1][iv.iii-p39]          Meister Eckhart, quoted by Wackernagel, "Altdeutsches    Lesebuch," p. 891.

^206:408 [iv.iii-p40.1][iv.iii-p41]          "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit." pt. vi., cap.    4.

^206:409 [iv.iii-p42.1][iv.iii-p43]          St. John of the Cross, "Subida del Monte Carmelo," bk.    i. cap. xiii.

^207:410 [iv.iii-p44.1][iv.iii-p45]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. v.

^207:411 [iv.iii-p45.1][iv.iii-p46]          Ennead vi. 9.

^207:412 [iv.iii-p47.14][iv.iii-p48]          "Oh Poverty, high wisdom! to be subject to nothing, and by    despising all to possess all created things. . . .

[iv.iii-p49]God will not lodge in a narrow heart; and    it is as great as thy love. Poverty has so ample a bosom that Deity    Itself may lodge therein. . . .

[iv.iii-p50]Poverty is naught to have, and nothing to    desire: but all things to possess in the spirit of    liberty."--    Jacopone da Todi.      Lauda lix.

^208:413 [iv.iii-p51.1][iv.iii-p52]          "Fioretti," cap. xvi., and "Speculum," cap.    cxx.

^208:414 [iv.iii-p53.1][iv.iii-p54]              Ibid     ., cap. xiii. (Arnold's translation).

^208:415 [iv.iii-p55.1][iv.iii-p56]          Pfeiffer, Tractato x. (Eng. translation., p, 348).

^208:416 [iv.iii-p56.1][iv.iii-p57]          "Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum Domina    Paupertate," caps. iv. and v. (Rawnsley's    translation).

^209:417 [iv.iii-p58.2][iv.iii-p59]              Op. cit     ., cap. xxii.

^210:418 [iv.iii-p81.1][iv.iii-p82]          So Ruysbroeck, "Freewill is the king of the soul . . . he    should dwell in the chief city of that kingdom: that is to say, the    desirous power of the soul" ("De Ornatu Spiritalium    Nuptiarum," I. i. cap. xxiv.).

^210:419 [iv.iii-p84.1][iv.iii-p85]          Meister Eckhart. Quoted in Martensen's monograph, p. 107.

^210:420 [iv.iii-p87.1][iv.iii-p88]          Schmolders, "Essai sur les Ecoles Philosophiques    chez les Arabes," p. 54.

^211:421 [iv.iii-p89.1][iv.iii-p90]          Schmolders, "Essai sur les Ecoles Philosophiques    chez les Arabes,"     op. cit.,      p. 58.

^211:422 [iv.iii-p91.1][iv.iii-p92]          Richard Rolle, "The Mending of Life," cap. iii.

^211:423 [iv.iii-p93.1][iv.iii-p94]          "Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium," cap. i.

^211:424 [iv.iii-p95.1][iv.iii-p96]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. i. cap. iii.

^212:425 [iv.iii-p97.1][iv.iii-p98]          Gerlac Petersen,     op. cit.,      cap. xi.

^212:426 [iv.iii-p99.1][iv.iii-p100]          St. John of the Cross,     op. cit     ., cap. xi.

^212:427 [iv.iii-p101.1][iv.iii-p102]          Richard Rolle, "The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xix.

^212:428 [iv.iii-p102.1][iv.iii-p103]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. vi.

^213:429 [iv.iii-p104.1][iv.iii-p105]          "An Apology for Mrs. Antoinette Bourignan," pp.    269-70.

^213:430 [iv.iii-p106.1][iv.iii-p107]          St. Teresa's mystic states are particularly difficult to    classify. From one point of view these struggles might be regarded    as the preliminaries of conversion. She was, however, proficient in    contemplation when they occurred, and I therefore think that my    arrangement is the right one.

^215:431 [iv.iii-p109.1][iv.iii-p110]          Quoted by G. Cunninghame Graham, "Santa Teresa," vol.    i. p. 139. For St. Teresa's own account, see Vida, caps.    vii-ix.

^215:432 [iv.iii-p112.1][iv.iii-p113]          Sermon on St. Paul ("The Inner Way," p. 113).

^215:433 [iv.iii-p113.1][iv.iii-p114]          Cotter Morison, "Life and Times of St. Bernard," p.    68.

^215:434 [iv.iii-p115.1][iv.iii-p116]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. xxix.

^215:435 [iv.iii-p116.1][iv.iii-p117]              Ibid     ., Legenda Secunda, cap. cxxiv.

^216:436 [iv.iii-p117.1][iv.iii-p118]          Anne Macdonell, "St. Douceline," p. 30.

^216:437 [iv.iii-p118.1][iv.iii-p119]          Vida, cap. ix., p. 6.

^216:438 [iv.iii-p120.1][iv.iii-p121]          "In that time and by God's will there died my mother,    who was a great hindrance unto me in following the way of God: soon    after my husband died likewise, and also all my children. And    because I had commenced to follow the Aforesaid Way, and had prayed    God that He would rid me of them, I had great consolation of their    deaths. (Ste Angele de Foligno: "Le Livre de    l'Experience des Vrais Fideles." Ed. M. J.    Ferry p. 10.)

^217:439 [iv.iii-p122.1][iv.iii-p123]          "De Imitatione Christi," I. i. caps. iii. and ix.

^217:440 [iv.iii-p125.2][iv.iii-p126]          Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul ("The Inner Way," p.    114).

^218:441 [iv.iii-p127.1][iv.iii-p128]          Tauler, Second Sermon for Easter Day. (This is not included in    either of the English collections.)

^218:442 [iv.iii-p129.1][iv.iii-p130]          Augustine Baker, "Holy Wisdom," Treatise ii. Sect. i.,    cap. 3.

^218:443 [iv.iii-p130.1][iv.iii-p131]          Suso, Leben. cap. xvii.

^219:444 [iv.iii-p133.1][iv.iii-p134]          "The Mirror of Simple Souls," edited by Clare    Kirchberger, p. 12.

^219:445 [iv.iii-p135.6][iv.iii-p136]          "The war is at an end: in the battle of virtues, in travail    of mind, there is no more striving" (Lauda xci.).

^220:446 [iv.iii-p137.1][iv.iii-p138]          "Vita e Dottrina," cap. v.

^220:447 [iv.iii-p139.1][iv.iii-p140]          Walter Hilton "The Scale of Perfection," bk. i. cap. 8,    xlii.

^220:448 [iv.iii-p141.1][iv.iii-p142]          Recejac, "Fondements de la Connaissance    Mystique," p. 78. This, however, is to be understood of the    initial training of the mystic; not of his final state.

^221:449 [iv.iii-p142.1][iv.iii-p143]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. i. cap. v.

^221:450 [iv.iii-p143.1][iv.iii-p144]              Op. cit.,      bk. i. cap. xv.

^221:451 [iv.iii-p145.1][iv.iii-p146]          S. Caterina di Genova, "Trattato di Purgatorio," cap.    i.

^222:452 [iv.iii-p147.1][iv.iii-p148]          Dialogo, cap. lxxxv.

^222:453 [iv.iii-p148.1][iv.iii-p149]          Leben, cap. iv.

^222:454 [iv.iii-p150.1][iv.iii-p151]          "This truth, of which she was the living example," says    Huysmans of St. Lydwine, "has been and will be true for every    period. Since the death of Lydwine, there is not a saint who has not    confirmed it. Hear them formulate their desires. Always to suffer,    and to die! cries St. Teresa; always to suffer, yet not to die,    corrects St. Magdalena dei Pazzi; yet more, oh Lord, yet more!    exclaims St. Francis Xavier, dying in anguish on the coast of China;    I wish to be broken with suffering in order that I may prove my love    to God, declares a seventeenth century Carmelite, the Ven. Mary of    the Trinity. The desire for suffering is itself an agony, adds a    great servant of God of our own day, Mother Mary Du Bourg; and she    confided to her daughters in religion that 'if they sold pain    in the market she would hurry to buy it there.'" (J. K.    Huysmans, "Sainte Lydwine de Schiedam," 3rd edition, p.    225).Examples can be multiplied indefinitely from the lives and    works of the mystics of all periods.

^223:455 [iv.iii-p152.1][iv.iii-p153]          Tauler, Sermon on St. Paul ("The Inner Way," p.    114).

^224:456 [iv.iii-p157.1][iv.iii-p158]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. vii.; 3 Soc. cap. iv.

^224:457 [iv.iii-p159.1][iv.iii-p160]          3 Soc. cap. vii.

^225:458 [iv.iii-p161.1][iv.iii-p162]          "A Short Treatise of Contemplation taken out of the boke of    Margery Kempe ancresse of Lynne." London, 1521. Reprinted and    ed. by F. Gardner in "The Cell of Self-Knowledge," 1910,    p. 49.

^225:459 [iv.iii-p163.1][iv.iii-p164]          The curious are referred to the original authorities. For St.    Catherine chapter viii. of the "Vita e Dottrina": for    Madame Guyon, Vie, pt. i. ch. x.

^225:460 [iv.iii-p164.1][iv.iii-p165]          "Vita e Dottrina," cap. v.

^225:461 [iv.iii-p166.1][iv.iii-p167]          Testament, cap. ii. (Rix's translation).

^226:462 [iv.iii-p168.1][iv.iii-p169]          Vie, pt. i. cap. x.

^226:463 [iv.iii-p170.1][iv.iii-p171]              Supra     , p. 131.

^226:464 [iv.iii-p171.1][iv.iii-p172]          Schmolders, "Essay sur les Ecoles Philosophiques    chez les Arabes," p. 59.

^226:465 [iv.iii-p173.1][iv.iii-p174]              Supra     , p. 177.

^227:466 [iv.iii-p174.1][iv.iii-p175]          Hartmann, "Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme," p.    50.

^227:467 [iv.iii-p176.1][iv.iii-p177]          Compare the case of St. Teresa already cited,     supra     , p. 213.

^227:468 [iv.iii-p178.2][iv.iii-p179]          "Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xvii.

^227:469 [iv.iii-p179.1][iv.iii-p180]          Martensen, "Meister Eckhart," p. 75.

^228:470 [iv.iii-p180.1][iv.iii-p181]          Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.

^228:471 [iv.iii-p181.1][iv.iii-p182]          Jundt, "Rulman Merswin," pp. 10 and 20.

^228:472 [iv.iii-p182.1][iv.iii-p183]          We recognize here the chief symptoms of the "cyclic    type" of mentality, with its well-marked alternations of    depression and exaltation. This psychological type is found    frequently, but not invariably, among the mystics: and its    peculiarities must be taken into account when studying their    experiences. For a technical description, see W. McDougall:    "An Introduction to Abnormal Psychology," caps. xxii and    xxviii.

^229:473 [iv.iii-p190.1][iv.iii-p191]          See Ruysbroeck, "De Calculo," cap. vii. The metaphor is    an ancient one and occurs in many patristic and mediaeval    writers.

^230:474 [iv.iii-p191.1][iv.iii-p192]          "The Epistles of Jacob Boehme," p. 19.

^230:475 [iv.iii-p192.1][iv.iii-p193]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. vii.

^231:476 [iv.iii-p195.1][iv.iii-p196]          Jacob Boehme, "The Way to Christ," pt. i. p. 23 (vol.    iv. of the complete English translation of Boehme's    works).

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

IV. The Illumination of the Self

 [iv.iv][iv.iv-p1]In[iv.iv-p1.1] illumination we come to that state of consciousness which is  popularly supposed to be peculiar to the mystic: a form of mental  life, a kind of perception, radically different from that of  "normal" men. His preceding adventures and experiences  cannot be allowed this quality. His awakening to consciousness of the  Absolute--though often marked by a splendour and intensity which  seem to distinguish it from other psychic upheavals of that  kind--does but reproduce upon higher levels those characteristic  processes of conversion and falling in love which give depth and  actuality to the religious and passional life. The purification to  which he then sets himself--though this possesses as a rule  certain features peculiar to mystical development--is again  closely related to the disciplines and mortifications of ascetic, but  not necessarily mystical, piety. It is the most exalted form with  which we are acquainted of that   catharsis--   that pruning and training of the human plant--which is the  essence of all education, and a necessary stage in every kind of  transcendence. Here, the mystic does but adopt in a more drastic form  the principles which all who would live with an intense life, all  seekers after freedom, all true lovers must accept: though he may  justly claim with Ophelia that these wear their rue with a difference.   [*477]    [p. 233] [iv.iv-Page_233]

[iv.iv-p3]But in the great swing back into sunshine which is the  reward of that painful descent into the "cell of  self-knowledge," he parts company with these other pilgrims.  Those who still go with him a little way--certain prophets,  poets, artists, dreamers do so in virtue of that mystical genius, that  instinct for transcendental reality, of which all seers and creators  have some trace. The initiates of beauty or of wisdom, as the great  mystic is the initiate of love, they share in some degree the  experiences of the way of illumination. But the mystic has now a  veritable foothold in that transcendental world into which they  penetrate now and again: enjoys a certain fellowship--not yet  union--with the "great life of the All," and thence  draws strength and peace. Really and actually, as one whose noviciate  is finished, he has "entered the Inner Choir, where the Soul  joineth hands and danceth with Sophia, the Divine Wisdom": and,  keeping time with the great rhythms of the spiritual universe, feels  that he has found his place.

[iv.iv-p4]This change of consciousness, however abrupt and  amazing it may seem to the self which experiences it, seems to the  psychologist a normal phase in that organic process of development  which was initiated by the awakening of the transcendental sense.  Responding to the intimations received in that awakening, ordering  itself in their interest, concentrating its scattered energies on this  one thing, the self emerges from long and varied acts of purification  to find that it is able to apprehend another order of reality. It has  achieved consciousness of a world that was always there, and wherein  its substantial being--that Ground which is of God--has  always stood. Such a consciousness is "Transcendental  Feeling" [iv.iv-p4.1]  in excelsis     :    a deep, intuitional knowledge of the "secret plan."

[iv.iv-p5]"We are like a choir who stand round the  conductor," says Plotinus, "but do not always sing in  tune, because their attention is diverted by looking at external  things. So we always move round the One--if we did not, we should  dissolve and cease to exist--but we do not always look towards  the One." Hence, instead of that free and conscious co-operation  in the great life of the All which alone can make personal life worth  living, we move like slaves or marionettes, and, oblivious of the  whole to which our little steps contribute, fail to observe the  measure "whereto the worlds keep time." Our minds being  distracted from the Corypheus in the midst the "energetic  Word" who sets the rhythm, we do not behold Him. We are absorbed  in the illusions of sense; the "eye which looks on  Eternity" is idle. "But when we   do    behold Him," says Plotinus again, "we attain the end of  our existence and our rest. Then we no longer sing out of tune, but  form a truly divine chorus about Him; in the which chorus dance the  soul beholds the Fountain of life [p. 234] [iv.iv-Page_234] the  Fountain of intellect, the Principle of Being, the cause of good the  root of soul."   [*478]    Such a beholding, such a lifting of consciousness from a self-centred  to a God-centred world, is of the essence of illumination.

[iv.iv-p7]It will be observed that in these passages the claim  of the mystic is not yet to supreme communion; the "Spiritual  Marriage" of the Christian mystic, or that "flight of the  Alone to the Alone" which is the Plotinian image for the utmost  bliss of the emancipated soul. He has now got through preliminaries;  detached himself from his chief entanglements; re-orientated his  instinctive life. The result is a new and solid certitude about God,  and his own soul's relation to God: an  "enlightenment" in which he is adjusted to new standards  of conduct and thought. In the traditional language of asceticism he  is "proficient" but not yet perfect. He achieves a real  vision and knowledge, a conscious harmony with the divine World of  Becoming: not yet self-loss in the Principle of Life, but rather a  willing and harmonious revolution about Him, that "in dancing he  may know what is done." This character distinguishes almost  every first-hand description of illumination: and it is this which  marks it off from mystic union in all its forms. All pleasurable and  exalted states of mystic consciousness in which the sense of I-hood  persists, in which there is a loving and joyous relation between the  Absolute as object and the self as subject, fall under the head of  Illumination: which is really an enormous development of the  intuitional life at high levels. All veritable and first-hand  apprehensions of the Divine obtained by the use of symbols, as in the  religious life; all the degrees of prayer lying between meditation and  the prayer of union; many phases of poetic inspiration and  "glimpses of truth," are activities of the illuminated  mind.

[iv.iv-p8]To "see God in nature," to attain a  radiant consciousness of the "otherness" of natural  things, is the simplest and commonest form of illumination. Most  people, under the spell of emotion or of beauty, have known flashes of  rudimentary vision of this kind. Where such a consciousness is  recurrent, as it is in many poets,   [*479]    there results that partial yet often overpowering apprehension of the  Infinite Life immanent in all living things, which some modern writers  have dignified by the name of "nature-mysticism." [p. 235] [iv.iv-Page_235] Where it is raised to its highest  denomination, till the veil is obliterated by the light behind, and  "faith has vanished into sight," as sometimes happened to  Blake, we reach the point at which the mystic swallows up the  poet.

[iv.iv-p10]"Dear Sir," says that great genius in one  of his most characteristic letters, written immediately after an onset  of the illuminated vision which he had lost for many years,  "excuse my enthusiasm, or rather madness, for I am really drunk  with intellectual vision whenever I take a pencil or graver into my  hand."   [*480]    Many a great painter, philosopher, or poet, perhaps every inspired  musician, has known this indescribable inebriation of Reality in those  moments of transcendence in which his masterpieces were conceived.  This is the "saving madness" of which Plato speaks in the  "Phaedrus"; the ecstasy of the "God-intoxicated  man," the lover, the prophet, and the poet "drunk with  life." When the Christian mystic, eager for his birthright, says  [iv.iv-p11.1]"Sanguis Christi, inebria me!"   he is asking for just such a gift of supernal  vitality, a draught of that Wine of Absolute Life which runs in the  arteries of the world. Those to whom that cup is given attain to an  intenser degree of vitality, hence to a more acute degree of  perception, a more vivid consciousness, than that which is enjoyed by  other men. For though, as Ruysbroeck warns us, this "is not  God," yet it is for many selves "the Light in which we see  Him."   [*481] 

[iv.iv-p13]Blake conceived that it was his vocation to bring this  mystical illumination, this heightened vision of reality, within the  range of ordinary men: to "cleanse the doors of  perception" of the race. They thought him a madman for his  pains.

   [iv.iv-p13.1] ". . . I rest not upon my great task
   To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal  Eyes
   Of Man inwards into the Worlds of Thought: into  Eternity
   Ever expanding in the Bosom of God, the Human  Imagination.
   O Saviour, pour upon me thy Spirit of meekness and  love,
   Annihilate the Selfhood in me: be thou all my  life."   [*482]  
  [iv.iv-p15]The Mysteries of the antique world appear to have been  attempts--often by way of a merely magical initiation--to  "open the immortal eyes of man inwards": exalt his powers  of perception until they could receive the messages of a higher degree  of reality. In spite of much eager theorizing, it is impossible to  tell how far they succeeded in this task. To those who had a natural  genius for the Infinite, symbols and rituals which were doubtless  charged with ecstatic suggestions, and often dramatized the actual  course of [p. 236] [iv.iv-Page_236] the Mystic Way, may well have  brought some enhancement of consciousness:   [*483]    though hardly that complete rearrangement of character which is an  essential of the mystic's entrance on the true Illuminated  State. Hence Plato only claims that "he whose initiation is  recent" can see Immortal Beauty under mortal veils.

   [iv.iv-p16.1] "O blessed he in all wise,
   Who hath drunk the Living Fountain
   Whose life no folly staineth
   And whose soul is near to God:
   Whose sins are lifted pall-wise
   As he worships on the Mountain."   [*484]  
  [iv.iv-p18]Thus sang the initiates of Dionysus; that  mystery-cult in which the Greeks seem to have expressed all they knew  of the possible movement of consciousness through rites of  purification to the ecstasy of the Illuminated Life. The mere crude  rapture of illumination has seldom been more vividly expressed. With  its half-Oriental fervours, its self-regarding glory in personal  purification achieved, and the spiritual superiority conferred by  adeptship, may be compared the deeper and lovelier experience of the  Catholic poet and saint, who represents the spirit of Western  mysticism at its best. His sins, too, had been "lifted  pall-wise" as a cloud melts in the sunshine of Divine Love: but  here the centre of interest is not the little self which has been  exalted, but the greater Self which deigns thus to exalt.

   [iv.iv-p18.1] "O burn that burns to heal!
   O more than pleasant wound!
   And O soft hand, O touch most delicate
   That dost new life reveal
   That dost in grace abound
   And, slaying, dost from death to life  translate."   [*485]  
  [iv.iv-p20]Here the joy is as passionate, the consciousness of an  exalted life as intense: but it is dominated by the distinctive  Christian concepts of humility, surrender, and intimate love.

[iv.iv-p21]We have seen that all real artists, as well as all  pure mystics, are sharers to some degree in the Illuminated Life. They  have drunk, with Blake, from that cup of intellectual vision which is  the chalice of the Spirit of Life: know something of its divine  inebriation whenever Beauty inspires them to create. Some have only  sipped [p. 237] [iv.iv-Page_237] it. Some, like John of Parma,  have drunk deep, accepting in that act the mystic heritage with all  its obligations. But to all who have seen Beauty face to face, the  Grail has been administered; and through that sacramental communion  they are made participants in the mystery of the world.

[iv.iv-p22]In one of the most beautiful passages of the  "Fioretti" it is told how Brother Jacques of la Massa,  "unto whom God opened the door of His secrets," saw in a  vision this Chalice of the Spirit of Life delivered by Christ into the  hands of St. Francis, that he might give his brothers to drink  thereof.

[iv.iv-p23]"Then came St. Francis to give the chalice of  life to his brothers. And he gave it first to Brother John of Parma:  who, taking it drank it all in haste, devoutly; and straightway he  became all shining like the sun. And after him St. Francis gave it to  all the other brothers in order: and there were but few among them  that took it with due reverence and devotion and drank it all. Those  that took it devoutly and drank it all, became straightway shining  like the sun; but those that spilled it all and took it not devoutly,  became black, and dark, and misshapen and horrible to see; but those  that drank part and spilled part, became partly shining and partly  dark, and more so or less according to the measure of their drinking  or spilling thereof. But the aforesaid Brother John was resplendent  above all the rest; the which had more completely drunk the chalice of  life,   whereby he had the more deeply gazed into the abyss of the infinite  light divine   ."   [*486] 

[iv.iv-p25]No image, perhaps, could suggest so accurately as this  divine picture the conditions of perfect illumination: the drinking  deeply, devoutly, and in haste--that is, without prudent and  self-regarding hesitation--of the heavenly Wine of Life; that  wine of which Rolle says that it "fulfils the soul with a great  gladness through a sweet contemplation."   [*487]    John of Parma, the hero of those Spiritual Franciscans in whose  interest this exquisite allegory was composed, stands for all the  mystics, who, "having completely drunk," have attained the  power of gazing into the abyss of the infinite light divine. In those  imperfect brothers who dared not drink the cup of sacrifice to the  dregs, but took part and spilled part, so that they became partly  shining and partly dark, "according to the measure of their  drinking or spilling thereof," we may see an image of the  artist, musician, prophet, poet, dreamer, more or less illuminated  according to the measure of courage and self-abandonment in which he  has drunk the cup of ecstasy: but always in comparison with the  radiance of the pure contemplative, "partly shining and partly  dark." "Hinder me not," says the soul to the [p. 238] [iv.iv-Page_238] senses in Mechthild of Magdeburg's  vision, "I would drink for a space of the unmingled wine."   [*488]    In the artist, the senses have somewhat hindered the perfect  inebriation of the soul.

[iv.iv-p28]We have seen that a vast tract of experience--all  the experience which results from contact between a purged and  heightened consciousness and the World of Becoming in which it is  immersed; and much, too, of that which results from contact set up  between such a consciousness and the Absolute Itself--is included  in that stage of growth which the mystics call the Illuminative Way.  This is the largest and most densely populated province of the mystic  kingdom. Such different visionaries as Suso and Blake, Boehme and  Angela of Foligno, Mechthild of Magdeburg, Fox, Rolle, St. Teresa, and  countless others have left us the record of their sojourn therein.  Amongst those who cannot be called pure mystics we can detect in the  works of Plato and Heracleitus, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Walt Whitman  indications that they too were acquainted, beyond most poets and  seers, with the phenomena of the illuminated life. In studying it  then, we shall be confronted by a mass of apparently irreconcilable  material: the results of the relation set up between every degree of  lucidity, every kind of character, and the suprasensible world.

[iv.iv-p29]To say that God is Infinite is to say that He may be  apprehended and described in an infinity of ways. That Circle whose  centre is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere, may be  approached from every angle with a certainty of being found. Mystical  history, particularly that which deals with the Illuminative Way, is a  demonstration of this fact. Here, in the establishment of the  "first mystic life," of conscious correspondence with  Reality, the self which has oscillated between two forms of  consciousness, has alternately opposed and embraced its growing  intuitions of the Absolute, comes for a time to rest. To a large  extent, the discordant elements of character have been purged away.  Temporally at least the mind has "unified itself" upon  high levels, and attained, as it believes, a genuine consciousness of  the divine and veritable world. The depth and richness of its own  nature will determine how intense that consciousness shall be.

[iv.iv-p30]Whatever its scope, however, this new apprehension of  reality generally appears to the illuminated Self as final and  complete. As the true lover is always convinced that he has found in  his bride the one Rose of the World, so the mystic, in the first glow  of his initiation, is sure that his quest is now fulfilled. Ignorant  as yet of that consummation of love which overpasses the proceedings  of the inward eye and ear, he exclaims with entire assurance  [iv.iv-p30.1]"Beati oculi qui exterioribus clausi,  interioribus autem sunt [p. 239] [iv.iv-Page_239]  intenti,"   [*489]    and, absorbed in this new blissful act of vision, forgets that it  belongs to those who are still [iv.iv-p31.1]   in via   . He has yet to pass through that "night of the  senses" in which he learns to distinguish the substance of  Reality from the accidents under which it is perceived; to discover  that the heavenly food here given cannot satisfy his "hunger for  the Absolute."   [*490]    His true goal lies far beyond this joyful basking in the sunbeams of  the Uncreated Light. Only the greatest souls learn this lesson, and  tread the whole of that "King's Highway" which leads  man back to his Source. "For the many that come to Bethlehem,  there be few that will go on to Calvary." The rest stay here, in  this Earthly Paradise, these flowery fields; where the liberated self  wanders at will, describing to us as well as it can now this corner,  now that of the Country of the Soul.

[iv.iv-p33]It is in these descriptions of the joy of  illumination--in the outpourings of love and rapture belonging to  this state--that we find the most lyrical passages of mystical  literature. Here poet, mystic, and musician are on common ground: for  it is only by the oblique methods of the artist, by the use of  aesthetic suggestion and musical rhythm, that the wonder of that  vision can be expressed. When essential goodness, truth, and  beauty--Light, Life, and Love--are apprehended by the heart,  whether the heart be that of poet, painter, lover, or saint, that  apprehension can only be communicated in a living, that is to say, an  artistic form. The natural mind is conscious only of succession: the  special   differentia    of the mystic is the power of apprehending simultaneity. In the  peculiarities of the illuminated consciousness we recognize the effort  of the mind to bridge the gap between Simultaneity and Succession: the  characters of Creator and Creation. Here the successive is called upon  to carry the values of the Eternal.

[iv.iv-p34]Here, then, genius and sanctity kiss one another; and  each, in that sublime encounter, looks for an instant through the  other's eyes. Hence it is natural and inevitable that the mystic  should here call into play all the resources of artistic expression:  the lovely imagery of Julian and Mechthild of Magdeburg, Suso's  poetic visions, St. Augustine's fire and light, the heavenly  harmonies of St. Francis and Richard Rolle. Symbols, too, play a major  part, not only in the description, but also in the machinery of  illumination: the intuitions of many mystics presenting themselves  directly to the surface-mind in a symbolic form. We must therefore be  prepared for a great variety and fluidity of expression, a constant  and not always conscious recourse to symbol and image, in those [p. 240] [iv.iv-Page_240] who try to communicate the secret of this  state of consciousness. We must examine, and even classify so far as  possible, a wide variety of experience--some which is recognized  by friends and foes alike as purely "mystical," some in  which the operation of poetic imagination is clearly discernible, some  which involves "psychic phenomena" and other abnormal  activities of the mind--refusing to be frightened away from  investigation by the strange, and apparently irreconcilable character  of our material.

[iv.iv-p35]There are three main types of experience which appear  again and again in the history of mysticism; nearly always in  connection with illumination, rather than any other phase of mystical  development. I think that they may fairly be regarded as its main  characteristics, though the discussion of them cannot cover all the  ground. In few forms of spiritual life is the spontaneity of the  individual so clearly seen as here: and in few is the ever-deadly  process of classification attended with so many risks.

[iv.iv-p36]These three characteristics are:--

[iv.iv-p37]1. A joyous apprehension of the Absolute: that which  many ascetic writers call "the practice of the Presence of  God." This, however, is not to be confused with that unique  consciousness of union with the divine which is peculiar to a later  stage of mystical development. The self, though purified, still  realizes itself as a separate entity over against God. It is not  immersed in its Origin, but contemplates it. This is the  "betrothal" rather than the "marriage" of the  soul.

[iv.iv-p38]2. This clarity of vision may also be enjoyed in  regard to the phenomenal world. The actual physical perceptions seem  to be strangely heightened, so that the self perceives an added  significance and reality in all natural things: is often convinced  that it knows at last "the secret of the world." In  Blake's words "the doors of perception are cleansed"  so that "everything appears to man as it   is   , infinite."   [*491] 

[iv.iv-p40]In these two forms of perception we see the growing  consciousness of the mystic stretching in two directions, until it  includes in its span both the World of Being and the World of  Becoming;   [*492]    that dual apprehension of reality as transcendent yet immanent which  we found to be one of the distinguishing marks of the mystic type.

[iv.iv-p42]3. Along with this two-fold extension of  consciousness, the energy of the intuitional or transcendental self  may be enormously increased. The psychic upheavals of the Purgative  Way have tended to make it central for life: to eliminate from the  character all those elements which checked its activity. Now it seizes  upon [p. 241] [iv.iv-Page_241] the ordinary channels of  expression; and may show itself in such forms as (a) auditions, (b)  dialogues between the surface consciousness and another intelligence  which purports to be divine, (c) visions, and sometimes (d) in  automatic writings. In many selves this automatic activity of those  growing but still largely subconscious powers which constitute the  "New Man," increases steadily during the whole of the  mystic life.

[iv.iv-p43]Illumination, then, tends to appear mainly under one  or all of these three forms. Often all are present; though, as a rule,  one is dominant. The balance of characteristics will be conditioned in  each case by the self's psychic make-up; its temperamental  leaning towards "pure contemplation," "lucid  vision," or automatic expression; emanation or immanence, the  metaphysical, artistic, or intimate aspects of truth. The possible  combinations between these various factors are as innumerable as the  possible creations of Life itself.

[iv.iv-p44]In the wonderful rhapsodies of St. Augustine, in St.  Bernard's converse with the Word, in Angela of Foligno's  apprehensions of Deity, in Richard Rolle's "state of  song," when "sweetest heavenly melody he took, with him  dwelling in mind," or in Brother Lawrence's  "practice of the Presence of God," we may see varied  expressions of the first type of illuminated consciousness. Jacob  Boehme is rightly looked upon as a classic example of the second;  which is also found in one of its most attractive forms in St. Francis  of Assisi. Suso and St. Teresa, perhaps, may stand for the third,  since in them the visionary and auditory phenomena were peculiarly  well marked. A further study of each characteristic in order, will  help us to disentangle the many threads which go to the psychical  make-up of these great and complex mystic types. The rest of this  chapter will, then, be given to the analysis of the two chief forms of  illuminated consciousness: the self's perception of Reality in  the eternal and temporal worlds. The important subject of voices and  visions demands a division to itself.

   

[iv.iv-p44.1]I. The Consciousness of the Absolute, or "Sense of the  Presence of God"

[iv.iv-p45]This consciousness, in its various forms and degrees,  is perhaps the most constant characteristic of Illumination; and makes  it, for the mystic soul, a pleasure-state of the intensest kind. I do  not mean by this that the subject passes months or years in a  continuous ecstasy of communion with the Divine. Intermittent periods  of spiritual fatigue or "aridity"--renewals of the  temperamental conflicts experienced in purgation--the oncoming  gloom of the Dark Night--all these may be, and often are,  experienced [p. 242] [iv.iv-Page_242] at intervals during the  Illuminated Life; as flashes of insight, indistinguishable from  illumination, constantly break the monotony of the Purgative Way. But  a deep certitude of the Personal Life omnipresent in the universe has  been achieved; and this can never be forgotten, even though it be  withdrawn. The "spirit stretching towards God" declares  that it has touched Him; and its normal condition henceforth is joyous  consciousness of His Presence with "many privy touchings of  sweet spiritual sights and feeling, measured to us as our simpleness  may bear it."   [*493]    Where he prefers less definite or more pantheistic language, the  mystic's perceptions may take the form of "harmony with  the Infinite"--the same divine music transposed to a lower  key.

[iv.iv-p47]This "sense of God" is not a metaphor.  Innumerable declarations prove it to be a consciousness as sharp as  that which other men have, or think they have, of colour, heat, or  light. It is a well-known though usually transitory experience in the  religious life: like the homing instinct of birds, a fact which can  neither be denied nor explained. "How that presence is felt, it  may better be known by experience than by any writing," says  Hilton, "for it is the life and the love, the might and the  light, the joy and the rest of a chosen soul. And therefore he that  hath soothfastly once felt it he may not forbear it without pain; he  may not undesire it, it is so good in itself and so comfortable. . . .  He cometh privily sometimes when thou art least aware of Him, but thou  shalt well know Him or He go; for wonderfully He stirreth and mightily  He turneth thy heart into beholding of His goodness, and doth thine  heart melt delectably as wax against the fire into softness of His  love."   [*494] 

[iv.iv-p49]Modern psychologists have struggled hard to discredit  this "sense of the presence"; sometimes attributing it to  the psychic mechanism of projection, sometimes to  "wish-fulfilments" of a more unpleasant origin.   [*495]    The mystics, however, who discriminate so much more delicately than  their critics between true and false transcendental experience, never  feel any doubt about its validity. Even when their experience seems  inconsistent with their theology, they refuse to be disturbed.

[iv.iv-p51]Thus St. Teresa writes of her own experience, with her  usual simplicity and directness, "In the beginning it happened  to me that I was ignorant of one thing--I did not know that God  was in all things: and when He seemed to me to be so near, I thought  it impossible. Not to believe that He was present was not in my [p. 243] [iv.iv-Page_243] power; for it seemed to me, as it were,  evident that I felt there His very presence. Some unlearned men used  to say to me, that He was present only by His grace.   I      could not believe that,    because, as I am saying, He seemed to me to be present Himself: so I  was distressed. A most learned man, of the Order of the glorious  Patriarch St. Dominic, delivered me from this doubt, for he told me  that He was present, and how He communed with us: this was a great  comfort to me."   [*496] 

[iv.iv-p53]Again, "An interior peace, and the little  strength which either pleasures or displeasures have to remove this  presence (during the time it lasts) of the Three Persons, and that  without power to doubt of it, continue in such a manner that I clearly  seem to experience what St. John says,   That He will dwell in the soul,    and this not only by grace, but that He will also make her perceive  this presence."   [*497]    St. Teresa's strong "immanental" bent comes out  well in this passage.

[iv.iv-p55]Such a sense of the divine presence may go side by  side with the daily life and normal mental activities of its  possessor; who is not necessarily an ecstatic or an abstracted  visionary, remote from the work of the world. It is true that the  transcendental consciousness has now become, once for all, his centre  of interest, its perceptions and admonitions dominate and light up his  daily life. The object of education, in the Platonic sense, has been  achieved: his soul has "wheeled round from the perishing  world" to "the contemplation of the real world and the  brightest part thereof."   [*498]    But where vocation and circumstances require it, the duties of a busy  outward life continue to be fulfilled with steadiness and success: and  this without detriment to the soul's contemplation of the  Real.

[iv.iv-p57]In many temperaments of the unstable or artistic type,  however, this intuitional consciousness of the Absolute becomes  ungovernable: it constantly breaks through, obtaining forcible  possession of the mental field and expressing itself in the  "psychic" phenomena of ecstasy and rapture. In others,  less mobile, it wells up into an impassioned apprehension, a  "flame of love" in which the self seems to "meet God  in the ground of the soul." This is "pure  contemplation": that state of deep orison in which the subject  seems to be "seeing, feeling and thinking all at once." By  this spontaneous exercise of all his powers under the dominion of  love, the mystic attains that "Vision of the Heart" which,  "more interior, perhaps, than the visions of dream or  ecstasy,"   [*499]    stretches [p. 244] [iv.iv-Page_244] to the full those very  faculties which it seems to be holding in suspense; as a top  "sleeps" when it is spinning fast. [iv.iv-p58.1]   Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat     .    This act of contemplation, this glad surrender to an overwhelming  consciousness of the Presence of God, leaves no sharp image on the  mind: only a knowledge that we have been lifted up, to a veritable  gazing upon That which eye hath not seen.

[iv.iv-p59]St. Bernard gives in one of his sermons a simple,  ingenuous and obviously personal account of such "privy  touchings," such convincing but elusive contacts of the soul  with the Absolute. "Now bear with my foolishness for a  little," he says, "for I wish to tell you, as I have  promised, how such events have taken place in me. It is, indeed, a  matter of no importance. But I put myself forward only that I may be  of service to you; and if you derive any benefit I am consoled for my  egotism. If not, I shall but have displayed my foolishness. I confess,  then, though I say it in my foolishness, that the Word has visited me,  and even very often. But, though He has frequently entered into my  soul, I have never at any time been sensible of the precise moment of  His coming. I have felt that He was present, I remember that He has  been with me; I have sometimes been able even to have a presentiment  that He would come: but never to feel His coming nor His departure.  For whence He came to enter my soul, or whither He went on quitting  it, by what means He has made entrance or departure, I confess that I  know not even to this day; according to that which is said,  [iv.iv-p59.1]   Nescis unde veniat aut quo vadat     .    Nor is this strange, because it is to Him that the psalmist has said  in another place, [iv.iv-p59.2]   Vestigia tua non cognoscentur     . 

[iv.iv-p60]"It is not by the eyes that He enters, for He is  without form or colour that they can discern; nor by the ears, for His  coming is without sound; nor by the nostrils, for it is not with the  air but with the mind that He is blended. . . . By what avenue then  has He entered? Or perhaps the fact may be that He has not entered at  all, nor indeed come at all from outside: for not one of these things  belongs to outside. Yet it has not come from within me, for it is  good, and I know that in me dwelleth no good thing. I have ascended  higher than myself, and lo! I have found the Word above me still. My  curiosity has led me to descend below myself also, and yet I have  found Him still at a lower depth. If I have looked without myself, I  have found that He is beyond that which is outside of me, and if  within, He was at an inner depth still. And thus have I learned the  truth of the words I have read, [iv.iv-p60.1]  In      ipso enim vivimus et movemur et sumus   ."   [*500]    [p. 245] [iv.iv-Page_245]

[iv.iv-p62]Such a lifting up, such a condition of consciousness  as that which St. Bernard is here trying to describe, seems to snatch  the spirit for a moment into a state which it is hard to distinguish  from that of true "union." This is what the contemplatives  call passive or infused contemplation, or sometimes the "orison  of union": a brief foretaste of the Unitive State, often enjoyed  for short periods in the Illuminative Way, which reinforces their  conviction that they have now truly attained the Absolute. It is but a  foretaste, however, of that attainment: the precocious effort of a  soul still in that stage of "Enlightening" which the  "Theologia Germanica" declares to be "belonging to  such as are growing."   [*501] 

[iv.iv-p64]This distinction between the temporary experience of  union and the achievement of the Unitive Life is well brought out in a  fragment of dialogue between Soul and Self in Hugh of St.  Victor's mystical tract, "De Arrha Animae."

[iv.iv-p65]  The Soul says,    "Tell me, what can be this thing of delight that merely by its  memory touches and moves me with such sweetness and violence that I am  drawn out of myself and carried away, I know not how? I am suddenly  renewed: I am changed: I am plunged into an ineffable peace. My mind  is full of gladness, all my past wretchedness and pain is forgot. My  soul exults: my intellect is illuminated: my heart is afire: my  desires have become kindly and gentle: I know not where I am, because  my Love has embraced me. Also, because my Love has embraced me I seem  to have become possessed of something, and I know not what it is; but  I try to keep it, that I may never lose it. My soul strives in  gladness that she may not be separated from That which she desires to  hold fast for ever: as if she had found in it the goal of all her  desires. She exults in a sovereign and ineffable manner, seeking  nought, desiring nought, but to rest in this. Is   this,    then, my Beloved? Tell me that I may know Him, and that if He come  again I may entreat Him to leave me not, but to stay with me for  ever."

[iv.iv-p66]  Man says,    "It is indeed thy Beloved who visits thee; but He comes in an  invisible shape, He comes disguised, He comes incomprehensibly. He  comes to touch thee, not to be seen of thee: to arouse thee, not to be  comprehended of thee. He comes not to give Himself wholly, but to be  tasted by thee: not to fulfil thy desire, but to lead upwards thy  affection. He gives a foretaste of His delights, brings not the  plenitude of a perfect satisfaction: and the earnest of thy betrothal  consists chiefly in this, that He who shall afterwards give Himself to  be seen and possessed by thee perpetually, now permits Himself to be  sometimes tasted, that thou mayest learn how sweet He is. This shall  console thee [p. 246] [iv.iv-Page_246] for His absence: and the  savour of this gift shall keep thee from all despair."   [*502] 

[iv.iv-p68]The real distinction between the Illuminative and the  Unitive Life is that in Illumination the individuality of the  subject--however profound his spiritual consciousness, however  close his apparent communion with the Infinite--remains separate  and intact. His heightened apprehension of reality lights up rather  than obliterates the rest of his life: and may even increase his power  of dealing adequately with the accidents of normal existence. Thus  Brother Lawrence found that his acute sense of reality, his  apprehension of the Presence of God, and the resulting detachment and  consciousness of liberty in regard to mundane things, upheld and  assisted him in the most unlikely tasks; as, for instance, when he was  sent into Burgundy to buy wine for his convent, "which was a  very unwelcome task to him, because he had no turn for business, and  because he was lame, and could not go about the boat but by rolling  himself over the casks. That, however, he gave himself no uneasiness  about it, nor about the purchase of the wine. That he said to God,   It      was His business he was about:    and that he afterwards found it very well performed. . . . So  likewise in his business in the kitchen, to which he had naturally a  great aversion."   [*503] 

[iv.iv-p70]The mind, concentrated upon a higher object of  interest, is undistracted by its own anxieties, likes, or dislikes;  and hence performs the more efficiently the work that is given it to  do. Where it does not do so, then the normal make-up or imperfect  discipline of the subject, rather than its mystical proclivities, must  be blamed. St. Catherine of Genoa found in this divine companionship  the power which made her hospital a success. St. Teresa was an  administrator of genius and an admirable housewife, and declared that  she found her God very easily amongst the pots and pans.   [*504]    Appearances notwithstanding, Mary would probably have been a better  cook than Martha, had circumstances required of her this form of  activity.

[iv.iv-p72]In persons of feeble or diffuse intelligence, however,  and above all in victims of a self-regarding spirituality, this deep  absorption in the sense of Divine Reality may easily degenerate into  monoideism. Then the "shady side" of Illumination, a  selfish preoccupation with transcendental joys, the "spiritual  gluttony" condemned by St. John of the Cross, comes out.  "I made many mistakes," says Madame Guyon pathetically,  "through allowing myself to [p. 247] [iv.iv-Page_247] be  too much taken up by my interior joys. . . . I used to sit in a corner  and work, but I could hardly do anything, because the strength of this  attraction made me let the work fall out of my hands. I spent hours in  this way without being able to open my eyes or to know what was  happening to me: so simply, so peacefully, so gently that sometimes I  said to myself, 'Can heaven itself be more peaceful than  I?'"   [*505] 

[iv.iv-p74]Here we see Madame Guyon basking like a pious tabby  cat in the beams of the Uncreated Light, and already leaning to the  extravagances of Quietism, with its dangerous "double character  of passivity and beatitude." The heroic aspect of the mystic  vocation is in abeyance. Those mystical impressions which her peculiar  psychic make-up permitted her to receive, have been treated as a  source of personal and placid satisfactions; not as a well-spring,  whence new vitality might be drawn for great and self-giving  activities.

[iv.iv-p75]It has been claimed by the early biographers of St.  Catherine of Genoa, that she passed in the crisis of her conversion  directly through the Purgative to the Unitive Life; and never  exhibited the characteristics of the Illuminative Way. This has been  effectually disproved by Baron von Hugel,   [*506]    though he too is inclined in her case to reject the usual sequence of  the mystic states. Yet the description of Catherine's condition  after her four great penitential years were ended, as given in cap.  vi. of the "Vita e Dottrina," is an almost perfect picture  of healthy illumination of the inward or "immanental"  type; and makes an effective foil to the passage which I have quoted  from Madame Guyon's life.

[iv.iv-p77]No doubt there were hours in which St.  Catherine's experience, as it were, ran ahead; and she felt  herself not merely lit up by the Indwelling Light, but temporally  merged in it. These moments are responsible for such passages as the  beautiful fragment in cap. v.; which does, when taken alone, seem to  describe the true unitive state. "Sometimes," she said,  "I do not see or feel myself to have either soul, body, heart,  will or taste, or any other thing except Pure Love."   [*507]    Her normal condition of consciousness, however, was clearly not yet  that which Julian of Norwich calls being "oned with  bliss"; but rather an intense and continuous communion with an  objective Reality which was clearly realized as distinct from herself.  "After the aforesaid four years," says the next chapter of  the "Vita," "there was given unto her a purified  mind, free, and filled with God: insomuch that no other thing [p. 248] [iv.iv-Page_248] could enter into it. Thus, when she heard  sermons or Mass, so much was she absorbed in her interior feelings,  that she neither heard nor saw that which was said or done without.  But within, in the sweet divine light, she saw and heard other things,  being wholly absorbed by that interior light: and it was not in her  power to act otherwise." St. Catherine, then, is still a  spectator of the Absolute, does not feel herself to be   one    with it. "And it is a marvellous thing that with so great an  interior recollection, the Lord never permitted her to go beyond  control. But when she was needed, she always came to herself: so that  she was able to reply to that which was asked of her: and the Lord so  guided her, that none could complain of her. And she had her mind so  filled by Love Divine, that conversation became hard to her: and by  this continuous taste and sense of God, several times she was so  greatly transported, that she was forced to hide herself, that she  might not be seen." It is clear, however, that Catherine herself  was aware of the transitory and imperfect nature of this intensely  joyous state. Her growing transcendental self, unsatisfied with the  sunshine of the Illuminative Way, the enjoyment of the riches of God,  already aspired to union with the Divine. With her, as with all truly  heroic souls, it was love for love, not love for joy. "She cried  to God because He gave her so many consolations, [iv.iv-p78.1]  'Non voglio quello che esce da te, ma sol voglio te, O dolce  Amore   !'"   [*508] 

[iv.iv-p80][iv.iv-p80.1]  "Non voglio quello che esce da te."    When the growing soul has reached this level of  desire, the Illuminative Way is nearly at an end. It has seen the  goal, "that Country which is no mere vision, but a home,"   [*509]    and is set upon the forward march. So Rabia, the Moslem saint:  "O my God, my concern and my desire in this world, is that I  should remember thee above all the things of this world, and in the  next that out of all who are in that world, I should meet with thee  alone."   [*510]    So Gertrude More: "No knowledge which we can here have of thee  can satisfy my soul seeking and longing without ceasing after thee. .  . . Alas, my Lord God, what is all thou canst give to a loving soul  which sigheth and panteth after thee alone, and esteemeth all things  as dung that she may gain thee? What is all I say, whilst thou givest  not thyself, who art that one thing which is only necessary and which  alone can satisfy [p. 249] [iv.iv-Page_249] our souls? Was it any  comfort to St. Mary Magdalen, when she sought thee, to find two angels  which presented themselves instead of thee? verily I cannot think it  was any joy unto her. For that soul that hath set her whole love and  desire on thee can never find any true satisfaction but only in  thee."   [*511] 

[iv.iv-p84]What is the nature of this mysterious mystic  illumination? Apart from the certitude it imparts, what is the form  which it most usually assumes in the consciousness of the self? The  illuminatives seem to assure us that its apparently symbolic name is  really descriptive; that they do experience a kind of radiance, a  flooding of the personality with new light. A new sun rises above the  horizon, and transfigures their twilit world. Over and over again they  return to light-imagery in this connection. Frequently, as in their  first conversion, they report an actual and overpowering consciousness  of radiant light, ineffable in its splendour, as an accompaniment of  their inward adjustment.

   [iv.iv-p84.1] "Sopr' onne  lengua amore,
   bonta senza figura,
   lume fuor di mesura
   resplende nel mio core,"   [*512]  
  [iv.iv-p86]sang Jacopone da Todi. "Light rare,  untellable!" said Whitman. "The flowing light of the  Godhead," said Mechthild of Magdeburg, trying to describe   what    it was that made the difference between her universe and that of  normal men. [iv.iv-p86.1]  "Lux vixens dicit,"    said St. Hildegarde of her revelations, which she  described as appearing in a special light, more brilliant than the  brightness round the sun.   [*513]    It is an "infused brightness," says St. Teresa, "a  light which knows no night; but rather, as it is always light, nothing  ever disturbs it."   [*514] 

   [iv.iv-p88.1] "De subito parve  giorno a giorno
   essere aggiunto!"
  [iv.iv-p89]exclaims Dante, initiated into the atmosphere of  heaven; [iv.iv-p89.1]"Lume e  lassu"is his constant declaration:

   [iv.iv-p89.2] [iv.iv-p89.4]"Cio ch' io  dico e un semplice lume,"
  [iv.iv-p90]his last word, in the effort to describe the  soul's apprehension of the Being of God.   [*515] 

[iv.iv-p92]It really seems as though the mystics'  attainment of new levels of consciousness did bring with it the power  of perceiving a splendour always there, but beyond the narrow range of  our poor sight; to which it is only a "luminous darkness"  at the best. [p. 250] [iv.iv-Page_250] "In Eternal Nature,  or the kingdom of Heaven," said Law, "materiality stands  in life and light."   [*516]    The cumulative testimony on this point is such as would be held to  prove, in any other department of knowledge, that there is indeed an  actual light, "lighting the very light" and awaiting the  recognition of men.   [*517] 

[iv.iv-p95]Consider the accent of realism with which St.  Augustine speaks of his own experience of Platonic contemplation; a  passage in which we seem to see a born psychologist desperately  struggling by means of negations to describe an intensely positive  state. "I entered into the secret closet of my soul, led by  Thee; and this I could do because Thou wast my helper. I entered, and  beheld with the mysterious eye of my soul the Light that never  changes, above the eye of my soul, above my intelligence. It was not  the common light which all flesh can see, nor was it greater yet of  the same kind, as if the light of day were to grow brighter and  brighter and flood all space. It was not like this, but different:  altogether different from all such things. Nor was it above my  intelligence in the same way as oil is above water, or heaven above  earth; but it was higher because it made me, and I was lower because  made by it. He who knoweth the truth knoweth that Light: and who  knoweth it, knoweth eternity. Love knoweth it."   [*518] 

[iv.iv-p97]Here, as in the cases of St. Teresa, St. Catherine of  Genoa, and Jacopone da Todi, we have a characteristically  "immanental" description of the illuminated state. The  self, by the process which mystics call "introversion,"  the deliberate turning inwards of its attention, its conative powers,  discerns Reality within the heart: "the rippling tide of love  which flows secretly from God into the soul, and draws it mightily  back into its source."   [*519]    But the opposite or transcendental tendency is not less frequent. The  cosmic vision of Infinity, exterior to the subject--the  expansive, outgoing movement towards a Divine Light,

   [iv.iv-p98.1] "Che visible face
   lo Creatore a quella creatura,
   che solo in lui vedere ha la sua  pace," [*520]  
  [iv.iv-p100][p. 251] [iv.iv-Page_251] wholly other than  anything the earth-born creature can conceive--the strange,  formless absorption in the Divine Dark to which the soul is destined  to ascend--all these modes of perception are equally  characteristic of the Illuminative Way. As in conversion, so here  Reality may be apprehended in either transcendent or immanent,  positive or negative terms. It is both near and far; "closer to  us than our most inward part, and higher than our highest";   [*521]    and for some selves that which is far is easiest to find. To a  certain type of mind, the veritable practice of the Presence of God is  not the intimate and adorable companionship of the personal Comrade or  the Inward Light, but the awestruck contemplation of the Absolute, the  "naked Godhead," source and origin of all that Is. It is  an ascent to the supernal plane of perception, where "the  simple, absolute and unchangeable mysteries of heavenly Truth lie  hidden in the dazzling obscurity of the secret Silence, outshining all  brilliance with the intensity of their darkness, and surcharging our  blinded intellects with the utterly impalpable and invisible fairness  of glories which exceed all beauty."   [*522] 

[iv.iv-p103]With such an experience of eternity, such a vision of  the triune all-including Absolute which "binds the Universe with  love," Dante ends his "Divine Comedy": and the  mystic joy with which its memory fills him is his guarantee that he  has really seen the Inviolate Rose, the flaming heart of things.

   [iv.iv-p103.1] "O abbondante grazia,  ond' io presunsi
   ficcar lo viso per la luce eterna
   tanto che la veduta vi consunsi!
   Nel suo profondo vidi che s' interna,
   legato con amore in un volume,
   cio che per l'universo si squaderna;
   Sustanzia ed accidenti, e lor costume,
   quasi conflati insieme per tal modo
   che cio ch' io dico e un semplice  lume.
   La forma universal di questo nodo
   credo ch' io vidi, perche piu di  largo,
   dicendo questo, mi sento ch' io godo.
   . . . . .
   O, quanto e corto il dire, e come fioco
   al mio concetto! e questo, a quel ch' io  vidi,
   e tanto che non basta a dicer poco.
   O luce eterna, che sola in te sidi,
   sola t' intendi, e, da te intelletta
   ed intendente te, ami ed  arridi!" [*523]  
  [iv.iv-p111][p. 252] [iv.iv-Page_252] In Dante, the  transcendent and impersonal aspect of illumination is seen in its most  exalted form. It seems at first sight almost impossible to find room  within the same system for this expansive vision of the  Undifferentiated Light and such intimate and personal apprehensions of  Deity as Lady Julian's conversations with her "courteous  and dearworthy Lord," or St. Catherine's companionship  with Love Divine. Yet all these are really reports of the same  psychological state: describe the attainment by selves of different  types, of the same stage in the soul's progressive apprehension  of reality.

[iv.iv-p112]In a wonderful passage, unique in the literature of  mysticism, Angela of Foligno has reported the lucid vision in which  she perceived this truth: the twofold revelation of an Absolute at  once humble and omnipotent, personal and transcendent--the  unimaginable synthesis of "unspeakable power" and  "deep humility."

[iv.iv-p113]"The eyes of my soul were opened, and I beheld  the plenitude of God, wherein I did comprehend the whole world, both  here and beyond the sea, and the abyss and ocean and all things. In  all these things I beheld naught save the divine power, in a manner  assuredly indescribable; so that through excess of marvelling the soul  cried with a loud voice, saying 'This whole world is full of  God!'   [*524]    Wherefore I now comprehended how small a thing is the whole world,  that is to say both here and beyond the seas, the abyss, the ocean,  and all things; and that the Power of God exceeds and fills all. Then  He said unto me: 'I have shown thee something of My  Power,' and I understood, that after this I should better  understand the rest. He then said 'Behold now My  humility.' Then was I given an insight into the deep humility of  God towards man. And comprehending that unspeakable power and  beholding that deep humility, my soul marvelled greatly, and did  esteem itself to be nothing at all."   [*525] 

[iv.iv-p116]It must never be forgotten that all apparently  one-sided descriptions of illumination--more, all experiences of  it--are governed by temperament. "That Light whose smile  kindles the Universe" is ever the same; but the self through  whom it passes, [p. 253] [iv.iv-Page_253] and by whom we must  receive its report, has already submitted to the moulding influences  of environment and heredity, Church and State. The very language of  which that self avails itself in its struggle for expression, links it  with half a hundred philosophies and creeds. The response which it  makes to Divine Love will be the same in type as the response which  its nature would make to earthly love: but raised to the   n   th degree. We, receiving the revelation, receive with it all those  elements which the subject has contributed in spite of itself. Hence  the soul's apprehension of Divine Reality may take almost any  form, from the metaphysical ecstasies which we find in Dionysius, and  to a less degree in St. Augustine, to the simple, almost  "common-sense" statements of Brother Lawrence, the  emotional ardours of St. Gertrude, or the lovely intimacies of Julian  or Mechthild.

[iv.iv-p117]Sometimes--so rich and varied does the nature of  the great mystic tend to be--the exalted and impersonal language  of the Dionysian theology goes, with no sense of incongruity, side by  side with homely parallels drawn from the most sweet and common  incidents of daily life. Suso, in whom illumination and purgation  existed side by side for sixteen years, alternately obtaining  possession of the mental field, and whose oscillations between the  harshest mortification and the most ecstatic pleasure-states were  exceptionally violent and swift, is a characteristic instance of such  an attitude of mind. His illumination was largely of the intimate and  immanental type; but, as we might expect in a pupil of Eckhart, it was  not without touches of mystical transcendence, which break out with  sudden splendour side by side with those tender and charming passages  in which the Servitor of the Eternal Wisdom tries to tell his  love.

[iv.iv-p118]Thus, he describes in one of the earlier chapters of  his life how "whilst he was thinking, according to his custom,  of the most lovable Wisdom, he questioned himself, and interrogated  his heart, which sought persistently for love, saying, 'O my  heart, whence comes this love and grace, whence comes this gentleness  and beauty, this joy and sweetness of the heart? Does not all this  flow forth from the Godhead, as from its origin? Come! let my heart,  my senses and my soul immerse themselves in the deep Abyss whence come  these adorable things. What shall keep me back? To-day I will embrace  you, even as my burning heart desires to do.' And at this moment  there was within his heart as it were an emanation of all good, all  that is beautiful, all that is lovable and desirable was there  spiritually present, and this in a manner which cannot be expressed.  Whence came the habit that every time he heard God's praises  sung or said, he recollected himself in the depths of his heart and  soul, and thought on that Beloved Object, [p. 254] [iv.iv-Page_254] whence comes all love. It is impossible to  tell how often, with eyes filled with tears and open heart, he has  embraced his sweet Friend, and pressed Him to a heart overflowing with  love. He was like a baby which a mother holds upright on her knees,  supporting it with her hands beneath its arms. The baby, by the  movements of its little head, and all its little body, tries to get  closer and closer to its dear mother, and shows by its little laughing  gestures the gladness in its heart. Thus did the heart of the Servitor  ever seek the sweet neighbourhood of the Divine Wisdom, and thus he  was as it were altogether filled with delight."   [*526] 

   

[iv.iv-p119.1]2. The Illuminated Vision of the World

[iv.iv-p120]Closely connected with the sense of the  "Presence of God," or power of perceiving the Absolute, is  the complementary mark of the illuminated consciousness; the vision of  "a new heaven and a new earth," or an added significance  and reality in the phenomenal world. Such words as those of Julian,  "God is all thing that is good as to my sight, and the goodness  that all thing hath, it is He,"   [*527]    seem to supply the link between the two. Here again we must  distinguish carefully between vaguely poetic language--"the  light that never was," "every common bush afire with  God"--and descriptions which can be referred to a concrete  and definite psychological experience. This experience, at its best,  balances and completes the experience of the Presence of God at its  best. That is to say, its "note" is sacramental, not  ascetic. It entails the expansion rather than the concentration of  consciousness; the discovery of the Perfect One self-revealed in the  Many, not the forsaking of the Many in order to find the One. Its  characteristic expression is--

   [iv.iv-p121.1] "The World is charged with the grandeur of  God;
   It will flame out, like shining from shook  foil,"
  [iv.iv-p122]not "turn thy thoughts into thy own soul,  where He is hid." It takes, as a rule, the form of an enhanced  mental lucidity--an abnormal sharpening of the  senses--whereby an ineffable radiance, a beauty and a reality  never before suspected, are perceived by a sort of clairvoyance  shining in the meanest things.

[iv.iv-p123]"From the moment in which the soul has received  the impression of Deity in infused orison," says Malaval,  "she sees Him everywhere, by one of love's secrets which  is only known of those who have experienced it. The simple vision of  pure love, which is [p. 255] [iv.iv-Page_255] marvellously  penetrating, does not stop at the outer husk of creation: it  penetrates to the divinity which is hidden within."   [*528] 

[iv.iv-p125]Thus Browning makes David declare--

   [iv.iv-p125.1] "I but open my eyes,--and perfection, no  more and no less
   In the kind I imagined full-fronts me, and God is  seen God
   In the star, in the stone, in the flesh, in the soul  and the clod."   [*529]  
  [iv.iv-p127]Blake's "To see a world in a grain of  sand," Tennyson's "Flower in the crannied  wall," Vaughan's "Each bush and oak doth know I  AM," and the like, are exact though over-quoted reports of  "things seen" in this state of consciousness, this  "simple vision of pure love": the value of which is summed  up in Eckhart's profound saying, "The meanest thing that  one knows in God--for instance if one could understand a flower  as it has its Being in God--this would be a higher thing than the  whole world!"   [*530]    Mystical poets of the type of Wordsworth and Walt Whitman seem to  possess in a certain degree this form of illumination. It is this  which Bucke, the American psychologist, analysed under the name of  "Cosmic Consciousness."   [*531]    It is seen at its full development in the mystical experiences of  Boehme, Fox, and Blake.

[iv.iv-p130]We will take first the experience of Jacob Boehme, a  mystic who owed little or nothing to the influence of tradition, and  who furnishes one of the best recorded all-round examples of mystical  illumination; exhibiting, along with an acute consciousness of divine  companionship, all those phenomena of visual lucidity, automatism, and  enhanced intellectual powers which properly belong to it, but are  seldom developed simultaneously in the same individual.

[iv.iv-p131]In Boehme's life, as described in the  Introduction to the English translation of his collected works,   [*532]    there were three distinct onsets of illumination; all of the  pantheistic and external type. In the first, which seems to have  happened whilst he was very young, we are told that "he was  surrounded by a divine Light for seven days, and stood in the highest  contemplation and Kingdom of Joy." This we may perhaps identify  with mystical awakening, of the kind experienced by Suso. About the  year 1600 occurred the second illumination, initiated by a trance-like  state of consciousness, the result of gazing at a polished disc. To  this I have already referred.   [*533]    This experience brought with it that peculiar and lucid [p. 256] [iv.iv-Page_256] vision of the inner reality of the phenomenal  world in which, as he says, "he looked into the deepest  foundations of things." "He believed that it was only a  fancy, and in order to banish it from his mind he went out upon the  green. But here he remarked that he gazed into the very heart of  things, the very herbs and grass, and that actual Nature harmonized  with what he had inwardly seen."   [*534]    Of this same experience and the clairvoyance which accompanied it,  another biographer says, "Going abroad in the fields to a green  before Neys Gate, at Gorlitz, he there sat down, and, viewing the  herbs and grass of the field in his inward light, he saw into their  essences, use and properties, which were discovered to him by their  lineaments, figures and signatures. . . . In the unfolding of these  mysteries before his understanding, he had a great measure of joy, yet  returned home and took care of his family and lived in great peace and  silence, scarce intimating to any these wonderful things that had  befallen him."   [*535] 

[iv.iv-p136]So far as we can tell from his own scattered  statements, from this time onwards Boehme must have enjoyed a frequent  and growing consciousness of the transcendental world: though there is  evidence that he, like all other mystics, knew seasons of darkness,  "many a shrewd Repulse," and times of struggle with that  "powerful contrarium" the lower consciousness. In  1610--perhaps as the result of such intermittent  struggles--the vivid illumination of ten years before was  repeated in an enhanced form: and it was in consequence of this, and  in order that there might be some record of the mysteries upon which  he had gazed, that he wrote his first and most difficult book, the  "Aurora," or "Morning Redness." The passage in  which the "inspired shoemaker" has tried to tell us what  his vision of Reality was like, to communicate something of the grave  and enthusiastic travail of his being, the unspeakable knowledge of  things which he attained, is one of those which arouse in all who have  even the rudiments of mystical perception the sorrow and excitement of  exiles who suddenly hear the accents of home. Like absolute music, it  addresses itself to the whole being, not merely to the intellect.  Those who will listen and be receptive will find themselves repaid by  a strange sense of extended life, an exhilarating consciousness of  truth. Here, if ever, is a man who is struggling to "speak as he  saw": and it is plain that he saw much--as much, perhaps,  as Dante, though he lacked the poetic genius which was needed to give  his vision an intelligible form. The very strangeness of the phrasing,  the unexpected harmonies and dissonances which worry polite [p. 257] [iv.iv-Page_257] and well-regulated minds, are earnests of the  Spirit of Life crying out for expression from within. Boehme, like  Blake, seems "drunk with intellectual  vision"--"a God-intoxicated man."

[iv.iv-p137]"In this my earnest and Christian Seeking and  Desire," he says, "(wherein I suffered many a shrewd  Repulse, but at last resolved rather to put myself in Hazard, than  give over and leave off) the Gate was opened to me, that in one  Quarter of an Hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years  together at an University, at which I exceedingly admired, and  thereupon turned my Praise to God for it. For I saw and knew the Being  of all Beings, the Byss and the Abyss, and the Eternal Generation of  the   Holy Trinity,    the Descent and Original of the World, and of all creatures through  the Divine Wisdom: knew and saw in myself all the three Worlds,  namely,   The Divine,    angelical and paradisical; and the   dark World,    the Original of the Nature to the Fire; and then, thirdly, the   external;    and   visible World,    being a Procreation or external Birth from both the internal and  spiritual Worlds. And I saw and knew the whole working Essence in the  Evil and the Good, and the Original and Existence of each of them; and  likewise how the fruitful bearing Womb of Eternity brought forth. . .  . Yet however I must begin to labour in these great mysteries, as a  Child that goes to School. I saw it as in a great Deep in the  Internal. For I had a thorough view of the Universe, as in a Chaos,  wherein all things are couched and wrapped up, but it was impossible  for me to explain the same. Yet it opened itself to me, from Time to  Time, as in a Young Plant; though the same was with me for the space  of twelve years, and as it was as it were breeding, and I found a  powerful Instigation within me, before I could bring it forth into  external Form of Writing: and whatever I could apprehend with the  external Principle of my mind, that I wrote down."   [*536] 

[iv.iv-p139]Close to this lucid vision of the reality of  things--this sudden glimpse of the phenomenal in the light of the  intelligible world--is George Fox's experience at the age  of twenty-four, as recorded in his Journal.   [*537]    Here, as in Boehme's case, it is clear that a previous and  regrettable acquaintance with the "doctrine of signatures"  has to some extent determined the language and symbols under which he  describes his intuitive vision of actuality as it exists in the Divine  Mind.

[iv.iv-p141]"Now was I come up in spirit through the flaming  sword into the Paradise of God. All things were new: and all the  creation gave another smell unto me than before, beyond what words can  utter. . . . The creation was opened to me; and it was showed me how  all things had their names given them, according to their [p. 258] [iv.iv-Page_258] nature and virtue. And I was at a stand in my  mind whether I should practise physic for the good of mankind, seeing  the nature and virtue of the creatures were so opened to me by the  Lord. . . . Great things did the Lord lead me unto, and wonderful  depths were opened unto me beyond what can by words be declared; but  as people come into subjection to the Spirit of God, and grow up in  the image and power of the Almighty, they may receive the word of  wisdom that opens all things, and come to know the   hidden unity in the Eternal Being." 

[iv.iv-p142]"To know the hidden unity in the Eternal  Being"--know it with an invulnerable certainty, in the  all-embracing act of consciousness with which we are aware of the  personality of those we truly love--is to live at its fullest the  Illuminated Life, enjoying "all creatures in God and God in all  creatures." Lucidity of this sort seemes to be an enormously  enhanced form of the poetic consciousness of "otherness"  in natural things--the sense of a unity in separateness, a mighty  and actual Life beyond that which eye can see, a glorious reality  shining through the phenomenal veil--frequent in those  temperaments which are at one with life. The self then becomes  conscious of the living reality of that World of Becoming, the vast  arena of the Divine creativity, in which the little individual life is  immersed. Alike in howling gale and singing cricket it hears the  crying aloud of that "Word which is through all things  everlastingly." It participates, actively and open-eyed, in the  mighty journey of the Son towards the Father's heart: and seeing  with purged sight all things and creatures as they are in that  transcendent order, detects in them too that striving of Creation to  return to its centre which is the secret of the Universe.

[iv.iv-p143]A harmony is thus set up between the mystic and Life  in all its forms. Undistracted by appearance, he sees, feels, and  knows it in one piercing act of loving comprehension. "And the  bodily sight stinted," says Julian, "but the spiritual  sight dwelled in mine understanding, and I abode with reverent dread  joying in that I saw."   [*538]    The heart outstrips the clumsy senses, and sees--perhaps for an  instant, perhaps for long periods of bliss--an undistorted and  more veritable world. All things are perceived in the light of  charity, and hence under the aspect of beauty: for beauty is simply  Reality seen with the eyes of love. As in the case of another and more  beatific Vision, essere in caritate e qui necesse [*539]   For such a reverent and joyous sight the meanest accidents of life are  radiant. The London streets are paths of loveliness; the very  omnibuses look like coloured archangels, their laps filled full of  little trustful souls. [p. 259] [iv.iv-Page_259]

[iv.iv-p146]Often when we blame our artists for painting ugly  things, they are but striving to show us a beauty to which we are  blind. They have gone on ahead of us, and attained that state of  "fourfold vision to which Blake laid claim; in which the  visionary sees the whole visible universe transfigured, because he has  "put off the rotten rags of sense and memory," and  "put on Imagination uncorrupt."   [*540]    In this state of lucidity symbol and reality, Nature and Imagination,  are seen to be   One:    and in it are produced all the more sublime works of art, since these  owe their greatness to the impact of Reality upon the artistic mind.  "I know," says Blake again, "that this world is a  world of imagination and vision. I see everything I paint in this  world, but everybody does not see alike. To the eye of a miser a  guinea is far more beautiful than the sun and a bag worn with the use  of money has more beautiful proportions than a vine filled with  grapes. The tree which moves some to tears of joy is in the eyes of  others only a green thing which stands in the way. Some see Nature all  ridicule and deformity, and by these I shall not regulate my  proportions; and some scarce see Nature at all. But to the eyes of the  man of imagination Nature is Imagination itself. As a man is, so he  sees. As the eye is formed, such are its powers. You certainly  mistake, when you say that the visions of fancy are not to be found in  this world. To me this world is all one continued vision of fancy or  imagination, and I feel flattered when I am told so."   [*541] 

[iv.iv-p149]If the Mystic Way be considered as an organic process  of transcendence, this illuminated apprehension of things, this  cleansing of the doors of perception, is surely what we might expect  to occur as man moves towards higher centres of consciousness. It  marks the self's growth towards free and conscious participation  in the Absolute Life; its progressive appropriation of that life by  means of the contact which exists in the deeps of man's  being--the ground or spark of the soul--between the subject  and the transcendental world. The surface intelligence, purified from  the domination of the senses, is invaded more and more by the  transcendent personality; the "New Man" who is by nature a  denizen of the independent spiritual world, and whose destiny, in  mystical language, is a "return to his Origin." Hence an  inflow of new vitality, a deeper and wider apprehension of the  mysterious world in which man finds himself, an exaltation of his  intuitive powers.

[iv.iv-p150]In such moments of clear sight and enhanced perception  as that which Blake and Boehme describe, the mystic and the artist do  really see [iv.iv-p150.1]  sub specie aeternitatis     the Four-fold River of Life--that World of  Becoming in which, as Erigena says, "Every visible and invisible  creature is a theophany or appearance of God"-- [p. 260] [iv.iv-Page_260] as all perhaps might see it, if prejudice,  selfhood, or other illusion did not distort our sight. From this  loving vision there comes very often that beautiful sympathy with,  that abnormal power over, all living natural things, which crops up  again and again in the lives of the mystical saints; to amaze the  sluggish minds of common men, barred by "the torrent of Use and  Wont"   [*542]    from all free and deep communion alike with their natural and  supernatural origin.

[iv.iv-p152]Yet it is surely not very amazing that St. Francis of  Assisi, feeling and knowing--not merely  "believing"--that every living creature was veritably  and actually a "theophany or appearance of God," should  have been acutely conscious that he shared with these brothers and  sisters of his the great and lovely life of the All. Nor, this being  so, can we justly regard him as eccentric because he acted in  accordance with his convictions, preached to his little sisters the  birds,   [*543]    availed himself of the kindly offices of the falcon,   [*544]    enjoyed the friendship of the pheasant,   [*545]    soothed the captured turtledoves, his "simple-minded sisters,  innocent and chaste,"   [*546]    or persuaded his Brother Wolf to a better life.   [*547] 

[iv.iv-p158]The true mystic, so often taunted with "a denial  of the world," does but deny the narrow and artificial world of  self: and finds in exchange the secrets of that mighty universe which  he shares with Nature and with God. Strange contacts, unknown to those  who only lead the life of sense, are set up between his being and the  being of all other things. In that remaking of his consciousness which  follows upon the "mystical awakening," the deep and primal  life which he shares with all creation has been roused from its sleep.  Hence the barrier between human and non-human life, which makes man a  stranger on earth as well as in heaven, is done away. Life now  whispers to his life: all things are his intimates, and respond to his  fraternal sympathy.

[iv.iv-p159]Thus it seems quite a simple and natural thing to the  Little Poor Man of Assisi, whose friend the pheasant preferred his  cell to "the haunts more natural to its state," that he  should be ambassador from the terrified folk of Gubbio to his  formidable brother the Wolf. The result of the interview, reduced to  ordinary language, could be paralleled in the experience of many  persons who have possessed this strange and incommunicable power over  animal life.

[iv.iv-p160]"O wondrous thing! whereas St. Francis had made  the sign of the Cross, right so the terrible wolf shut his jaws and  stayed his running: and when he was bid, came gently as a lamb and  laid [p. 261] [iv.iv-Page_261] him down at the feet of St.  Francis. . . . And St. Francis stretching forth his hand to take  pledge of his troth, the wolf lifted up his right paw before him and  laid it gently on the hand of St. Francis, giving thereby such sign of  good faith as he was able. Then quoth St. Francis, 'Brother  Wolf, I bid thee in the name of Jesu Christ come now with me, nothing  doubting, and let us go stablish this peace in God's  name.' And the wolf obedient set forth with him, in fashion as a  gentle lamb; whereat the townsfolk made mighty marvel, beholding. . .  . And thereafter this same wolf lived two years in Agobio; and went  like a tame beast in and out the houses from door to door, without  doing hurt to any, or any doing hurt to him, and was courteously  nourished by the people; and as he passed thus wise through the  country and the houses, never did any dog bark behind him. At length  after a two years space, brother wolf died of old age: whereat the  townsfolk sorely grieved, sith marking him pass so gently through the  city, they minded them the better of the virtue and the sanctity of  St. Francis."   [*548] 

[iv.iv-p162]In another mystic, less familiar than St. Francis to  English readers--Rose of Lima, the Peruvian saint--this deep  sympathy with natural things assumed a particularly lovely form. To  St. Rose the whole world was a holy fairyland, in which it seemed to  her that every living thing turned its face towards Eternity and  joined in her adoration of God. It is said in her biography that  "when at sunrise, she passed through the garden to go to her  retreat, she called upon nature to praise with her the Author of all  things. Then the trees were seen to bow as she passed by, and clasp  their leaves together, making a harmonious sound. The flowers swayed  upon their stalks, and opened their blossoms that they might scent the  air; thus according to their manner praising God. At the same time the  birds began to sing, and came and perched upon the hands and shoulders  of Rose. The insects greeted her with a joyous murmur, and all which  had life and movement joined in the concert of praise she addressed to  the Lord."   [*549] 

[iv.iv-p164]Again--and here we catch an echo of the pure  Franciscan spirit, the gaiety of the Troubadours of God--during  her last Lent, "each evening at sunset a little bird with an  enchanting voice came and perched upon a tree beside her window, and  waited till she gave the sign to him to sing. Rose, as soon as she saw  her little feathered chorister, made herself ready to sing the praises  of God, and challenged the bird to this musical duel in a song which  she had [p. 262] [iv.iv-Page_262] composed for this purpose.  'Begin, dear little bird,' she said, 'begin thy  lovely song! Let thy little throat, so full of sweet melodies, pour  them forth: that together we may praise the Lord. Thou dost praise thy  Creator, I my sweet Saviour: thus we together bless the Deity. Open  thy little beak, begin and I will follow thee: and our voices shall  blend in a song of holy joy.'

[iv.iv-p165]"At once the little bird began to sing, running  through his scale to the highest note. Then he ceased, that the saint  might sing in her turn . . . thus did they celebrate the greatness of  God, turn by turn, for a whole hour: and with such perfect order, that  when the bird sang Rose said nothing, and when she sang in her turn  the bird was silent, and listened to her with a marvellous attention.  At last, towards the sixth hour, the saint dismissed him, saying,  'Go, my little chorister, go, fly far away. But blessed be my  God who never leaves me!'''   [*550] 

[iv.iv-p167]The mystic whose illumination takes such forms as  these, who feels with this intensity and closeness the bond of love  which "binds in one book the scattered leaves of all the  universe," dwells in a world unknown to other men. He pierces  the veil of imperfection, and beholds Creation with the  Creator's eye. The "Pattern is shown him in the  Mount." "The whole consciousness," says  Recejac, "is flooded with light to unknown depths,  under the gaze of love, from which nothing escapes. In this stage,  intensity of vision and sureness of judgment are equal: and the things  which the seer brings back with him when he returns to common life are  not merely partial impressions, or the separate knowledge of  'science' or 'poetry.' They are rather truths  which embrace the world, life and conduct: in a word,   the whole consciousness   ."   [*551] 

[iv.iv-p169]It is curious to note in those diagrams of experience  which we have inherited from the more clear-sighted philosophers and  seers, indications that they have enjoyed prolonged or transitory  periods of this higher consciousness; described by Recejac  as the marriage of imaginative vision with moral transcendence. I  think it at least a reasonable supposition that Plato's doctrine  of Ideas owed something to an intuition of this kind; for a  philosophy, though it may claim to be the child of pure reason, is  usually found to owe its distinctive character to the  philosopher's psychological experience. The Platonic statements  as to the veritable existence of the Idea of a house, a table, or a  bed, and other such concrete and practical applications of the  doctrine of the ideal, which have annoyed many metaphysicians, become  explicable on such a psychological basis. That illuminated vision in  which "all things are made new" can afford to embrace the  homeliest as well as the sublimest things; [p. 263] [iv.iv-Page_263] and, as a matter of experience, it does do  this, seeing all objects, as Monet saw the hayrick, as "modes of  light." Blake said that his cottage at Felpham was a shadow of  the angels' houses,   [*552]    and I have already referred to the converted Methodist who saw his  horses and hogs on the ideal plane.   [*553] 

[iv.iv-p172]Again, when Plotinus, who is known to have experienced  ecstatic states, speaks with the assurance of an explorer of an  "intelligible world," and asks us, "What other fire  could be a better image of the fire which is there, than the fire  which is here? Or what other earth than this, of the earth which is  there?"   [*554]    we seem to detect behind the language of Neoplatonic philosophy a  hint of the same type of first-hand experience. The minds to whom we  owe the Hebrew Kabalah found room for it too in their diagram of the  soul's ascent towards Reality. The first "Sephira"  above Malkuth, the World of Matter, or lowest plane upon that Tree of  Life which is formed by the ten emanations of the Godhead is, they  say, "Yesod," the "archetypal universe." In  this are contained the realities, patterns, or Ideas, whose shadows  constitute the world of appearance in which we dwell. The path of the  ascending soul upon the Tree of Life leads him first from Malkuth to  Yesod:   i.e.   , human consciousness in the course of its transcendence passes from  the normal illusions of men to a deeper perception of its  environment--a perception which is symbolized by the  "archetypal plane" or world of Platonic Ideas.  "Everything in temporal nature," says William Law,  "is descended out of that which is eternal, and stands as a  palpable visible outbirth of it, so when we know how to separate the  grossness, death, and darkness of time from it, we find what it is in  its eternal state. . . . In Eternal Nature, or the Kingdom of Heaven,  materiality stands in life and light; it is the light's glorious  Body, or that garment wherewith light is clothed, and therefore has  all the properties of light in it, and only differs from light as it  is its brightness and beauty, as the holder and displayer of all its  colours, powers, and virtues."   [*555]    When Law wrote this, he may have believed that he was interpreting to  English readers the unique message of his master, Jacob Boehme. As a  matter of fact he was reiterating truths which a long line of  practical mystics had been crying for centuries into the deaf ears of  mankind. He was saying in the eighteenth century what Gregory of Nyssa  had said in the fourth and Erigena in the ninth; telling the secret of  that "Inviolate Rose" which can never be profaned because  it can only be seen with the eyes of love. [p. 264] [iv.iv-Page_264]

[iv.iv-p175]That serene and illuminated consciousness of the  relation of things inward and outward--of the Hidden Treasure and  its Casket, the energizing Absolute and its expression in Time and  Space--which we have been studying in this chapter, is at its  best a state of fine equilibrium; a sane adjustment of the inner and  outer life. By that synthesis of love and will which is the secret of  the heart, the mystic achieves a level of perception in which the  whole world is seen and known in God, and God is seen and known in the  whole world. It is a state of exalted emotion: being produced by love,  of necessity it produces love in its turn. The sharp division between  its inlooking and outlooking forms which I have adopted for  convenience of description, is seldom present to the minds which  achieve it. They, "cleansed, fed, and sanctified," are  initiated into a spiritual universe where such clumsy distinctions  have little meaning. All is alike part of the "new life"  of peaceful charity: and that progressive abolition of selfhood which  is of the essence of mystical development, is alone enough to prevent  them from drawing a line between the inward personal companionship and  outward impersonal apprehension of the Real. True Illumination, like  all real and vital experience, consists rather in the breathing of a  certain atmosphere, the living at certain levels of consciousness,  than in the acquirement of specific information. It is, as it were, a  resting-place upon "the steep stairway of love"; where the  self turns and sees all about it a transfigured universe, radiant with  that same Light Divine which nests in its own heart and leads it  on.

[iv.iv-p176]"When man's desires are fixed immovably on  his Maker as far as for deadliness and corruption of the flesh he is  let," says Rolle of the purified soul which has attained the  illuminated state, "then it is no marvel that his strength manly  using, first as it were heaven being opened, with his understanding he  beholds high heavenly citizens; and afterwards sweetest heat, as it  were burning fire, he feels. Then with marvellous sweetness he is  taught, and so forth in songful noise he is joyed. This, therefore, is  perfect charity, which no man knows but he that hath it took. And he  that it has taken, it never leaves: sweetly he lives and sickerly he  shall die."   [*556] 

[iv.iv-p178]Sweetly, it is true, the illuminated mystic may live;  but not, as some think, placidly. Enlightenment is a symptom of  growth: and growth is a living process, which knows no rest. The  spirit, indeed, is invaded by a heavenly peace; but it is the peace,  not of idleness, but of ordered activity. "A rest most  busy," in Hilton's words: a progressive appropriation of  the Divine. The urgent push of an indwelling spirit, aspiring to its  home in the heart of Reality, is felt more and more, as the invasion  of the normal consciousnesss [p. 265] [iv.iv-Page_265] by the  transcendental personality--the growth of the New  Man--proceeds towards its term.

[iv.iv-p179]Therefore the great seekers for reality are not as a  rule long delayed by the exalted joys of Illumination. Intensely aware  now of the Absolute Whom they adore, they are aware too that though  known He is unachieved. Even whilst they enjoy the rapture of the  Divine Presence--of life in a divine, ideal  world--something, they feel, makes default.   Sol voglio Te, O dolce Amore.    Hence for them that which they now enjoy, and which passes the  understanding of other men, is not a static condition; often it  coexists with that travail of the heart which Tauler has called  "stormy love." The greater the mystic, the sooner he  realizes that the Heavenly Manna which has been administered to him is  not yet That with which the angels are full fed. Nothing less will do:  and for him the progress of illumination is a progressive  consciousness that he is destined not for the sunny shores of the  spiritual universe, but for "the vast and stormy sea of the  divine."

[iv.iv-p180]"Here," says Ruysbroeck of the soul which  has been lit by the Uncreated Light, "there begins an eternal  hunger, which shall never more be satisfied. It is the inward craving  and hankering of the affective power and created spirit after an  Uncreated Good. And as the spirit longs for fruition, and is invited  and urged thereto by God, she must always desire to attain it. Behold!  here begin an eternal craving and continual yearning in eternal  insatiableness! These men are poor indeed: for they are hungry and  greedy, and their hunger is insatiable! Whatsoever they eat and drink  they shall never be satisfied, for this hunger is eternal. . . . Here  are great dishes of food and drink, of which none know but those who  taste them; but full satisfaction in fruition is the one dish that  lacks them, and this is why their hunger is ever renewed. Nevertheless  in this contact rivers of honey full of all delight flow forth; for  the spirit tastes these riches under every mode that it can conceive  or apprehend. But all this is according to the manner of the  creatures, and is below God: and hence there remains an eternal hunger  and impatience. If God gave to such a man all the gifts which all the  saints possess, and all that He is able to give, but without giving  Himself, the craving desire of the spirit would remain hungry and  unsatisfied."   [*557] 

[iv.iv-p182][p. 266] [iv.iv-Page_266]

Footnotes

^232:477 [iv.iv-p1.2][iv.iv-p2]          For the relation between     catharsis      and poetic and mystical knowledge, see Bremond, "Priere    et Poesie," caps xvi. and xvii.

^234:478 [iv.iv-p5.1][iv.iv-p6]          Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9. Compare with this image of the rhythmic    dance of things about a divine Corypheus in the midst, those    passages in the Apocryphal "Hymn of Jesus" where the    Logos or Christ, standing within the circle of disciples, says,    "I am the Word who did play and dance all things,"    "Now answer to My dancing," "Understand by dancing    what I do." Again, "Who danceth not knoweth not what is    being done." "I would pipe, dance ye all!" and    presently the rubric declares, "All whose Nature is to dance,    doth dance!" (See Dr. M. R. James, "Apocrypha    Anecdota," series     2;      and G. R. S. Mead, "Echoes from the Gnosis: the Dance of    Jesus." Compare     supra,      p. 134.)

^234:479 [iv.iv-p8.1][iv.iv-p9]          For instance, Keats Shelley, Wordsworth, Tennyson, Browning,    Whitman.

^235:480 [iv.iv-p10.1][iv.iv-p11]          "Letters of William Blake," p. 171.

^235:481 [iv.iv-p11.2][iv.iv-p12]          Ruysbroeck, "De vera Contemplatione," cap. xi.

^235:482 [iv.iv-p13.8][iv.iv-p14]          "Jerusalem," cap. i.

^236:483 [iv.iv-p15.1][iv.iv-p16]          Compare E. Rhode, "Psyche," and J. E. Harrison,    "Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion," caps, ix.,    x., and xi.; a work which puts the most favourable construction    possible on the meaning of Orphic initiation.

^236:484 [iv.iv-p16.8][iv.iv-p17]          The "Bacchae" of Euripides (translated by Gilbert    Murray), p. 83.

^236:485 [iv.iv-p18.8][iv.iv-p19]          St. John of the Cross, "Llama de Amor Viva" (translated    by Arthur Symons).

^237:486 [iv.iv-p23.1][iv.iv-p24]          "Fioretti," cap. xlviii. (Arnold's    translation).

^237:487 [iv.iv-p25.1][iv.iv-p26]          Horstman, "Richard Rolle of Hampole," vol. ii. p.    79.

^238:488 [iv.iv-p26.1][iv.iv-p27]          "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. i. cap.    43.

^239:489 [iv.iv-p30.2][iv.iv-p31]          "De Imitatione Christi," I. iii. cap. i.

^239:490 [iv.iv-p31.2][iv.iv-p32]          For the decisive character of this "night of the    senses," see St. John of the Cross, "Noche escura del    Alma," I. i.

^240:491 [iv.iv-p38.1][iv.iv-p39]          "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell," xxii.

^240:492 [iv.iv-p40.1][iv.iv-p41]              Vide supra,      pp. 42-50    . 

^242:493 [iv.iv-p45.1][iv.iv-p46]          Julian of Norwich, "Revelations," cap. xliii.

^242:494 [iv.iv-p47.1][iv.iv-p48]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xli.

^242:495 [iv.iv-p49.1][iv.iv-p50]          See Delacroix, "Etudes sur le Mysticisme,"    Appendix I. "Sentiment de Presence." For a balanced    view, Marechal, "Studies in the Psychology of the    Mystics," p. 55. See also Poulain, "Les Graces    d'Oraison," cap. v.

^243:496 [iv.iv-p51.1][iv.iv-p52]          Vida, cap. xviii.  section 20.

^243:497 [iv.iv-p53.1][iv.iv-p54]          "Letters of St. Teresa" (1581), Dalton's    translation, No. VII.

^243:498 [iv.iv-p55.1][iv.iv-p56]          "Republic," vii. 518.

^243:499 [iv.iv-p57.1][iv.iv-p58]          Recejac, "Fondements de la Connaissance    Mystique," p. 151.

^244:500 [iv.iv-p60.2][iv.iv-p61]          St. Bernard, "Cantica Canticorum," Sermon lxxiv.

^245:501 [iv.iv-p62.1][iv.iv-p63]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. xiv.

^246:502 [iv.iv-p66.1][iv.iv-p67]          Hugh of St. Victor, "De Arrha Animae" (Migne,    Patrologia Latina, vol. clxxvi.).

^246:503 [iv.iv-p68.1][iv.iv-p69]          "The Practice of the Presence of God," Second    Conversation.

^246:504 [iv.iv-p70.1][iv.iv-p71]          St. Teresa, "Las Fundaciones," cap, v. p. 8.

^247:505 [iv.iv-p72.1][iv.iv-p73]          Vie, pt. i. cap. xvii.

^247:506 [iv.iv-p75.1][iv.iv-p76]          "Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. p. 105.

^247:507 [iv.iv-p77.1][iv.iv-p78]          "Vita e Dottrina"     loc. cit. 

^248:508 [iv.iv-p78.2][iv.iv-p79]          "I desire not that which comes forth from Thee; but only I    desire Thee, O sweetest Love!" ("Vita e Dottrina,"    cap. vi ).

^248:509 [iv.iv-p80.2][iv.iv-p81]          Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xx. Compare St. Teresa: "Rapture is    a great help to recognize our true home and to see that we are    pilgrims here; it is a great thing to see what is going on there,    and to know where we have to live, for if a person has to go and    settle in another country, it is a great help to him in undergoing    the fatigues of his journey that he has discovered it to be a    country where he may live in the most perfect peace" (Vida,    cap. xxxviii.,  section 8).

^248:510 [iv.iv-p81.1][iv.iv-p82]          M. Smith, "Rabia the Mystic," p. 30.

^249:511 [iv.iv-p82.1][iv.iv-p83]          "Spiritual Exercises," pp. 26 and 174.

^249:512 [iv.iv-p84.6][iv.iv-p85]          "Love above all language, goodness unimagined, light without    measure shines in my heart" (Jacopone da Todi. Lauda    xci.).

^249:513 [iv.iv-p86.2][iv.iv-p87]          Pitra, "Analecta S. Hildegardis opera," p. 332.

^249:514 [iv.iv-p87.1][iv.iv-p88]          St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxviii.  section section 7, 8.

^249:515 [iv.iv-p90.1][iv.iv-p91]          Par. i. 61, xxx. 100, xxxiii. 90.

^250:516 [iv.iv-p92.1][iv.iv-p93]          "An Appeal to All who Doubt." I give the whole passage    below, p. 263.

^250:517 [iv.iv-p93.1][iv.iv-p94]          It is, of course, arguable that the whole of this light-imagery is    ultimately derived from the Prologue of the Fourth Gospel: as the    imagery of the Spiritual Marriage is supposed to be derived from the    Song of Songs. Some hardy commentators have even found in it    evidence of the descent of Christian Mysticism from sun-worship.    (See H. F. Dunbar, "Symbolism in Mediaeval Thought".)    But it must be remembered that mystics are essentially realists,    always seeking for language adequate to their vision of truth: hence    their adoption of this imagery is most simply explained by the fact    that it represent something which they know and are struggling to    describe.

^250:518 [iv.iv-p95.1][iv.iv-p96]          Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

^250:519 [iv.iv-p97.1][iv.iv-p98]          Mechthild of Magdeburg,     op. cit     ., pt. vii. 45.

^250:520 [iv.iv-p98.5][iv.iv-p99]          Par. xxx. 100, "Which makes visible the creator to that    creature who only in beholding Him finds its peace."

^251:521 [iv.iv-p100.1][iv.iv-p101]          Aug. Conf., bk. iii. cap. 6.

^251:522 [iv.iv-p101.1][iv.iv-p102]          Dionysius the Areopagite, "De Mystica Theologia," i. 1.    (Rolt's translation.)

^251:523 [iv.iv-p103.21][iv.iv-p104]     Par. xxxiii. 82, 121:--

[iv.iv-p105]"O grace abounding! wherein I    presumed to fix my gaze on the eternal light so long that I consumed    my sight thereon!

[iv.iv-p106]In its depths I saw ingathered the    scattered leaves of the universe, bound into one book by love.

[iv.iv-p107]Substance and accident and their    relations: as if fused together in such a manner that what I tell of    is a simple light.

[iv.iv-p108]And I believe that I saw the universal    form of this complexity; because, as I say this, I feel that I    rejoice more deeply. . . .

[iv.iv-p109]Oh, but how scant the speech and how    faint to my concept! and that to what I saw is such, that it    suffices not to call it 'little.'

[iv.iv-p110]O Light Eternal, Who only in Thyself    abidest, only Thyself dost comprehend, and, of Thyself comprehended    and Thyself comprehending, dost love and smile!"

^252:524 [iv.iv-p113.1][iv.iv-p114]          The Latin is more vivid: "Est iste mundus pregnans de    Deo."

^252:525 [iv.iv-p114.1][iv.iv-p115]          Ste. Angele de Foligno, "Le Livre de    l'Experience des Vrais Fideles," p. 124    (English translation, p. 172).

^254:526 [iv.iv-p118.1][iv.iv-p119]          Suso, Leben, cap. iv.

^254:527 [iv.iv-p120.1][iv.iv-p121]          "Revelations," cap. viii.

^255:528 [iv.iv-p123.1][iv.iv-p124]          Malaval, "De l'Oraison Ordinaire" ("La    Pratique de la Vraye Theologie Mystique," vol. i. p. 342).

^255:529 [iv.iv-p125.5][iv.iv-p126]         "Saul," xvii.

^255:530 [iv.iv-p127.1][iv.iv-p128]          Meister Eckhart ("Mystische Schriften," p. 137).

^255:531 [iv.iv-p128.1][iv.iv-p129]              Vide          supra,      pt. II. Cap. II., the cases of Richard Jefferies, Brother Lawrence,    and others.

^255:532 [iv.iv-p131.1][iv.iv-p132]          The Works of Jacob Boehme, 4 vols., 1764, vol. i. pp. xii.,    etc.

^255:533 [iv.iv-p132.1][iv.iv-p133]              Supra     , p. 58.

^256:534 [iv.iv-p133.1][iv.iv-p134]          Martensen, "Jacob Boehme," p. 7.

^256:535 [iv.iv-p134.1][iv.iv-p135]          "Life of Jacob Boehme," pp. xiii. and xiv. in vol. i.    of his Collected Works, English translation.

^257:536 [iv.iv-p137.1][iv.iv-p138]              Op. cit     ., p. xv.

^257:537 [iv.iv-p139.1][iv.iv-p140]          Vol. I. cap. ii.

^258:538 [iv.iv-p143.1][iv.iv-p144]          "Revelations," cap. viii.

^258:539 [iv.iv-p144.1][iv.iv-p145]      Par. iii. 77.

^259:540 [iv.iv-p146.1][iv.iv-p147]          "Letters of William Blake," p. 111.

^259:541 [iv.iv-p147.1][iv.iv-p148]              Op. cit.,      p. 62.

^260:542 [iv.iv-p150.2][iv.iv-p151]          Aug. Conf., bk. I. cap. xvi.

^260:543 [iv.iv-p152.1][iv.iv-p153]          "Fioretti," cap. xiv.

^260:544 [iv.iv-p153.1][iv.iv-p154]              Ibid.,      "Delle Istimate," 2, and Thomas of Celano, Vita    Secunda, cap, xccvii.

^260:545 [iv.iv-p154.1][iv.iv-p155]          Thomas of Celano,     op. cit.,      cap. cxxix.

^260:546 [iv.iv-p155.1][iv.iv-p156]          "Fioretti," cap. xxii.

^260:547 [iv.iv-p156.1][iv.iv-p157]              Ibid.,      cap. xxi.

^261:548 [iv.iv-p160.1][iv.iv-p161]          Fioretti," cap. xxi (Arnold's translation). Perhaps I    may be allowed to remind the incredulous reader that the discovery    of a large wolf's scull in Gubbio close to the spot in which    Brother Wolf is said to have lived in a cave for two years after his    taming by the Saint, has done something to vindicate the truth of    this beautiful story.

^261:549 [iv.iv-p162.1][iv.iv-p163]          De Bussierre, "Le Perou et Ste. Rose de Lime," p.    256.

^262:550 [iv.iv-p165.1][iv.iv-p166]          De Bussierre, "Le Perou et Ste. Rose de Lime," p.    415.

^262:551 [iv.iv-p167.1][iv.iv-p168]          "Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique," p. 113.

^263:552 [iv.iv-p169.1][iv.iv-p170]          Letters, p. 75.

^263:553 [iv.iv-p170.1][iv.iv-p171]              Vide supra,      p. 192.

^263:554 [iv.iv-p172.1][iv.iv-p173]          Ennead ii. 9. 4.

^263:555 [iv.iv-p173.1][iv.iv-p174]          "An Appeal to All who Doubt" (Liberal and Mystical    Writings of William Law, p. 52).

^264:556 [iv.iv-p176.1][iv.iv-p177]          Rolle, "The Fire of love," bk. i. cap. xix.

^265:557 [iv.iv-p180.1][iv.iv-p181]          "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii. cap,    liii.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

V. Voices and Visions

 [iv.v][iv.v-p1]We[iv.v-p1.1] now come to that eternal battle-ground, the detailed discussion of  those abnormal psychic phenomena which appear so persistently in the  history of the mystics. That is to say, visions, auditions, automatic  script, and those dramatic dialogues between the Self and some other  factor--the Soul, Love, Reason, of the Voice of God--which  seem sometimes to arise from an exalted and uncontrolled imaginative  power, sometimes to attain the proportions of auditory  hallucination.

[iv.v-p2]Here, moderate persons are like to be hewn in pieces  between the two "great powers" who have long disputed this  territory. On the one hand we have the strangely named rationalists,  who feel that they have settled the matter once for all by calling  attention to the obvious parallels which exist between the bodily  symptoms of acute spiritual stress and the bodily symptoms of certain  forms of disease. These considerations, reinforced by those  comfortable words "auto-suggestion" "psychosensorial  hallucination" and "association  neurosis"--which do but reintroduce mystery in another and  less attractive form--enable them to pity rather than blame the  peculiarities of the great contemplatives. French psychology, in  particular, revels in this sort of thing: and [p. 267] [iv.v-Page_267] would, if it had its way, fill the wards of  the Salpetriere with patients from the Roman Calendar. The  modern interpreter, says Rufus Jones, finds in the stigmata of St.  Francis of Assisi a point of weakness rather than a point of strength:  not "the marks of a saint," but "the marks of  emotional and physical abnormality."   [*558]    This is a very moderate statement of the "rational"  position, by a writer who is in actual sympathy with certain aspects  of mysticism. Yet it may well be doubted whether that flame of living  love which could, for one dazzling instant, weld body and soul in one,  was really a point of weakness in a saint: whether Blake was quite as  mad as some of his interpreters, or the powers of St. Paul and St.  Teresa are fully explained on a basis of epilepsy or hysteria:  whether, finally, it is as scientific as it looks, to lump together  all visions and voices--from Wandering Willy to the Apocalypse of  St. John--as examples of unhealthy cerebral activity.

[iv.v-p4]As against all this, the intransigeant votaries of the  supernatural seem determined to play into the hands of their foes.  They pin themselves, for no apparent reason, to the objective reality  and absolute value of visions, voices, and other experiences which  would be classed, in any other department of life, as the harmless  results of a vivid imagination: and claim as examples of miraculous  interference with "natural law" psychic phenomena which  may well be the normal if rare methods by which a certain type of  intuitive genius actualizes its perceptions of the spiritual world.   [*559] 

[iv.v-p6]Materialistic piety of this kind, which would have us  believe that St. Anthony of Padua really held the Infant Christ in his  arms, and that the Holy Ghost truly told the Blessed Angela of Foligno  that He loved her better than any other woman in the Vale of Spoleto,  and she knew Him more intimately than the Apostles themselves,   [*560]    is the best friend the "rationalists" possess. It turns  dreams into miracles and drags down the symbolic visions of genius to  the level of pious hallucination. Even the profound and beautiful  significance of St. Margaret Mary Alacoque's vision of the  Sacred Heart--a pictured expression of one of the deepest  intuitions of the human soul, caught up to the contemplation of  God's love--has been impaired by the grossly material  interpretation which it has been forced to bear. So, too, the  beautiful reveries of Suso, the divine visitations experienced by  Francis, Catherine, [p. 268] [iv.v-Page_268] Teresa and  countless other saints, have been degraded in the course of their  supposed elevation to the sphere called  "supernatural"--a process as fatal to their truth and  beauty as the stuffing of birds.   [*561] 

[iv.v-p9]All this, too, is done in defiance of the great  mystics themselves, who are unanimous in warning their disciples  against the danger of attributing too much importance to  "visions" and "voices," or accepting them at  their face value as messages from God. Nevertheless, these visions and  voices are such frequent accompaniments of the mystic life, that they  cannot be ignored. The messengers of the invisible world knock  persistently at the doors of the senses: and not only at those which  we refer to hearing and to sight. In other words, supersensual  intuitions--the contact between man's finite being and the  Infinite Being in which it is immersed--can express themselves by  means of almost any kind of sensory automatism. Strange sweet perfumes  and tastes, physical sensations of touch, inward fires, are reported  over and over again in connection with such spiritual adventures.   [*562]    Those symbols under which the mystic tends to approach the Absolute  easily become objectivized, and present themselves to the  consciousness as parts of experience, rather than as modes of  interpretation. The knowledge which is obtained in such an approach is  wholly transcendental. It consists in an undifferentiated act of the  whole consciousness, in which under the spur of love life draws near  to Life. Thought, feeling, vision, touch--all are hopelessly  inadequate to it: yet all, perhaps, may hint at that intense  perception of which they are the scattered parts. "And we shall  endlessly be all had in God," says Julian of this supreme  experience, "Him verily seeing and fully feeling, Him  spiritually hearing and Him delectably smelling and sweetly  swallowing."   [*563] 

[iv.v-p12]All those so-called "hallucinations of the  senses" which appear in the history of mysticism must, then, be  considered soberly, frankly, and without prejudice in the course of  our inquiry into the psychology of man's quest of the Real. The  question for their critics must really be this: do these automatisms,  which appear so persistently as a part of the contemplative life,  represent merely [p. 269] [iv.v-Page_269] the dreams and  fancies, the old digested percepts of the visionary, objectivized and  presented to his surface-mind in a concrete form; or, are they ever  representations--symbolic, if you like--of some fact, force,  or personality, some "triumphing spiritual power,"  external to himself? Is the vision only a pictured thought, an  activity of the dream imagination: or, is it the violent effort of the  self to translate something impressed upon its deeper being, some  message received from without,   [*564]    which projects this sharp image and places it before the  consciousness?

[iv.v-p14]The answer seems to be that the voice or vision may be  either of these two things: and that pathology and religion have both  been over-hasty in their eagerness to snatch at these phenomena for  their own purposes. Many--perhaps most--voices do but give  the answer which the subject has already suggested to itself;   [*565]   many--perhaps most--visions are the picturings of dreams and  desires.   [*566]    Some are morbid hallucinations: some even symptoms of insanity. All  probably borrow their shape, as apart from their content, from  suggestions already present in the mind of the seer.   [*567] 

[iv.v-p18]But there are some, experienced by minds of great  power and richness, which are crucial for those who have them. These  bring wisdom to the simple and ignorant, sudden calm to those who were  tormented by doubts. They flood the personality with new light:  accompany conversion, or the passage from one spiritual state to  another: arrive at moments of indecision, bringing with them  authoritative commands or counsels, opposed to the inclination of the  self: confer a convinced knowledge of some department of the spiritual  life before unknown. Such visions, it is clear, belong to another and  higher plane of experience from the radiant appearances of our Lady,  the piteous exhibitions of the sufferings of Christ, which swarm in  the lives of the saints, and contain no feature which is not traceable  to the subject's religious enthusiasms or previous knowledge.   [*568]    These, in the apt phrase of Godfernaux, [p. 270] [iv.v-Page_270] are but "images floating on the moving  deeps of feeling,"   [*569]    not symbolic messages from another plane of consciousness. Some test,  then, must be applied, some basis of classification discovered, if we  are to distinguish the visions and voices which seem to be symptoms of  real transcendental activity from those which are only due to  imagination raised to the   n   th power, to intense reverie, or to psychic illness. That test, I  think, must be the same as that which we shall find useful for  ecstatic states; namely, their life-enhancing quality.

[iv.v-p21]Those visions and voices which are the   media    by which the "seeing self" truly approaches the Absolute;  which are the formula under which ontological perceptions are  expressed; are found by that self to be sources of helpful energy,  charity, and, courage. They infuse something new in the way of  strength, knowledge, direction; and leave it--physically,  mentally, or spiritually--better than they found it. Those which  do not owe their inception to the contact of the soul with external  reality--in theological language, do not "come from  God"--do not have this effect. At best, they are but the  results of the self's turning over of her treasures: at worst,  they are the dreams--sometimes the diseased dreams--of an  active, rich, but imperfectly controlled subliminal consciousness.

[iv.v-p22]Since it is implicit in the make-up of the mystical  temperament, that the subliminal consciousness should be active and  rich--and since the unstable nervous organization which goes with  it renders it liable to illness and exhaustion--it is not  surprising to find that the visionary experience even of the greatest  mystics is mixed in type. Once automatism has established itself in a  person, it may as easily become the expression of folly as of wisdom.  In the moments when inspiration has ebbed, old forgotten superstitions  may take its place. When Julian of Norwich in her illness saw the  "horrible showing" of the Fiend, red with black freckles,  which clutched at her throat with its paws:   [*570]    when St. Teresa was visited by Satan, who left a smell of brimstone  behind, or when she saw him sitting on the top of her breviary and  dislodged him by the use of holy water:   [*571]    it is surely reasonable to allow that we are in the presence of  visions which tend towards the psychopathic type, and which are  expressive of little else but an exhaustion and temporary loss of  balance on the subject's part, which allowed her intense  consciousness of the reality of evil to assume a concrete form.   [*572]    [p. 271] [iv.v-Page_271]

[iv.v-p26]Because we allow this, however, it does not follow  that all the visionary experience of such a subject is morbid: any  more than "Oedipus Tyrannus" invalidates "Prometheus  Unbound," or occasional attacks of dyspepsia invalidate the  whole process of nutrition. The perceptive power and creative genius  of mystics, as of other great artists, sometimes goes astray. That  visions or voices should sometimes be the means by which the soul  consciously assimilates the nourishment it needs, is conceivable: it  is surely also conceivable that by the same means it may present to  the surface-intelligence things which are productive of unhealthy  rather than of healthy reactions.

[iv.v-p27]If we would cease, once for all, to regard visions and  voices as objective, and be content to see in them forms of symbolic  expression, ways in which the subconscious activity of the spiritual  self reaches the surface-mind, many of the disharmonies noticeable in  visionary experience, which have teased the devout, and delighted the  agnostic, would fade away. Visionary experience is--or at least  may be--the outward sign of a real experience. It is a picture  which the mind constructs, it is true, from raw materials already at  its disposal: as the artist constructs his picture with canvas and  paint. But, as the artist's paint and canvas picture is the  fruit, not merely of contact between brush and canvas, but also of a  more vital contact between his creative genius and visible beauty or  truth; so too we may see in vision, where the subject is a mystic, the  fruit of a more mysterious contact between the visionary and a  transcendental beauty or truth. Such a vision, that is to say, is the  "accident" which represents and enshrines a  "substance" unseen: the paint and canvas picture which  tries to show the surface consciousness that ineffable sight, that  ecstatic perception of good or evil--for neither extreme has the  monopoly--to which the deeper, more real soul has attained. The  transcendental powers take for this purpose such material as they can  find amongst the hoarded beliefs and memories of the self.   [*573]    Hence Plotinus sees the Celestial Venus, Suso the Eternal Wisdom, St.  Teresa the [p. 272] [iv.v-Page_272] Humanity of Christ, Blake  the strange personages of his prophetic books: others more obviously  symbolic objects. St. Ignatius Loyola, for instance, in a moment of  lucidity, "saw the most Holy Trinity as it were under the  likeness of a triple plectrum or of three spinet keys" and on  another occasion "the Blessed Virgin without distinction of  members."   [*574] 

[iv.v-p30]Visions and voices, then, may stand in the same  relation to the mystic as pictures, poems, and musical compositions  stand to the great painter, poet, musician. They are the artistic  expressions and creative results (  a   ) of thought, (  b   ) of intuition, (  c   ) of direct perception. All would be ready to acknowledge how  conventional and imperfect of necessity are those transcripts of  perceived Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which we owe to artistic genius:  how unequal is their relation to reality. But this is not to say that  they are valueless or absurd. So too with the mystic, whose  proceedings in this respect are closer to those of the artist than is  generally acknowledged. In both types there is a constant and  involuntary work of translation going on, by which Reality is  interpreted in the terms of appearance. In both, a peculiar mental  make-up conduces to this result.

[iv.v-p31]In artistic subjects, the state of reverie tends  easily to a visionary character: thought becomes pictorial, auditory  or rhythmic as the case may be. Concrete images, balanced harmonies,  elusive yet recognizable, surge up mysteriously without the  intervention of the will, and place themselves before the mind. Thus  the painter really sees his impainted picture, the novelist hears the  conversation of his characters, the poet receives his cadences  ready-made, the musician listens to a veritable music which  "pipes to the spirit ditties of no tone." In the mystic,  the same type of activity constantly appears. Profound meditation  takes a pictorial or dramatic form. Apt symbols which suggest  themselves to his imagination become objectivized. The message that he  longs for is heard within his mind. Hence, those "interior  voices" and "imaginary visions" which are  sometimes--as in Suso--indistinguishable from the ordinary  accompaniments of intense artistic activity.

[iv.v-p32]Where, however, artistic "automatisms"  spend themselves upon the artist's work, mystical  "automatisms" in their highest forms have to do with that  transformation of personality which is the essence of the mystic life.  They are   media    by which the self receives spiritual stimulus; is reproved, consoled,  encouraged and guided on its upward way. Moreover, they are frequently  coordinated. The voice and the vision go together: corroborate one  another, and "work out right" in relation to the life of  the self. [p. 273] [iv.v-Page_273] Thus St. Catherine of  Siena's "mystic marriage" was preceded by a voice,  which ever said in answer to her prayers, "I will espouse thee  to Myself in faith"; and the vision in which that union was  consummated was again initiated by a voice saying, "I will   this day    celebrate solemnly with thee the feast of the betrothal of thy soul,  and even as I promised I will espouse thee to Myself in faith."   [*575]    "Such automatisms as these," says Delacroix, "are  by no means scattered and incoherent. They are systematic and  progressive: they are governed by an interior aim; they have, above  all, a teleological character. They indicate the continuous  intervention of a being at once wiser and more powerful than the  ordinary character and reason; they are the realization, in visual and  auditory images, of a secret and permanent personality of a superior  type to the conscious personality. They are its voice, the exterior  projection of its life. They translate to the conscious personality  the suggestions of the subconscious: and they permit the continuous  penetration of the conscious personality by these deeper activities.  They establish a communication between these two planes of existence,  and, by their imperative nature, they tend to make the inferior  subordinate to the superior."   [*576] 

   

[iv.v-p34.1]Audition

[iv.v-p35]The simplest and as a rule the first way in which  automatism shows itself, is in "voices" or auditions. The  mystic becomes aware of Something which speaks to him either clearly  or implicitly; giving him abrupt and unexpected orders and  encouragements. The reality of his contact with the Divine Life is  thus brought home to him by a device with which the accidents of human  intercourse have made him familiar. His subliminal mind, open as it  now is to transcendental impressions, "at one with the  Absolute," irradiated by the Uncreated Light, but still  dissociated from the surface intelligence which it is slowly  educating, seems to that surface self like another being. Hence its  messages are often heard, literally, as Voices: either (1) the  "immediate" or inarticulate voice, which the auditive  mystic knows so well, but finds it so difficult to define; (2) the  distinct interior voice, perfectly articulate, but recognized as  speaking only within the mind; (3) by a hallucination which we have  all experienced in dream or reverie, the exterior voice, which appears  to be speaking externally to the subject and to be heard by the  outward ear. This, the traditional classification of auditions, also  answers exactly to she three main types of vision--(1)  intellectual, (2) imaginary, (3) corporeal. [p. 274] [iv.v-Page_274]

[iv.v-p36]Of these three kinds of voices the mystics are  unanimous in their opinion that the first and least  "marvellous" is by far the best: belonging indeed to an  entirely different plane of consciousness from the uttered interior or  exterior "word," which few of the great contemplatives are  willing to accept without scrutiny as a "message from  God." The articulate word is inevitably subject to some degree  of illusion, even at the best; since so far as it possesses  transcendental content it represents the translation of the  simultaneous into successive speech.

[iv.v-p37]"Let Thy good Spirit enter my heart and there be  heard without utterance, and without the sound of words speak all  truth," says a prayer attributed to St. Ambrose,   [*577]    exactly describing the function of these unmediated or  "intellectual words." Dynamic messages of this kind,  imperative intuitions which elude the containing formula of speech,  are invariably attributed by the self to the direct action of the  Divine. They are indeed their own guarantee, bringing with them an  infusion of new knowledge or new life. Their character is less that of  messages than of actual "invasions" from beyond the  threshold; transcending succession and conveying "all at  once" fresh truth or certitude. "Intellectual  words," in fact, are a form of inspiration. Eternal truth bursts  in upon the temporally-conditioned human mind. Thus St. Hildegarde  tells us that each of her great revelations was received "in an  instant" and St. Bridget of Sweden that the whole substance of  her 5th Book was given "in a flash."   [*578] 

[iv.v-p40]"Distinct interior words," on the other  hand, lack this character of simultaneity. Nor are they invariably  authoritative for those who hear them. St. Teresa, whose brilliant  self-criticisms are our best source of information on mystical  auditions, considers that, though they often "come from  God," they are not due to direct contact with the Divine; and  agrees with all the great mystics on the need of subjecting them to  criticism. She hesitated long before obeying the Voice which told her  to leave the Convent of the Incarnation and make the first foundation  of her Reform. Genuine locutions may however be distinguished from  those "words" which result merely from voluntary activity  of the imagination, as much by the sense of certitude, peace and  interior joy which they produce, as by the fact that they force  themselves upon the attention in spite of its resistance, and bring  with them knowledge which was not previously within the field of  consciousness. That is to say, they are really automatic presentations  of the result of mystic intuition, not mere rearrangements of the  constituents [p. 275] [iv.v-Page_275] of thought.   [*579]    Hence they bring to the surface-self new conviction or material: have  a positive value for life.

[iv.v-p42]Those purely self-created locutions, or rearrangements  of thought "which the mind self-recollected forms and fashions  within itself"--often difficult to distinguish from true  automatic audition--are called by Philip of the trinity, St. John  of the Cross and other mystical theologians "successive  words." They feel it to be of the highest importance that the  contemplative should learn to distinguish such hallucinations from  real transcendental perceptions presented in auditive form.

[iv.v-p43]"I am really terrified," says St. John of  the Cross, with his customary blunt common sense, "by what  passes among us in these days. Anyone who has barely begun to  meditate, if he becomes conscious of words of this kind during his  self-recollection, pronounces them forthwith to be the work of God;   [*580]    and, convinced that they are so, goes about proclaiming 'God  has told me this,' or 'I have had that answer from  God.' But all is illusion and fancy; such an one has only been  speaking to himself. Besides, the desire for these words, and the  attention they give to them, end by persuading men that all the  observations which they address to themselves are the responses of  God."   [*581]    These are the words of one who was at once the sanest of saints and  the most penetrating of psychologists: words which our modern unruly  amateurs of the "subconscious" might well take to  heart.

[iv.v-p46]True auditions are usually heard when the mind is in a  state of deep absorption without conscious thought: that is to say, at  the most favourable of all moments for contact with the transcendental  world. They translate into articulate language some aspect of that  ineffable apprehension of Reality which the contemplative enjoys:  crystallize those clairvoyant intuitions, those prophetic hints which  surge in on him so soon as he lays himself open to the influence of  the supra-sensible. Sometimes, however, mystical intuition takes the  form of a sudden and ungovernable uprush of knowledge from the deeps  of personality. Then, auditions may break in upon the normal  activities of the self with startling abruptness. It is in such cases  that their objective and uncontrollable character is most sharply  felt. However they may appear, they are, says St. Teresa, "very  distinctly formed; but by the bodily ear they are not heard. They are,  however, much more clearly understood than if they were heard by the  ear. It is impossible not to understand them, whatever resistance we  may offer. . . . The words formed by the understanding effect nothing,  but when our Lord speaks, it is   at once word    [p. 276] [iv.v-Page_276]   and work. . . .    The human locution [  i.e.   , the work of imagination] is as something we cannot well make out, as  if we were half asleep: but the divine locution is a voice so clear,  that not a syllable of its utterance is lost. It may occur, too, when  the understanding and the soul are so troubled and distracted that  they cannot form one sentence correctly: and yet grand sentences,  perfectly arranged such as the soul in its most recollected state  never could have formed, are uttered: and at the first word, as I have  said, change it utterly."   [*582] 

[iv.v-p48]St. Teresa's mystic life was governed by voices:  her active career as a foundress was much guided by them. They advised  her in small things as in great. Often they interfered with her plans,  ran counter to her personal judgment, forbade a foundation on which  she was set, or commanded one which appeared imprudent or impossible.  They concerned themselves with journeys, with the purchase of houses;  they warned her of coming events.   [*583]    As her mystical life matured, Teresa seems to have learned to  discriminate those locutions on which action should properly be based.  She seldom resisted them, though it constantly happened that the  action on which they insisted seemed the height of folly: and though  they frequently involved her in hardships and difficulties, she never  had cause to regret this reliance upon decrees which she regarded as  coming direct from God, and which certainly did emanate from a life  greater than her own. So too St. Hildegarde, when she prefaced her  prophecies and denunciations by "Thus saith the Living  Light" was not making use of a poetic metaphor. She lived under  the direction of a Power which was precise and articulate in its  communications, and at her peril disobeyed its commands.

[iv.v-p50]So far from mere vague intuitions are the  "distinct interior words" which the mystic hears within  his mind, that Suso is able to state that the hundred meditations on  the Passion thus revealed to him were spoken in German and not in  Latin.   [*584]    St. Teresa's own auditions were all of this interior  kind--some "distinct" and some  "substantial" or inarticulate--as her corresponding  visions were nearly all of the "intellectual" or  "imaginary" sort: that is to say, she was not subject to  sensible hallucination. Often, however, the boundary is overpassed,  and the locution seems to be heard by the mystic's outward ear;  as in the case of those voices which guided the destinies of St. Joan  of Arc, or the Figure upon the Cross which spoke to St. Francis of  Assisi. We then have the [p. 277] [iv.v-Page_277] third  form--"exterior words"--which the mystics for  the most part regard with suspicion and dislike.

[iv.v-p52]Sometimes audition assumes a musical rather than a  verbal character: a form of perception which probably corresponds to  the temperamental bias of the self, the ordered sweetness of Divine  Harmony striking responsive chords in the music-loving soul. The lives  of St. Francis of Assisi, St. Catherine of Siena, and Richard Rolle  provide obvious instances of this:   [*585]    but Suso, in whom automatism assumed its richest and most varied  forms, has also given in his autobiography some characteristic  examples.

[iv.v-p54]"One day . . . whilst the Servitor was still at  rest, he heard within himself a gracious melody by which his heart was  greatly moved. And at the moment of the rising of the morning star, a  deep sweet voice sang within him these words, [iv.v-p54.1]   Stella Maria maris, hodie processit ad ortum     .    That is to say, Mary Star of the Sea is risen today. And this song  which he heard was so spiritual and so sweet, that his soul was  transported by it and he too began to sing joyously. . . . And one  day--it was in carnival time--the Servitor had continued his  prayers until the moment when the bugle of the watch announced the  dawn. Therefore he said to himself, Rest for an instant, before you  salute the shining Morning Star. And, whilst that his senses were at  rest, behold! angelic spirits began to sing the fair Respond:  [iv.v-p54.2]  'Illuminare, illuminare, Jerusalem   !'And this song was echoed with a marvellous  sweetness in the deeps of his soul. And when the angels had sung for  some time his soul overflowed with joy: and his feeble body being  unable to support such happiness, burning tears escaped from his  eyes."   [*586] 

[iv.v-p56]Closely connected on the one hand with the phenomena  of automatic words, on the other with those of prophecy and  inspiration, is the prevalence in mystical literature of revelations  which take the form of dialogue: intimate colloquies between Divine  Reality and the Soul. The Revelations of Julian of Norwich and St.  Catherine of Siena, and many of those of the Blessed Angela of Foligno  and of the modern mystic Lucie-Christine appear to have been received  by them in this way. We seem as we read them to be present at  veritable outpourings of the Divine Mind, crystallized into verbal  form on their way through the human consciousness. We feel on the one  hand a "one-ness with the Absolute" on the part of the  mystic which has made her really, for the time being, the "voice  of God": whilst on the other we recognize in her the persistence  of the individual--exalted, but not yet wholly absorbed [p. 278] [iv.v-Page_278] in the Divine--whose questions, here and there, break  in upon the revelation which is mediated by the deeper mind.

[iv.v-p57]Duologues of this sort are reported with every  appearance of realism and good faith by Suso, Tauler, Mechthild of  Magdeburg, Angela of Foligno, St. Teresa, and countless other mystics.  The third book of the "Imitation of Christ" contains some  conspicuously beautiful examples, which may or may not be due to  literary artifice. The self, wholly absorbed by the intimate sense of  divine companionship, receives its messages in the form of  "distinct interior words"; as of an alien voice, speaking  within the mind with such an accent of validity and spontaneity as to  leave no room for doubt as to its character. Often, as in  Julian's Revelations, the discourses of the "Divine  Voice," its replies to the eager questions of the self, are  illustrated by imaginary visions. Since these dialogues are, on the  whole, more commonly experienced in the illuminative than the unitive  way, that self--retaining a clear consciousness of its own  separateness, and recognizing the Voice as personal and distinct from  its own soul--naturally enters into a communion which has an  almost conversational character, replies to questions or asks others  in its turn: and in this dramatic style the content of its intuitions  is gradually expressed. We have then an extreme form of that  dissociation which we all experience in a slight degree when we  "argue with ourselves." But in this case one of the  speakers is become the instrument of a power other than itself, and  communicates to the mind new wisdom and new life.

[iv.v-p58]The peculiar rhythmical language of genuine mystic  dialogue of this kind--for often enough, as in Suso's  "Book of the Eternal Wisdom," it is deliberately adopted  as a literary device--is an indication of its automatic  character.   [*587]    Expression, once it is divorced from the critical action of the  surface intelligence, always tends to assume a dithyrambic form.  Measure and colour, exaltation of language, here take a more important  place than the analytic intellect will generally permit. This feature  is easily observable in prophecy, and in automatic writing. It forms  an interesting link with poetry; which--in so far as it is  genuine and spontaneous--is largely the result of subliminal  activity. Life, which eludes language, can yet--we know not  why--be communicated by rhythm: and the mystic fact is above all  else the communication of a greater Life. Hence we must not take it  amiss if the voice of the Absolute, as translated to us by those  mystics who are alone capable of hearing it, often seems to adopt the  "grand manner." [p. 279] [iv.v-Page_279]

[iv.v-p60]We pass from the effort of man's deeper mind to   speak    truth to his surface-intelligence, to the effort of the same  mysterious power to   show    truth: in psychological language, from auditory to visual automatism.  "Vision," that vaguest of words, has been used by the  friends and enemies of the mystics to describe or obscure a wide range  of experience: from formless intuition, through crude optical  hallucination, to the voluntary visualizations common to the artistic  mind. In it we must include that personal and secret vision which is  the lover's glimpse of Perfect Love, and the great pictures seen  by clairvoyant prophets acting in their capacity as eyes of the race.  Of these, the two main classes of vision, says Denis the Carthusian,  the first kind are to be concealed, the second declared. The first are  more truly mystic, the second prophetic: but excluding prophetic  vision from our inquiry, a sufficient variety of experience remains in  the purely mystical class. St. Teresa's fluid and formless  apprehension of the Trinity, her concrete visions of Christ, Mechthild  of Madeburg's poetic dreams, Suso's sharply pictured  allegories, even Blake's soul of a flea, all come under this  head.

[iv.v-p61]Since no one can know what it is really like to have a  vision but the visionaries themselves, it will be interesting to see  what they have to say on this subject: and notice the respects in  which these self-criticisms agree with the conclusions of psychology.  We forget, whilst arguing on these matters, that it is as impossible  for those who have never heard a voice or seen a vision to discuss  these experiences with intelligence, as it is for stay-at-homes to  discuss the passions of the battle-field on the material supplied by  war correspondents. No second-hand account can truly report the  experience of the person whose perceptions or illusions present  themselves in this form. "We cannot," says  Recejac, "remind ourselves too often that the mystic  act consists in relations between the Absolute and Freedom which are  incommunicable. We shall never know, for instance, what was the state  of consciousness of some citizen of the antique world when he gave  himself without reserve to the inspiring suggestions of the Sacred  Fire, or some other image which evoked the infinite."   [*588]    Neither shall we ever know, unless it be our good fortune to attain  to it, the secret of that consciousness which is able to apprehend the  Transcendent in visionary terms.

[iv.v-p63]The first thing we notice when we come to this inquiry  is that the mystics are all but unanimous in their refusal to  attribute [p. 280] [iv.v-Page_280] importance to any kind of visionary  experience.   [*589]    The natural timidity and stern self-criticism with which they  approach auditions is here greatly increased: and this, if taken to  heart, might well give pause to their more extreme enemies and  defenders. "If it be so," says Hilton of automatisms in  general, "that thou see any manner of light or brightness with  thy bodily eye or in imagining, other than every man may see; or if  thou hear any merry sounding with thy ear, or in thy mouth any sweet  sudden savour, other than of kind [nature], or any heat in thy breast  as it were fire, or any manner delight in any part of thy body, or if  a spirit bodily appeareth to thee as it were an angel, for to comfort  thee and kiss thee, or any such feeling, which thou wost well that it  cometh not of thyself, nor of no bodily creature, be then wary in that  time or soon after, and wisely behold the stirrings of thy heart. If  thou be stirred because of that liking that thou feelest for to draw  out thine heart . . . from the inward desire of virtues and of ghostly  knowing and feeling of God, for to set the sight of thy heart and  thine affection, thy delight and thy rest, principally therein,  weening that bodily feeling should be a part of heavenly joy and of  angels' bliss . . . this feeling is suspect and of the enemy.  And therefore, though it be never so liking and wonderful, refuse it,  and assent not thereto."   [*590]    Nearly every master of the contemplative life has spoken to the same  effect: none, perhaps, more strongly than that stern and virile lover  of the invisible, St. John of the Cross, who was relentless in hunting  down even the most "spiritual" illusions, eager to purge  mind as well as morals of all taint of the unreal.

[iv.v-p66]"It often happens," he says "that  spiritual men are affected supernaturally by sensible representations  and objects. They sometimes see the forms and figures of those of  another life, saints or angels, good and evil, or certain  extraordinary lights and brightness. They hear strange words,  sometimes seeing those who utter them and sometimes not. They have a  sensible perception at times of most sweet odours, without knowing  whence they proceed. . . . Still, though all these experiences may  happen to the bodily senses in the way of God, we must never delight  in them nor encourage them; yea, rather we must fly from them, without  seeking to know whether their origin be good or evil. For, inasmuch as  they are exterior and physical, the less is the likelihood of their  being from God. That which properly and generally comes [p. 281] [iv.v-Page_281] from God is a purely spiritual communication; wherein  there is greater security and profit for the soul than through the  senses, wherein there is usually much danger and delusion, because the  bodily sense decides upon, and judges, spiritual things, thinking them  to be what itself feels them to be, when in reality they are as  different as body and soul, sensuality and reason."   [*591] 

[iv.v-p68]Again, "in the high state of the union of love,  God does not communicate Himself to the soul under the disguise of  imaginary visions, similitudes or figures, neither is there place for  such, but mouth to mouth. . . . The soul, therefore, that will ascend  to this perfect union with God, must be careful not to lean upon  imaginary visions, forms, figures, and particular intelligible  objects, for these things can never serve as proportionate or  proximate means towards so great an end; yea, rather they are an  obstacle in the way, and therefore to be guarded against and  rejected."   [*592] 

[iv.v-p70]So, too, St. Teresa. "In such matters as these  there is always cause to fear illusion; until we are assured that they  truly proceed from the Spirit of God. Therefore at the beginning it is  always best to resist them. If it is indeed God who is acting, the  soul will but progress still more quickly, for the trial will favour  her advancement."   [*593] 

[iv.v-p72]Vision, then, is recognized by the true contemplative  as at best an imperfect, oblique, and untrustworthy method of  apprehension: it is ungovernable, capricious, liable to deception, and  the greater its accompanying hallucination the more suspicious it  becomes. All, however, distinguish different classes of visionary  experience; and differentiate sharply between the value of the vision  which is "felt" rather than seen, and the true optical  hallucination which is perceived, exterior to the subject, by the  physical sight.

[iv.v-p73]We may trace in visions, as in voices--for these,  from the psychologist's point of view, are strictly parallel  phenomena--a progressive externalization on the self's part  of those concepts or intuitions which form the bases of all automatic  states. Three main groups have been distinguished by the mystics, and  illustrated again and again from their experiences. These are (1)  Intellectual (2) Imaginary, and (3) Corporeal vision: answering to (1)  Substantial or inarticulate, (2) Interior and distinct, (3) Exterior  words. With the first two we must now concern ourselves. As to  corporeal vision, it has few peculiarities of interest to the student  of pure mysticism. Like the "exterior word" it is little  else than a more or less uncontrolled externalization of inward  memories, thoughts, or [p. 282] [iv.v-Page_282] intuitions--even of  some pious picture which has become imprinted on the mind--which  may, in some subjects, attain the dimensions of true sensorial  hallucination.

[iv.v-p74](1)   Intellectual Vision.--   The "intellectual vision," like the "substantial  word" as described to us by the mystics, is of so elusive,  spiritual, and formless a kind that it is hard to distinguish it from  that act of pure contemplation in which it often takes its rise. These  moods and apprehensions of the soul are so closely linked  together--the names applied to them are so often little more than  the struggles of different individuals to describe by analogy an  experience which is   one--   that we risk a loss of accuracy the moment that classification begins.  The intellectual vision, so far as we can understand it, seems to be a    something    not sought but put before the mind, and seen or perceived by the  whole self by means of a sense which is neither sight nor feeling, but  partakes of the character of both. It is intimate but indescribable:  definite, yet impossible to define. There is a passage in the  Revelations of Angela of Foligno which vividly describes the sequence  of illuminated states leading up to and including the intuitions which  constitute the substance of this "formless vision" and its  complement the "formless word": and this does far more  towards making us realize its nature than the most painstaking  psychological analysis could ever do. "At times God comes into  the soul without being called; and He instills into her fire, love,  and sometimes sweetness; and the soul believes this comes from God,  and delights therein. But she does not yet know, or see, that He  dwells in her; she perceives His grace, in which she delights. And  again God comes to the soul, and speaks to her words full of  sweetness, in which she has much joy, and she feels Him. This   feeling    of God gives her the greatest delight; but even here a certain doubt  remains; for the soul has not the certitude that God is in her. . . .  And beyond this the soul receives the gift of seeing God. God says to  her, 'Behold Me!' and the soul sees Him dwelling within  her. She sees Him more clearly than one man sees another. For   the eyes of the soul behold a plenitude of which I cannot speak: a  plenitude which is not bodily but spiritual, of which I can say  nothing.    And the soul rejoices in that sight with an ineffable joy; and this  is the manifest and certain sign that God indeed dwells in her. And  the soul can behold nothing else, because this fulfils her in an  unspeakable manner. This beholding, whereby the soul can behold no  other thing, is so profound that it grieves me that I can say nothing  of it. It is not a thing which can be touched or imagined, for it is  ineffable."   [*594]    [p. 283] [iv.v-Page_283]

[iv.v-p76]Intellectual vision, then, seems to be closely  connected with that "consciousness of the Presence of God"  which we discussed in the last chapter: though the contemplatives  themselves declare that it differs from it.   [*595]    It is distinguished apparently from that more or less diffused  consciousness of Divine Immanence by the fact that although unseen of  the eyes, it can be exactly located in space. The mystic's  general awareness of the divine is here focussed upon one  point--a point to which some theological or symbolic character is  at once attached. The result is a sense of presence so concrete  defined, and sharply personal that, as St. Teresa says, it carries  more conviction than bodily sight. This invisible presence is  generally identified by Christian mystics rather with the Humanity of  Christ than with the unconditioned Absolute. "In the prayer of  union and of quiet," says St. Teresa, "certain inflowings  of the Godhead are present; but in the   vision,    the Sacred Humanity also, together with them, is pleased to be our  companion and to do us good."   [*596]    "A person who is in no way expecting such a favour," she  says again, "nor has ever imagined herself worthy of receiving  it, is conscious that Jesus Christ stands by her side; although she  sees Him neither with the eyes of the body nor of the soul. This is  called an intellectual vision; I cannot tell why. This vision, unlike  an imaginary one, does not pass away quickly but lasts for several  days and even sometimes for more than a year. . . . Although I believe  some of the former favours are more sublime, yet this brings with it a  special knowledge of God; a most tender love for Him results from  being constantly in His company while the desire of devoting  one's whole being to His service is more fervent than any  hitherto described. The conscience is greatly purified by the  knowledge of His perpetual and near presence, for although we know  that God sees all we do, yet nature inclines us to grow careless and  forgetful of it. This is impossible here, since our Lord makes the  soul conscious that He is close at hand."   [*597] 

[iv.v-p80]In such a state--to which the term  "vision" is barely applicable--it will be observed  that consciousness is at its highest, and hallucination at its lowest  point. Nothing is seen, even with the eyes of the mind: as, in the  parallel case of the "substantial word," nothing is said.  It is pure apprehension: in the one case of Personality, in the other  of knowledge. "The immediate vision of the naked Godhead,"  says Suso of this, "is without doubt the pure truth: a vision is  to be esteemed the more noble the more [p. 284] [iv.v-Page_284] intellectual  it is, the more it is stripped of all image and approaches the state  of pure contemplation."   [*598] 

[iv.v-p82]We owe to St. Teresa our finest first-hand account of  this strange condition of "awareness." It came upon her  abruptly, after a period of psychic distress, and seemed to her to be  an answer to her unwilling prayers that she might be "led"  by some other way than that of "interior words"; which  were, in the opinion of her director, "so suspicious."  "I could not force myself," she says, "to desire the  change, nor believe that I was under the influence of Satan. Though I  was doing all I could to believe the one and to desire the other, it  was not in my power to do so." She resolved this divided state  by making an act of total surrender to the will of God: and it seems  to have been as the result of this release of stress, this willing  receptivity, that the new form of automatism suddenly developed  itself, reinforcing and justifying her auditions and bringing peace  and assurance to the distracted surface-self.

[iv.v-p83]"At the end of two years spent in prayer by  myself and others for this end, namely, that our Lord would either  lead me by another way, or show the truth of this--for now the  locutions of our Lord were extremely frequent--this happened to  me. I was in prayer one day--it was the feast of the glorious St.  Peter--when I saw Christ close by me, or, to speak more  correctly, felt Him; for I saw nothing with the eyes of the body,  nothing with the eyes of the soul. He seemed to me to be close beside  me; and I saw, too, as I believe, that it was He who was speaking to  me. As I was utterly ignorant that such a vision was possible, I was  extremely afraid at first, and did nothing but weep; however, when He  spoke to me but one word to reassure me, I recovered myself, and was,  as usual, calm and comforted, without any fear whatever. Jesus Christ  seemed to be by my side continually. As the vision was not imaginary,  I saw no form, but I had a most distinct feeling that He was always on  my right hand, a witness of all I did; and never at any time, if I was  but slightly recollected, or not too much distracted, could I be  ignorant of His near presence. I went at once to my confessor in great  distress, to tell him of it. He asked in what form I saw our Lord. I  told him I saw no form. He then said: 'How did you know that it  was Christ?' I replied that I did not know how I knew it; but I  could not help knowing that He was close beside me . . . there are no  words whereby to explain--at least, none for us women, who know  so little; learned men can explain it better.

[iv.v-p84]"For if I say that I see Him neither with the  eyes of the body nor those of the soul--because it was not an  imaginary vision--how is it that I can understand and maintain  that He stand [p. 285] [iv.v-Page_285] beside me, and be   more certain of it than if I saw Him   ? If it be supposed that it is as if a person were blind, or in the  dark, and therefore unable to see another who is close to him, the  comparison is not exact. There is a certain likelihood about it,  however, but not much, because the other senses tell him who is blind  of that presence: he hears the other speak or move, or he touches him;  but in these visions there is nothing like this. The darkness is not  felt; only He renders Himself present to the soul by a certain  knowledge of Himself which is more clear than the sun. I do not mean  that we now see either a sun or any other brightness, only that there  is a light not seen, which illumines the understanding, so that the  soul may have the fruition of so great a good. This vision brings with  it great blessings."   [*599] 

[iv.v-p86](2) In   Imaginary Vision,    as in "interior words," there is again no sensorial  hallucination. The self sees sharply and clearly, it is true: but is  perfectly aware that it does so in virtue of its most precious  organ--"that inward eye which is the bliss of  solitude."   [*600]    Imaginary Vision is the spontaneous and automatic activity of a power  which all artists, all imaginative people, possess. So far as the  machinery employed in it is concerned, there is little real difference  except in degree between Wordsworth's imaginary vision of the  "dancing daffodils" and Suso's of the dancing  angels, who "though they leapt very high in the dance, did so  without any lack of gracefulness."   [*601]    Both are admirable examples of "passive imaginary  vision": though in the first the visionary is aware that the  picture seen is supplied by memory, whilst in the second it arises  spontaneously like a dream from the subliminal region, and contains  elements which may be attributed to love, belief, and direct intuition  of truth.

[iv.v-p90]Such passive imaginary vision--by which I mean  spontaneous mental pictures at which the self looks, but in the action  of which it does not participate--takes in the mystics two main  forms: (a) symbolic, (b) personal.

[iv.v-p91](a) In the symbolic form there is no mental deception:  the self is aware that it is being shown truth "under an  image." Many of the visions of the great prophetic  mystics--e.g., St. Hildegarde--have so elaborate a symbolic  character, that much intellectual activity is involved in their  interpretation. This interpretation is [p. 286] [iv.v-Page_286] sometimes  "given" with the vision. Rulman Merswin's  "Vision of Nine Rocks" is thus described to us as being  seen by him in a sharp picture, the allegorical meaning of which was  simultaneously presented to his mind. In Suso's life these  symbolic visions abound: he seems to have lived always on the verge of  such a world of imagination, and to have imbibed truth most easily in  this form. Thus: "It happened one morning that the Servitor saw  in a vision that he was surrounded by a troop of heavenly spirits. He  therefore asked one of the most radiant amongst these Princes of the  Sky to show him how God dwelt in his soul. The angel said to him,  'Do but fix your eyes joyously upon yourself, and watch how God  plays the game of love within your loving soul.' And he looked  quickly, and saw that his body in the region of his heart was pure and  transparent like crystal: and he saw the Divine Wisdom peacefully  enthroned in the midst of his heart, and she was fair to look upon.  And by her side was the soul of the Servitor, full of heavenly  desires; resting lovingly upon the bosom of God, Who had embraced it,  and pressed it to His Heart. And it remained altogether absorbed and  inebriated with love in the arms of God its well-beloved."   [*602] 

[iv.v-p93]In such a vision as this, we see the mystic's  passion for the Absolute, his intuition of Its presence in his soul,  combining with material supplied by a poetic imagination, and  expressing itself in an allegorical form. It is really a visualized  poem, inspired by a direct contact with truth. Of the same kind are  many of those reconstructions of Eternity in which mystics and seers  of the transcendent and outgoing type actualized their profound  apprehensions of reality. In such experiences, as Beatrice told Dante  when he saw the great vision of the River of Light, the thing seen is  the shadowy presentation of a transcendent Reality which the self is  not yet strong enough to see.

   [iv.v-p93.1] "E vidi lume in forma  di rivera
   fulvido di fulgore, intra due rive
   dipinte di mirabil primavera.
   Di tal fiumana uscian faville vive,
   e d' ogni parte si mettean nei fiori,
   quasi rubin che oro circonscrive.
   Poi, come inebriate dagli odori,
   riprofondavan se nel miro gurge,
   e, s'una entrava, un' altra n'  uscia fuori."
   . . . .
   "il sol degli occhi miei
   anco soggiunse: Il fiume, e li topazii
   ch' entrano ed escono, e il rider dell'  erbe
   son di lor vero ombriferi prefazii. [p. 287] [iv.v-Page_287]
   Non che da se sien queste cose acerbe:
   ma e difetto dalla parte tua,
   che non hai viste ancor tanto  superbe." [*603]  
  [iv.v-p95]In the last two lines of this wonderful passage, the  whole philosophy of vision is expressed. It is an accommodation of the  supra-sensible to our human disabilities, a symbolic reconstruction of  reality on levels accessible to sense. This symbolic reconstruction is  seen as a profoundly significant, vivid, and dramatic dream: and since  this dream conveys transcendental truth, and initiates the visionary  into the atmosphere of the Eternal, it may well claim precedence over  that prosaic and perpetual vision which we call the "real  world." In it--as in the less significant dreams of our  common experience--vision and audition are often combined. Many  of the visions of St. Mechthild of Hackborn are of this complex type.  Thus--"She saw in the Heart of God, as it were a virgin  exceeding fair, holding a ring in her hand on which was a diamond:  with which, incessantly, she touched the Heart of God. Moreover, the  soul asked why that virgin thus touched the Heart of God. And the  virgin answered, 'I am Divine Love, and this stone signifieth  the sin of Adam. . . . As soon as Adam sinned, I introduced myself and  intercepted the whole of his sin, and by thus ceaselessly touching the  Heart of God and moving Him to pity, I suffered Him not to rest until  the moment when I took the Son of God from His Father's Heart  and laid him in the Virgin Mother's womb.' . . . Another  time, she saw how Love, under the likeness of a fair Virgin, went  round about the consistory singing   Alone I have made the circuit of heaven, and I have walked on the  waves of the sea.    In these words she understood how Love had subjected to herself the  Omnipotent Majesty of God, had inebriated His Unsearchable Wisdom, had  drawn forth all His most sweet goodness; and, by wholly conquering His  divine justice and changing it into gentleness and mercy, had moved  the Lord of all Majesty."   [*604] 

[iv.v-p97]Imaginary vision of this kind is probably far more  common than is generally supposed: and can exist without any  disturbance of that balance of faculties which is usually recognized  as "sane." [p. 288] [iv.v-Page_288] "If," says  Pratt, "there be any truth in Freud's insistence upon the  symbolic nature of normal dreams, it is the less surprising that the  dream imagination of the Christian mystic should work up visions of a  symbolic sort. . . . Our modern tendency to consider visions quite  extraordinary and pathological is probably mistaken.   [*605]    It is certain that the meditations of those persons who are  "good visualizers" often take a pictorial form; and indeed  St. Ignatius Loyola, the great teacher of meditation, advised a  deliberate effort so to visualize the subject dwelt upon. The picture  may appear involuntarily, at the summit of a train of thought, which  it sometimes illustrates and sometimes contradicts. It may show itself  faintly against a background of mist; or start into existence sharply  focussed, well-lighted, and alive. It always brings with it a greater  impression of reality than can be obtained by the operations of the  discursive mind.

[iv.v-p99](  b   ) The symbolic and artistic character of the visions we have been  discussing is obvious. There is, however, another form of imaginary  vision which must be touched on with a gentler hand. In this, the  imagery seized upon by the subliminal powers, or placed before the  mind by that Somewhat Other of which the mystic is always conscious  over against himself, is at once so vivid, so closely related to the  concrete beliefs and spiritual passions of the self, and so perfectly  expresses its apprehensions of God, that it is not always recognized  as symbolic in kind. A simple example of this is the vision of Christ  at the moment of consecration at Mass, experienced by so many Catholic  ecstatics.   [*606]    Another is St. Margaret Mary Alacoque's vision of the Sacred  Heart. St. Teresa is one of the few mystics who have detected the true  character of automatisms of this sort: which bring with  them--like their purer forms, the intellectual visions of  God--a vivid apprehension of Personality, the conviction of a  living presence, rather than the knowledge of new facts. "Now  and then," she says of her own imaginary visions of Christ,  "it seemed to me that what I saw was an image: but most  frequently it was not so. I thought it was Christ Himself, judging by  the brightness in which He was pleased to show Himself. Sometimes the  vision was so indistinct, that I [p. 289] [iv.v-Page_289] thought it was an  image: but still, not like a picture, however well painted, and I have  seen a good many pictures. It would be absurd to suppose that the one  bears any resemblance whatever to the other, for they differ as a  living person differs from his portrait, which, however well drawn,  cannot be lifelike, for it is plain that it is a dead thing."   [*607] 

[iv.v-p102]"The vision," she says in another place,  "passes as quickly as a flash of lightning, yet this most  glorious picture makes an impression on the imagination that I believe  can never be effaced until the soul at last sees Christ to enjoy Him  for ever. Although I call it a 'picture,' you must not  imagine that it looks like a painting; Christ appears as a living  Person, Who sometimes speaks and reveals deep mysteries."   [*608] 

[iv.v-p104]It seems, then, that this swift and dazzling vision of  Divine Personality may represent a true contact of the soul with the  Absolute Life--a contact immediately referred to the image under  which the self is accustomed to think of its God. Obviously in the  case of Christian contemplatives this image will most usually be the  historical Person of Christ, as He is represented in sacred literature  and art.   [*609]    The life-enhancing quality of such an abrupt apprehension, however,  the profound sense of reality which it brings, permit of its being  classed not amongst vivid dreams, but amongst those genuine mystic  states in which "the immanent God, formless, but capable of  assuming all forms, expresses Himself in vision as He had expressed  Himself in words."   [*610]    Certainty and joy are the feeling-states accompanying this  experience; which is as it were a love-letter received by the ardent  soul, bringing with it the very fragrance of personality, along with  the sign-manual of the beloved.

[iv.v-p107]This concrete vision of Christ has the true mystic  quality of ineffability, appearing to the self under a form of  inexpressible beauty, illuminated with that unearthly light which is  so persistently reported as a feature of transcendent experience. The  artist's exalted consciousness of Beauty as a form of Truth is  here seen operating on the transcendental plane. Thus when St. Teresa  saw only the Hands of God, she was thrown into an [p. 290] [iv.v-Page_290]  ecstasy of adoration by their shining loveliness.   [*611]    "If I were to spend many years in devising how to picture to  myself anything so beautiful," she says of the imaginary vision  of Christ, "I should never be able, nor even know how, to do it;  for it is beyond the scope of any possible imagination here below: the  whiteness and brilliancy alone are inconceivable. It is not a  brightness which dazzles, but a delicate whiteness, an infused  brightness, giving excessive delight to the eyes, which are never  wearied thereby nor by the visible brightness which enables us to see  a beauty so divine. It is a light so different from any light here  below, that the very brightness of the sun we see, in comparison with  the brightness and light before our eyes, seems to be something so  obscure that no one would ever wish to open his eyes again. . . . In  short, it is such that no man, however gifted he may be, can ever in  the whole course of his life arrive at any imagination of what it is.  God puts it before us so instantaneously, that we could not open our  eyes in time to see it, if it were necessary for us to open them at  all. But whether our eyes be open or shut, it makes no difference  whatever: for when our Lord wills, we must see it, whether we will or  not."   [*612] 

[iv.v-p110]There is another and highly important class of visual  automatisms: those which I have chosen to call   Active Imaginary Visions.    Whereas vision of the passive kind is the expression of thought,  perception, or desire on the part of the deeper self: active vision is  the expression of a change in that self, and generally accompanies  some psychological crisis. In this vision, which always has a dramatic  character, the self seems to itself to act, not merely to look on.  Such visions may possess many of the characters of dreams; they may be  purely symbolic; they may be theologically "realistic."  They may entail a journey through Hell, Purgatory and Heaven, an  excursion into fairyland, a wrestling with the Angel in the Way.  Whatever their outward form, they are always connected with inward  results. They are the automatic expressions of intense subliminal  activity: not merely the   media    by which the self's awareness of the Absolute is strengthened  and enriched, but the outward and visible signs of its movement  towards new levels of consciousness. Hence we are not surprised to  find that a dynamic vision of this sort often initiates the Unitive  Life. Such are the imaginary visions reported by St. Francis of Assisi  and St. Catherine of Siena at the moment of their stigmatization: the  [p. 291] [iv.v-Page_291] transverberation of St. Teresa; the heavenly  visitor who announced to Suso his passage from the "lower  school" to the "upper school" of the Holy Spirit.   [*613]    But perhaps the most picturesque and convincing example of all such  dramas of the soul, is that which is known in art as the "Mystic  Marriage of St. Catherine of Siena."

[iv.v-p112]We have seen that Catherine, who was subject from  childhood to imaginary visions and interior words, had long been  conscious of a voice reiterating the promise of this sacred  bretrothal; and that on the last day of the Carnival, A.D. 1366, it  said to her, "I will this day celebrate solemnly with thee the  feast of the betrothal of thy soul, and even as I promised I will  espouse thee to Myself in faith." "Then," says her  legend, "whilst the Lord was yet speaking, there appeared the  most glorious Virgin His Mother, the most blessed John, Evangelist,  the glorious Apostle Paul, and the most holy Dominic, father of her  order; and with these the prophet David, who had the psaltery set to  music in his hands; and while he played with most sweet melody the  Virgin Mother of God took the right hand of Catherine with her most  sacred hand, and, holding out her fingers towards the Son, besought  Him to deign to espouse her to Himself in faith. To which graciously  consenting the Only Begotten of God drew out a ring of gold, which had  in its circle four pearls enclosing a most beauteous diamond; and  placing this ring upon the ring finger of Catherine's right hand  He said, 'Lo, I espouse thee to Myself, thy Creator and Saviour  in the faith, which until thou dost celebrate thy eternal nuptials  with Me in Heaven thou wilt preserve ever without stain. Henceforth,  my daughter, do manfully and without hesitation those things which by  the ordering of My providence will be put into thy hands; for being  now armed with the fortitude of the faith, thou wilt happily overcome  all thy adversaries.' Then the vision disappeared, but that ring  ever remained on her finger, not indeed to the sight of others, but  only to the sight of the virgin herself; for she often, albeit with  bashfulness, confessed to me that she always saw that ring on her  finger, nor was there any time when she did not see it."'   [*614]    [p. 292] [iv.v-Page_292]

[iv.v-p114]It is not difficult to discern the materials from  which this vision has been composed. As far as its outward  circumstances go, it is borrowed intact from the legendary history of  St. Catherine of Alexandria, with which her namesake must have been  familiar from babyhood.   [*615]    Caterina Benincasa showed a characteristic artistic suggestibility  and quickness in transforming the stuff of this old story into the  medium of a profound personal experience: as her contemporaries  amongst the Sienese painters took subject, method, and composition  from the traditional Byzantine source, yet forced them to become  expressions of their overpowering individuality. The important matter  for us, however, is not the way in which the second Catherine adapted  a traditional story to herself, actualized it in her experience: but  the fact that it was for her the sacramental form under which she  became acutely and permanently conscious of union with God. Long  prepared by that growing disposition of her deeper self which caused  her to hear the reiterated promise of her Beloved, the vision when it  came was significant, not for its outward circumstances, but for its  permanent effect upon her life. In it she passed to a fresh level of  consciousness; entering upon that state of spiritual wedlock, of close  and loving identification with the interests of Christ, which Richard  of St. Victor calls the "Third Stage of Ardent Love."

[iv.v-p116]Of the same active sort is St. Teresa's great  and celebrated vision, or rather experience, of the Transverberation;  in which imagery and feeling go side by side in their effort towards  expressing the anguish of insatiable love. "I saw," she  says, "an angel close by me, on my left side, in bodily form.  This I am not accustomed to see unless very rarely. Though I have  visions of angels frequently, yet I see them only by an intellectual  vision, such as I have spoken of before. It was our Lord's will  that in this vision I should see the angel in this wise. He was not  large, but small of stature, and most beautiful--his face  burning, as if he were one of the highest angels, who seem to be all  of fire: they must be those whom we call Cherubim. . . . I saw in his  hand a long spear of gold, and at the iron's point there seemed  to be a little fire. He appeared to me to be thrusting it at times  into my heart, and to pierce my very entrails; when he drew it out, he  seemed to draw them out also and to leave me all on fire with a great  love of God. The pain was so great that it made me moan; and yet so  surpassing was the sweetness of this excessive pain that I could not  wish to be rid of it. The soul is satisfied now with nothing less than  God. The pain is not bodily, but spiritual; though the body has its  share in it, even a large one. It is a caressing of love so sweet  which now takes [p. 293] [iv.v-Page_293] place between the soul and God,  that I pray God of His goodness to make him experience it who may  think that I am lying."   [*616] 

[iv.v-p118]Finally it should be added that dynamic vision may  assume a purely intellectual form; as in the case of the Blessed  Angela of Foligno. "During last Lent I found myself," she  says, "altogether in God, without knowing how, and in a way more  exalted than was customary for me. I seemed to be in the midst of the  Trinity in a more exalted way than I had ever been before for greater  than usual were the blessings I received, and I enjoyed these  blessings without interruption. And thus to be absorbed in God filled  me with joy and with delight. And feeling myself to be in this  beatitude and this great and unspeakable delight, which were above all  I had experienced before, such ineffable divine operations took place  in my soul, as neither saint nor angel could describe or explain. And  I see and understand that these divine operations, that unfathomable  abyss, no angel or other creature howsoever great or wise, could  comprehend; and all I say now of it seemeth to me so ill said that it  is blasphemy."   [*617] 

   

[iv.v-p119.1]Automatic Script

[iv.v-p120]The rarest of the automatic activities reported to us  in connection with mysticism is that of "automatic  writing." This form of subliminal action has already been spoken  of in an earlier chapter;   [*618]    where two of the most marked examples--Blake and Madame  Guyon--are discussed. As with voice and vision, so this power of  automatic composition may and does exist in various degrees of  intensity: ranging from that "inspiration," that  irresistible impulse to write, of which all artists are aware, to the  extreme form in which the hand of the conscious self seems to have  become the agent of another personality. We are not here in the  presence of phenomena which require a "supernatural"  explanation. From the point of view of the psychologist, the  inspirational writing of the mystics differs in degree rather than in  kind from such poetic creation as that described by de Russet:  "it is not work, it is listening; it is as if some unknown  person were speaking in your ear."   [*619]    Such subliminal activity is probably present to some extent in all  the literary work of the great mystics, whose creative power, like  that of most poets, is largely dissociated from the control of the  will and the surface intelligence.

[iv.v-p123]St. Catherine of Siena, we are told, dictated her  great Dialogue to her secretaries whilst in the state of ecstasy:  which may mean [p. 294] [iv.v-Page_294] no more than the absorbed state of  recollection in which the creative faculty works most freely, or may  have been a condition of consciousness resembling the  "trance" of mediums, in which the deeper mind governs the  tongue. Had she been more accustomed to the use of the pen--she  did not learn writing until after the beginning of her apostolic  life--that deeper mind would almost certainly have expressed  itself by means of automatic script. As it is, in the rhythm and  exaltation of its periods, the Dialogue bears upon it all the marks of  true automatic composition of the highest type. The very  discursiveness of its style, its loose employment of metaphor, the  strangely mingled intimacy and remoteness of its tone, link it with  prophetic literature; and are entirely characteristic of subliminal  energy of a rich type, dissociated from the criticism and control of  the normal consciousness.    [*620] 

[iv.v-p125]So too the writings of Rulman Merswin, if we accept  the ingenious and interesting theory of his psychic state elaborated  by M. Jundt,   [*621]    were almost wholly of this kind. So Blake insisted that he was  "under the direction of Messengers from Heaven, Daily and  Nightly,"   [*622]    and stated on his deathbed that the credit for all his works belonged  not to himself, but to his "celestial friends,"   [*623]      i.e.   , to the inspiration of a personality which had access to levels of  truth and beauty unknown to his surface mind.

[iv.v-p129]St. Teresa was of much the same opinion in respect of  her great mystical works: which were, she said, like the speech of a  parrot repeating, though he cannot understand, the things which his  master has taught him. There is little doubt that her powers of  composition--as we might expect in one so apt at voice and  vision--were largely of the uncontrolled, inspired, or  "automatic" kind. She wrote most usually after the  reception of Holy Communion--that is to say, when her mystic  consciousness was in its most active state--and always swiftly,  without hesitations or amendments. Ideas and images welled up from her  rich and active subliminal region too quickly, indeed, for her eager,  hurrying pen: so that she sometimes exclaimed, "Oh, that I could  write with many hands, so that none were forgotten!"   [*624]    In Teresa's unitive state, a slight suggestion was enough to  change the condition of her consciousness, place her under the  complete domination of her deeper mind. Often, she said, when  composing the "Interior Castle," her work reacted upon  herself. She would suddenly be caught up into the very degree of  contemplation [p. 295] [iv.v-Page_295] which she was trying to describe, and  continued to write in this absorbed or entranced condition, clearly  perceiving that her pen was guided by a power not her own, and  expressed ideas unknown to her surface mind, which filled her with  astonishment.

[iv.v-p131]In the evidence given during the process for St.  Teresa's beatification, Maria de San Francisco of Medina, one of  her early nuns, stated that on entering the saint's cell whilst  she was writing this same "Interior Castle" she found her  so absorbed in contemplation as to be unaware of the external world.  "If we made a noise close to her," said another, Maria del  Nacimiento, "she neither ceased to write nor complained of being  disturbed." Both these nuns, and also Ana de la Encarnacion,  prioress of Granada, affirmed that she wrote with immense speed, never  stopping to erase or to correct: being anxious, as she said, to  "write what the Lord had given her, before she forgot it."  They and many others declared that when she was thus writing she  seemed like another being: and that her face, excessively beautiful in  expression, shone with an unearthly splendour which afterwards faded  away.   [*625] 

[iv.v-p133]As for Madame Guyon, whose temperament had in it  almost as much of the medium as of the mystic, and whose passion for  quietism and mental passivity left her almost wholly at the mercy of  subconscious impulses, she exhibits by turns the phenomena of  clairvoyance, prophecy, telephathy, and automatic writing, in  bewildering profusion.

[iv.v-p134]"I was myself surprised," she says,  "at the letters which Thou didst cause me to write, and in which  I had no part save the actual movement of my hand: and it was at this  time that I received that gift of writing according to the interior  mind, and not according to my own mind, which I had never known  before. Also my manner of writing was altogether changed, and every  one was astonished because I wrote with such great facility."   [*626] 

[iv.v-p136]Again, ". . . Thou didst make me write with so  great a detachment that I was obliged to leave off and begin again as  Thou didst choose. Thou didst try me in every way: suddenly Thou  wouldst cause me to write, then at once to cease, and then to begin  again. When I wrote during the day, I would be suddenly interrupted,  and often left words half written, and afterwards Thou wouldst give me  whatever was pleasing to Thee. Nothing of that which I wrote was in my  mind: my mind, in fact, was so wholly at liberty that it seemed a  blank, I was so detached from that which I wrote that it seemed  foreign to me. . . . All the faults in my writings come from this:  that being unaccustomed to the operations of God, I was [p. 296] [iv.v-Page_296] often unfaithful to them, thinking that I did well to  continue writing when I had time, without being moved thereto, because  I had been told to finish the work. So that it is easy to distinguish  the parts which are fine and sustained, and those which have neither  savour nor grace. I have left them as they are; so that the difference  between the Spirit of God and the human or natural spirit may be seen.  . . . I continued always to write, and with an inconceivable  swiftness, for the hand could hardly keep up with the dictating  spirit: and during this long work, I never changed my method, nor did  I make use of any book. The scribe could not, however great his  diligence, copy in five days that which I wrote in a single night. . .  . I will add to all that I have been saying on my writings, that a  considerable part of the book on 'Judges' was lost. Being  asked to complete it, I rewrote the lost portions. Long afterwards,  when I was moving house, these were found in a place where no one  could have imagined that they would be; and the old and new versions  were exactly alike--a circumstance which greatly astonished those  persons of learning and merit who undertook its verification."   [*627] 

[iv.v-p138]A far greater and stronger mystic than Madame Guyon,  Jacob Boehme, was also in his literary composition the more or less  helpless tool of some power other than his normal surface-mind. It is  clear from his own words that his first book, the  "Aurora," produced after the great illumination which he  received in the year 1610, was no deliberate composition, but an  example of inspired or automatic script. This strange work, full of  sayings of a deep yet dazzling darkness, was condemned by the local  tribunal; and Boehme was forbidden to write more. For seven years he  obeyed. Then "a new motion from on high" seized him, and  under the pressure of this subliminal impulse--which,  characteristically, he feels as coming from without not from  within--he began to write again.

[iv.v-p139]This second outburst of composition, too, was almost  purely automatic in type. The transcendental consciousness was in  command, and Boehme's surface-intellect could exert but little  control. "Art," he says of it himself, "has not  wrote here, neither was there any time to consider how to set it  punctually down, according to the Understanding of the Letters, but  all was ordered according to the Direction of the Spirit, which often  went in haste, so that in many words Letters may be wanting, and in  some Places a Capital Letter for a Word; so that the Penman's  Hand, by reason he was not accustomed to it, did often shake. And  though I could have [p. 297] [iv.v-Page_297] wrote in a more accurate, fair  and plain Manner, yet the Reason was this, that the burning Fire often  forced forward with Speed and the Hand and Pen must hasten directly  after it, for it comes and goes as a sudden shower."   [*628] 

[iv.v-p141]No description could give more vividly than this the  spontaneous and uncontrollable character of these automatic states;  the welling-up of new knowledge, the rapid formation of sentences: so  quick, that the hand of the subject can hardly keep pace with that  "burning Fire," the travail of his inner mind. As in  vision, so here, the contents of that inner mind, its hoarded memories  will influence the form of the message. Hence, in Boehme's  works, the prevalence of that obscure Kabalistic and Alchemical  imagery which baffles even his most eager readers, and which is the  result of an earlier acquaintance with the works of Paracelsus,  Weigel, and Sebastian Franck.   [*629]    Such language, however, no more discredits the "power behind  the pen," than the form under which St. Catherine of Siena  apprehended the mystic marriage discredits her attainment of the  unitive life. In the fruit of such automatic travail, such a  "wrestling with the Angel in the way," the mystic offers  to our common humanity the chalice of the Spirit of Life. We may  recognize the origins of the ornament upon the chalice: but we cannot  justly charge him with counterfeiting the Wine.

[iv.v-p143]We have been dealing throughout this section with  means rather than with ends: means snatched at by the struggling self  which has not yet wholly shaken itself free from "image,"  in its efforts to seize somehow--actualize, enjoy, and  adore--that Absolute which is the sum of its desires. No one will  ever approach an understanding of this phase of the mystical  consciousness, who brings to it either a contempt for the minds which  could thus simply and sometimes childishly objectivize the Divine, or  a superstitious reverence for the image, apart from the formless  Reality at which it hints. Between these two extremes lies our hope of  grasping the true place of automatisms on the Mystic Way: of seeing in  them instances of the adaptation of those means by which we obtain  consciousness of the phenomenal world, to an apprehension of that  other world whose attainment is humanity's sublimest end.

[iv.v-p144][p. 298] [iv.v-Page_298]

Footnotes

^267:558 [iv.v-p2.1][iv.v-p3]          "Studies in Mystical Religion," p. 165. Those who wish    to study the "rationalist" argument in an extreme form    are directed to Prof. Janet, "L'Automatisme    psychologique" and "L'Etat mentale des    hysteriques," and Prof. Leuba, "Introduction to the    Psychology of Religious Mysticism."

^267:559 [iv.v-p4.1][iv.v-p5]          On the difference in this respect between the "normal"    and the "average," see Granger, "The Soul of a    Christian," p. 12.

^267:560 [iv.v-p6.1][iv.v-p7]          See St. Angele de Foligno,     op. cit     ., p. 130 (English translation, p. 245).

^268:561 [iv.v-p7.1][iv.v-p8]          Poulain, "Les Graces d'Oraison," cap. xx. Farges,    "Mystical Phenomena," and Ribet's elaborate work,    "La Mystique Divine," well represent the    "supernaturalist" position. As against the    "rationalistic" theory of stigmatization already    described, one feels that this last-named writer hardly advances his    own cause when he insists on attributing equal validity (    a     ) to the Stigmata as marks of the Divine, (    b     ) to the imprint of a toad, bat, spider [iv.v-p8.1]"ou de tout autre objet exprimant    l'abjection" on the bodies of those who    have had commerce with the devil (tome iii. p. 482).

^268:562 [iv.v-p9.1][iv.v-p10]              Vide infra,      quotations from Hilton and St. John of the Cross. Also Rolle    "The Fire of Love," Prologue. E. Gardner, "St.    Catherine of Siena," p. 15. Von Hugel, "The    Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. pp. 178-181.

^268:563 [iv.v-p10.1][iv.v-p11]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. xliii. I have    restored the bold language of the original, which is somewhat toned    down in modern versions.

^269:564 [iv.v-p12.1][iv.v-p13]          Here as elsewhere the reader will kindly recollect that all spatial    language is merely symbolic when used in connection with spiritual    states.

^269:565 [iv.v-p14.1][iv.v-p15]          For instance when Margaret Ebner, the celebrated "Friend of    God," heard a voice telling her that Tauler, who was the    object of great veneration in the circle to which she belonged, was    the man whom God loved best and that He dwelt in him like melodious    music (see Rufus Jones,     op. cit     ., p. 257).

^269:566 [iv.v-p15.1][iv.v-p16]          "There are persons to be met with," says St. Teresa,    "and I have known them myself, who have so feeble a brain and    imagination that they think they see whatever they are thinking    about, and this is a very dangerous condition." ("El    Castillo Interior," Moradas Cuartas, cap. iii.)

^269:567 [iv.v-p16.1][iv.v-p17]          The dream-theory of vision is well and moderately stated by Pratt:    "The Religious Consciousness," cap. xviii, pp. 402     seq.      But his statement     (loc. cit.)      that "the visions of the mystics are determined in content by    their belief, and are due to the dream imagination working upon the    mass of theological material which fills the mind" is far too    absolute.

^269:568 [iv.v-p18.1][iv.v-p19]         The book of Angela of Foligno, already cited, contains a rich series    of examples.

^270:569 [iv.v-p19.1][iv.v-p20]          "Sur la psychologie du Mysticisme" (    Revue          Philosophique,      February, 1902    ). 

^270:570 [iv.v-p22.1][iv.v-p23]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. lxvi.

^270:571 [iv.v-p23.1][iv.v-p24]          Vida, cap. xxxi.  section section 5 and 10.

^270:572 [iv.v-p24.1][iv.v-p25]          Thus too in the case of St. Catherine of Siena, the intense    spiritual strain of that three years' retreat which I have    already described     (supra,      Pt. II, Cap 1.) showed itself towards the end of the period by a    change in the character of her visions. These, which had previously    been wholly concerned with intuitions of the good and beautiful, now    took on an evil aspect and greatly distressed her (Vita (Acta SS.),    i. xi. 1; see E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," p.    20). We are obliged to agree with Pratt that such visions as these    are "pathological phenomena quite on a level with other    hallucinations."("The Religious Consciousness," p    405.)

^271:573 [iv.v-p27.1][iv.v-p28]          An excellent example of such appropriation of material is related    without comment by Huysmans ("Sainte Lyndwine de    Schiedam," p. 258): "Lydwine found again in heaven those    forms of adoration, those ceremonial practices of the divine office,    which she had known here below during her years of health. The    Church Militant had been, in fact, initiated by the inspiration of    its apostles, its popes, and its saints into the liturgic joys of    Paradise." In this same vision, which occurred on Christmas    Eve, when the hour of the Nativity was rung from the belfries of    heaven, the Divine Child appeared on His Mother's knee: just    as the creche is exhibited in Catholic churches the moment that    Christmas has dawned.

^272:574 [iv.v-p28.1][iv.v-p29]          Testament, cap. iii.

^273:575 [iv.v-p32.1][iv.v-p33]          E. Gardner "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 25.

^273:576 [iv.v-p33.1][iv.v-p34]          Delacroix, "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 114.

^274:577 [iv.v-p37.1][iv.v-p38]          Missale Romanum. Praeparatio ad Missam; Die Dominica.

^274:578 [iv.v-p38.1][iv.v-p39]          Given in Poulain: "Les Graces d'Oraison," p.    318.

^275:579 [iv.v-p40.1][iv.v-p41]          "El Castillo Interior." Moradas Sextas, cap. iii.

^275:580 [iv.v-p43.1][iv.v-p44]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. xxvii.

^275:581 [iv.v-p44.1][iv.v-p45]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. xxvii.

^276:582 [iv.v-p46.1][iv.v-p47]          Vida. cap. xxv.  section section     2,      5, 6. See also for a detailed discussion of all forms of auditions    St. John of the Cross,     op. cit     ., I. ii. caps. xxviii. to xxxi.

^276:583 [iv.v-p48.1][iv.v-p49]          "El Libro de las Fundaciones" is full of instances.

^276:584 [iv.v-p50.1][iv.v-p51]          Suso, "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," Prologue.

^277:585 [iv.v-p52.1][iv.v-p53]          "Fioretti," "Delle Istimate,"     2.;      E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena." p. 15; Rolle,    "The Fire of Love," bk. i. cap. xvi., and other    places.

^277:586 [iv.v-p54.3][iv.v-p55]          Leben, cap. vi.

^278:587 [iv.v-p58.1][iv.v-p59]          Compare p. 80.

^279:588 [iv.v-p61.1][iv.v-p62]          "Les Fondements de la Connaissance Mystique." p.    149.

^280:589 [iv.v-p63.1][iv.v-p64]          Here the exception which proves the rule is Blake. But    Blake's visions differed in some important respects from those    of his fellow-mystics. They seem to have been    "corporeal," not "imaginary" in type, and    were regarded by him as actual perceptions of that "real and    eternal world" in which he held that it was man's    privilege to dwell.

^280:590 [iv.v-p64.1][iv.v-p65]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. i. cap. xi.

^281:591 [iv.v-p66.1][iv.v-p67]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. xi. The whole    chapter should be read in this connection.

^281:592 [iv.v-p68.1][iv.v-p69]          "Subida del Monte Carmelo," I. ii. cap. xvi.

^281:593 [iv.v-p70.1][iv.v-p71]          El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas, cap. iii.

^282:594 [iv.v-p74.1][iv.v-p75]          St. Angels de Foligno, "Livre de l'Experience des    Vrais Fideles," pp. 170     seq.      (English translation, p. 24).

^283:595 [iv.v-p76.1][iv.v-p77]          "It is not like that presence of God which is frequently felt    . . . this is a great grace . . . but it is not vision" (St.    Teresa, Vida, cap, xxvii.  section 6).

^283:596 [iv.v-p77.1][iv.v-p78]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

^283:597 [iv.v-p78.1][iv.v-p79]          St. Teresa, "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas,    cap. viii.

^284:598 [iv.v-p80.1][iv.v-p81]          Leben, cap. liv.

^285:599 [iv.v-p84.1][iv.v-p85]          St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxvii.  section section 2-5.

^285:600 [iv.v-p86.1][iv.v-p87]          "For oft, when on my couch I lie    
      In vacant or in pensive mood,    
      They flash upon that inward eye    
      Which is the bliss of solitude:    
      And then my heart with pleasure fills    
      And dances with the daffodils."

[iv.v-p88]    Wordsworth     , "The Daffodils."

^285:601 [iv.v-p88.1][iv.v-p89]          Leben, cap. vii.

^286:602 [iv.v-p91.1][iv.v-p92]          Suso, Leben, cap. vi.

^287:603 [iv.v-p93.19][iv.v-p94]          Par. xxx. 61-81: "And I saw light in the form of a river    blazing with radiance, streaming between banks painted with a    marvellous spring. Out of that river issued living sparks and    settled on the flowers on every side, like rubies set in gold. Then,    as it were inebriated by the perfume, they plunged again into the    wondrous flood, and as one entered another issued forth. . . . Then    added the Sun of my eyes: The river, the topazes that enter and come    forth, the smiling flowers are shadowy foretastes of their reality.    Not that these things are themselves imperfect; but on thy side is    the defect, in that thy vision cannot rise so high." This    passage probably owes something to Mechthild of Magdeburg's    concept of Deity as a Flowing Light.

^287:604 [iv.v-p95.1][iv.v-p96]          Mechthild of Hackborn, "Liber Specialis Gratiae," I.    ii. caps. xvii. and xxxv.

^288:605 [iv.v-p97.1][iv.v-p98]          Pratt, "The Religious Consciousness," p. 404.

^288:606 [iv.v-p99.1][iv.v-p100]          For instance, the Blessed Angela of Foligno, who gives in her    "Revelations" a complete series of such experiences,    ranging from an apprehension of Divine Beauty "shining from    within and surpassing the splendour of the sun"     (op. cit.,      p. 64, English translation, p. 222)to a concrete vision of two eyes    shining in the Host     (loc. cit.,      English translation, p. 230)."I saw Him most plainly with the    eyes of the mind," she says, "first living, suffering,    bleeding, crucified, and then dead upon the Cross" (p.     326,      English translation p. 223)."Another time I beheld the Child    Christ in the consecrated Host. He Appeared beautiful and full of    majesty, He seemed as a child of twelve years of age (p. 67. English    translation, p. 229).

^289:607 [iv.v-p100.1][iv.v-p101]          Vida, cap. xxviii.  section 11.

^289:608 [iv.v-p102.1][iv.v-p103]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas, cap. ix.

^289:609 [iv.v-p104.1][iv.v-p105]          "On one of the feasts of St. Paul, while I was at Mass, there    stood before me the most sacred Humanity as painters represent Him    after the resurrection" (St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxviii  section    4). So too the form assumed by many of the visions of Angela of    Foligno is obviously due to her familiarity with the frescoed    churches of Assisi and the Vale of Spoleto. "When I bent my    knees upon entering in at the door of the church," she says,    "I immediately beheld a picture of St. Francis lying in    Christ's bosom. Then said Christ unto me, 'Thus closely    will I hold thee and so much closer, that bodily eyes can neither    perceive nor comprehend it'."     (op. cit.,      p. 53. English translation, p. 165).

^289:610 [iv.v-p105.1][iv.v-p106]          Delacroix. "Etudes sur le Mysticisme." p. 116.

^290:611 [iv.v-p107.1][iv.v-p108]          Vida, cap. xxviii.  section 2.

^290:612 [iv.v-p108.1][iv.v-p109]          St. Teresa,     op. cit     ., cap. xxviii.  section section 7, 8. Angela of Foligno says of a    similar vision of Christ, "His beauty and adornment were so    great . . . and so great was my joy at the sight, that I think I    shall never lose it. And so great was my certitude that I cannot    doubt it in any point" (St. Angele de Foligno,     op. cit     ., p. 66. English translation, p. 229).

^291:613 [iv.v-p110.1][iv.v-p111]          Leben, cap. xxi.

^291:614 [iv.v-p112.1][iv.v-p113]          E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 25. Vita, i.    xii. 1, 2 (Acta S.S.,     loc. cit     .). In the ring which she always saw upon her finger. we seem to    have an instance of true corporeal vision; which finds a curiously    exact parallel in the life of St. Teresa. "On one occasion    when I was holding in my hand the cross of my rosary, He took it    from me into His own hand. He returned it, but it was then four    large stones incomparably more precious than diamonds. He said to me    that for the future that cross would so appear to me always:     and so it did.      I never saw the wood of which it was made, but only the precious    stones. They were seen, however, by no one else" (Vida, cap.    xxix.  section 8). This class of experience, says Augustine Baker,    particularly gifts of roses, rings, and jewels, is "much to be    suspected," except in "souls of a long-continued    sanctity" ("Holy Wisdom." Treatise iii.  section iv.    cap. iii.).

^292:615 [iv.v-p114.1][iv.v-p115]              Vide      "Legenda Aurea," Nov. xxv.

^293:616 [iv.v-p116.1][iv.v-p117]          Vida, cap. xxix.  section section 16, 17.

^293:617 [iv.v-p118.1][iv.v-p119]          St. Angele de Foligno     op. cit     ., p. 232 (English translation, p. 186).

^293:618 [iv.v-p120.1][iv.v-p121]          P. 66.

^293:619 [iv.v-p121.1][iv.v-p122]          Quoted by Prescott, "The Poetic Mind," p. 102.

^294:620 [iv.v-p123.1][iv.v-p124]          On this point I must respectfully differ from Mr. E. Gardner. See    his "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 354.

^294:621 [iv.v-p125.1][iv.v-p126]              Supra     , p. 185.

^294:622 [iv.v-p126.1][iv.v-p127]          Quoted by M. Wilson, "Life of William Blake," p.    135.

^294:623 [iv.v-p127.1][iv.v-p128]          Berger, "William Blake," p. 54.

^294:624 [iv.v-p129.1][iv.v-p130]          G. Cunninghame Graham. "Santa Teresa." vol. i, pp.    202.

^295:625 [iv.v-p131.1][iv.v-p132]          G. Cunninghame Graham. "Santa Teresa." vol. i, pp.    203-4.

^295:626 [iv.v-p134.1][iv.v-p135]          Vie, pt. ii. cap. ii.

^296:627 [iv.v-p136.1][iv.v-p137]          Vie, pt. ii. cap. xxi. Those who wish to compare this vivid    subjective account of automatic writing with modern attested    instances may consult Myers, "Human Personality," and    Oliver Lodge, "The Survival of Man."

^297:628 [iv.v-p139.1][iv.v-p140]          Works of Jacob Boehme (English translation, vol. i. p. xiv.).

^297:629 [iv.v-p141.1][iv.v-p142]          See E. Boutroux, "Le Philosophe Allemand, Jacob    Boehme."

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VI. Introversion. Part I: Recollection and Qui

 [iv.vi][iv.vi-p1]In[iv.vi-p1.1] our study of the First Mystic Life, its purification and  illumination, we have been analysing and considering a process of  organic development; an evolution of personality. We may treat this  either as a movement of consciousness towards higher levels, or as a  remaking of consciousness consequent on the emergence and growth of a  factor which is dormant in ordinary man, but destined to be supreme in  the full-grown mystic type. We have seen the awakening of this  factor--this spark of the soul--with its innate capacity for  apprehending the Absolute. We have seen it attack and conquer the old  sense-fed and self-centred life of the normal self, and introduce it  into a new universe, lit up by the Uncreated Light. These were the  events which, taken together, constituted the "First Mystic  Life"; a complete round upon the spiral road which leads from  man to God.

[iv.vi-p2]What we have been looking at, then, is a life-process,  the establishment of a certain harmony between the created self and  that Reality whose invitation it has heard: and we have discussed this  life-process rather as if it contained no elements which were not  referable to natural and spontaneous growth, to the involuntary [p. 299] [iv.vi-Page_299] adjustments of the organism to that extended or  transcendental universe of which it gradually becomes aware. But side  by side with this organic growth there always goes a specific kind of  activity which is characteristic of the mystic: an education which he  is called to undertake, that his consciousness of the Infinite may be  stabilized, enriched and defined. Already once or twice we have been  in the presence of this activity, have been obliged to take its  influence into account: as, were we studying other artistic types, we  could not leave on one side the medium in which they work.

[iv.vi-p3]  Contemplation    is the mystic's medium. It is an extreme form of that  withdrawal of attention from the external world and total dedication  of the mind which also, in various degrees and ways, conditions the  creative activity of musician, painter and poet: releasing the faculty  by which he can apprehend the Good and Beautiful, enter into communion  with the Real. As "voice" or "vision" is often  the way in which the mystical consciousness presents its discoveries  to the surface-mind, so contemplation is the way in which it makes  those discoveries, perceives the suprasensible over against itself.  The growth of the mystic's effective genius, therefore, is  connected with his growth in this art: and that growth is largely  conditioned by education.

[iv.vi-p4]The painter, however great his natural powers, can  hardly dispense with some technical training; the musician is wise if  he acquaint himself at least with the elements of counterpoint. So too  the mystic. It is true that he sometimes seems to spring abruptly to  the heights, to be caught into ecstasy without previous preparation:  as a poet may startle the world by a sudden masterpiece. But unless  they be backed by discipline, these sudden and isolated flashes of  inspiration will not long avail for the production of great works.  [iv.vi-p4.1]"Ordina quest' amore, o tu che  m'ami" is the imperative demand made by  Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, by every aspect of Reality, upon the  human soul. Lover and philosopher, saint, artist, and scientist, must  alike obey or fail.

[iv.vi-p5]Transcendental genius, then, obeys the laws which  govern all other forms of genius, in being susceptible of culture:  and, indeed, cannot develop its full powers without an educative  process of some kind. This strange art of contemplation, which the  mystic tends to practise during the whole of his career--which  develops step by step with his vision and his love--demands of  the self which undertakes it the same hard dull work, the same slow  training of the will, which lies behind all supreme achievement, and  is the price of all true liberty. It is the want of such  training--such "supersensual drill"--which is  responsible for the mass of vague, ineffectual, and sometimes harmful  mysticism which has [p. 300] [iv.vi-Page_300] always existed: the dilute  cosmic emotion and limp spirituality which hang, as it were, on the  skirts of the true seekers of the Absolute, and bring discredit upon  their science.

[iv.vi-p6]In this, as in all the other and lesser arts which  have been developed by the race, education consists largely in a  humble willingness to submit to the discipline, and profit by the  lessons, of the past. Tradition runs side by side with experience; the  past collaborates with the present. Each new and eager soul rushing  out towards the only end of Love passes on its way the landmarks left  by others upon the pathway to Reality. If it be wise it observes them:  and finds in them rather helps towards attainment than hindrances to  that freedom which is of the essence of the mystic act. This act, it  is true, is in the last resort a solitary experience, "the  flight of the Alone to the Alone"; even though no achievement of  the soul truly takes place   in      vacao,    or leaves the universe of souls unchanged. At the same time, here as  elsewhere, man cannot safely divorce his personal history from that of  the race. The best and truest experience does not come to the  eccentric and individual pilgrim whose intuitions are his only law:  but rather to him who is willing to profit by the culture of the  spiritual society in which he finds himself, and submit personal  intuition to the guidance afforded by the general history of the  mystic type. Those who refuse this guidance expose themselves to all  the dangers which crowd about the individualist: from heresy at one  end of the scale to madness at the other.  Vae Soli!  Nowhere more clearly than in the history of mysticism  do we observe the essential solidarity of mankind, the penalty paid by  those who will not acknowledge it.

[iv.vi-p7]The education which tradition has ever prescribed for  the mystic, consists in the gradual development of an extraordinary  faculty of concentration, a power of spiritual attention. It is not  enough that he should naturally be "aware of the  Absolute," unless he be able to contemplate it: just as the mere  possession of eyesight or hearing, however acute, needs to be  supplemented by trained powers of perception and reception, if we are  really to appreciate--see or hear to any purpose--the  masterpieces of Music or of Art. More, Nature herself reveals little  of her secret to those who only look and listen with the outward ear  and eye. The condition of all valid seeing and hearing, upon every  plane of consciousness, lies not in the sharpening of the senses, but  in a peculiar attitude of the whole personality: in a self-forgetting  attentiveness, a profound concentration, a self-merging, which  operates a real communion between the seer and the seen--in a  word, in   Contemplation. 

[iv.vi-p8]Contemplation, then, in the most general sense is a  power which we may--and often must--apply to the perception,  not [p. 301] [iv.vi-Page_301] only of Divine Reality, but of anything. It is  a mental attitude under which all things give up to us the secret of  their life. All artists are of necessity in some measure  contemplative. In so far as they surrender themselves without selfish  preoccupation, they see Creation from the point of view of God.   [*630]    "Innocence of eye" is little else than this: and only by  its means can they see truly those things which they desire to show  the world. I invite those to whom these statements seem a compound of  cheap psychology and cheaper metaphysics to clear their minds of  prejudice and submit this matter to an experimental test. If they will  be patient and honest--and unless they belong to that minority  which is temperamentally incapable of the simplest contemplative  act--they will emerge from the experiment possessed of a little  new knowledge as to the nature of the relation between the human mind  and the outer world.

[iv.vi-p10]All that is asked is that we shall look for a little  time, in a special and undivided manner, at some simple, concrete, and  external thing. This object of our contemplation may be almost  anything we please: a picture, a statue, a tree, a distant hillside, a  growing plant, running water, little living things. We need not, with  Kant, go to the starry heavens. "A little thing the quantity of  an hazel nut" will do for us, as it did for Lady Julian long  ago.   [*631]    Remember, it is a practical experiment on which we are set; not an  opportunity of pretty and pantheistic meditation.

[iv.vi-p12]Look, then, at this thing which you have chosen.  Wilfully yet tranquilly refuse the messages which countless other  aspects of the world are sending; and so concentrate your whole  attention on this one act of loving sight that all other objects are  excluded from the conscious field. Do not think, but as it were pour  out your personality towards it: let your soul be in your eyes. Almost  at once, this new method of perception will reveal unsuspected  qualities in the external world. First, you will perceive about you a  strange and deepening quietness; a slowing down of our feverish mental  time. Next, you will become aware of a heightened significance, an  intensified existence in the thing at which you look. As you, with all  your consciousness, lean out towards it, an answering current will  meet yours. It seems as though the barrier between its life and your  own, between subject and object, had melted away. [p. 302] [iv.vi-Page_302]  You are merged with it, in an act of true communion: and you   know    the secret of its being deeply and unforgettably, yet in a way which  you can never hope to express.

[iv.vi-p13]Seen thus, a thistle has celestial qualities: a  speckled hen a touch of the sublime. Our greater comrades, the trees,  the clouds, the rivers, initiate us into mighty secrets, flame out at  us "like shining from shook foil." The "eye which  looks upon Eternity" has been given its opportunity. We have  been immersed for a moment in the "life of the All": a  deep and peaceful love unites us with the substance of all things, a  "Mystic Marriage" has taken place between the mind and  some aspect of the external world. [iv.vi-p13.1]   Cor ad cor loquitur   :Life has spoken to life, but not to the  surface-intelligence. That surface-intelligence knows only that the  message was true and beautiful: no more.

[iv.vi-p14]The price of this experience has been a stilling of  that surface-mind, a calling in of all our scattered interests: an  entire giving of ourselves to this one activity, without  self-consciousness, without reflective thought. To reflect is always  to distort: our minds are not good mirrors. The contemplative, on  whatever level his faculty may operate, is contented to absorb and be  absorbed: and by this humble access he attains to a plane of knowledge  which no intellectual process can come near.

[iv.vi-p15]I do not suggest that this simple experiment is in any  sense to be equated with the transcendental contemplation of the  mystic. Yet it exercises on a small scale, and in regard to visible  Nature, the same natural faculties which are taken up and  used--it is true upon other levels, and in subjection to the  transcendental sense--in his apprehension of the Invisible Real.  Though it is one thing to see truthfully for an instant the flower in  the crannied wall, another to be lifted up to the apprehension of  "eternal Truth, true Love and loved Eternity," yet both  according to their measure are functions of the inward eye, operating  in the "suspension of the mind."

[iv.vi-p16]This humble receptiveness, this still and steady  gazing, in which emotion, will, and thought are lost and fused, is the  secret of the great contemplative on fire with love of that which he  has been allowed to see. But whilst the contemplation of Nature  entails an outgoing towards somewhat indubitably external to us, and  has as its material the world of sensible experience: the  contemplation of Spirit, as it seems to those who practise it,  requires a deliberate refusal of the messages of the senses, an  ingoing or "introversion" of our faculties, a  "journey towards the centre." The Kingdom of God, they  say, is within you: seek it, then, in the most secret habitations of  the soul. The mystic must learn so to concentrate all his faculties,  his very self, upon the invisible and intangible, [p. 303] [iv.vi-Page_303]  that all visible things are forgot: to bring it so sharply into focus  that everything else is blurred. He must call in his scattered  faculties by a deliberate exercise of the will, empty his mind of its  swarm of images, its riot of thought. In mystical language he must  "sink into his nothingness": into that blank abiding place  where busy, clever Reason cannot come. The whole of this process, this  gathering up and turning "inwards" of the powers of the  self, this gazing into the ground of the soul, is that which is called    Introversion. 

[iv.vi-p17]Introversion is an art which can be acquired, as  gradually and as certainly, by the born mystic, as the art of  piano-playing can be acquired by the born musician. In both cases it  is the genius of the artist which makes his use of the instrument  effective: but it is also his education in the use of the instrument  which enables that genius to express itself in an adequate way. Such  mystical education, of course, presumes a something that can be  educated: the "New Birth," the awakening of the deeper  self, must have taken place before it can begin. It is a psychological  process, and obeys psychological laws. There is in it no element of  the unexpected or the abnormal. In technical language, we are here  concerned with "ordinary" not "extraordinary"  contemplation.

[iv.vi-p18]In its early stages the practice of introversion is  voluntary, difficult, and deliberate; as are the early stages of  learning to read or write. But as reading or writing finally becomes  automatic, so as the mystic's training in introversion proceeds,  habits are formed: and those contemplative powers which he is  educating establish themselves amongst his normal faculties. Sometimes  they wholly dominate these faculties, escape the control of the will,  and appear spontaneously, seizing upon the conscious field. Such  violent and involuntary invasions of the transcendental powers, when  they utterly swamp the surface-consciousness and the subject is  therefore cut off from his ordinary "external world,"  constitute the typical experience of   rapture    or   ecstasy.    It is under the expansive formula of such abrupt ecstatic perception,  "not by gradual steps, but by sudden ecstatic flights soaring  aloft to the glorious things on high,"   [*632]    that the mystical consciousness of Divine Transcendence is most  clearly expressed. Those wide, exalted apprehensions of the Godhead  which we owe to the mystics have usually been obtained, not by  industrious meditation, but by "a transcending of all creatures,  a perfect going forth from oneself: by standing in an ecstasy of  mind."   [*633]    Hence the experiences peculiar to these ecstatic states have a great  value for the student of mysticism. It will be our duty to consider  them in detail in a [p. 304] [iv.vi-Page_304] later section of this book. The  normal and deliberate practice of introversion, on the contrary, is  bound up with the sense of Divine Immanence. Its emphasis is on the  indwelling God Who may be found "by a journey towards the  centre": on the conviction indeed that "angels and  archangels are with us, but He is more truly our own who is not only   with us    but   in us   ."   [*634] 

[iv.vi-p22]Contemplation--taking that term in its widest  sense, as embracing all the degrees and kinds of mystical  prayer--establishes communion between the soul and the Absolute  by way of these complementary modes of apprehending that which is One.  A. The usually uncontrollable, definitely outgoing, ecstatic  experience; the attainment of Pure Being, or "flight to  God." B. The more controllable ingoing experience; the breaking  down of the barrier between the surface-self and those deeper levels  of personality where God is met and known "in our  nothingness," and a mysterious fusion of divine and human life  takes place. The one, says the Christian mystic, is the "going  forth to the Father"; the other is the "marriage with the  Son." Both are operated by the Spirit whose dwelling is in the  "spark of the soul." Yet it is probable, in spite of the  spatial language which the mystics always use concerning them, that  these two experiences, in their most sublime forms, are but opposite  aspects of one whole: the complementary terms of a higher synthesis  beyond our span. In that consummation of love which Ruysbroeck has  called "the peace of the summits" they meet: then  distinctions between inward and outward, near and far, cease to have  any meaning, in "the dim silence where lovers lose  themselves." "To mount to God," says the writer of  "De Adhaerando Deo," "is to enter into one's  self. For he who inwardly entereth and intimately penetrateth into  himself, gets above and beyond himself and truly mounts up to  God."   [*635] 

[iv.vi-p24]Says Tauler of this ineffable meeting-place, which is  to the intellect an emptiness, and to the heart a fulfillment of all  desire, "All there is so still and mysterious and so desolate:  for there is nothing there but God only, and nothing strange. . . .  This Wilderness is the Quiet Desert of the Godhead, into which He  leads all who are to receive this inspiration of God, now or in  Eternity."   [*636]    From this "quiet desert," this still plane of being, so  near to her though she is far from it, the normal self is separated by  all the "unquiet desert" of sensual existence. Yet it  stretches through and in her, the stuff of Reality, the very Ground of  her being, since it is, in Julian's words, "the Substance  of all that is": linking that [p. 305] [iv.vi-Page_305] being at once  with the universe and with God. "God is near us, but we are far  from Him, God is within, we are without, God is at home, we are in the  far country," said Meister Eckhart, struggling to express the  nature of this "intelligible where."   [*637]    Clearly, if the self is ever to become aware of it, definite work  must be undertaken, definite powers of perception must be trained: and  the consciousness which has been evolved to meet the exigencies of the  World of Becoming must be initiated into that World of Being from  which it came forth.

[iv.vi-p27]Plato long ago defined the necessity of such a  perception, and the nature of that art of contemplation by which the  soul can feed upon the Real, when he said in one of his most purely  mystical passages, "When the soul returns into itself and  reflects, it passes into . . . the region of that which is pure and  everlasting, immortal and unchangeable: and, feeling itself kindred  thereto, it dwells there under its own control, and has rest from its  wanderings."   [*638]    In the "contemplation" of Plato and of the Platonic  Schools generally, however, the emphasis lies at least as much on  intellect as on intuition: with him the head and not the heart is the  meeting-place between man and the Real. "Anciently," says  Augustine Baker, "there was a certain kind of false  contemplation, which we may call philosophical, practised by some  learned heathens of old, and imitated by some in these days, which  hath for its last and best end only the perfection of knowledge, and a  delightful complacency in it. . . . To this rank of philosophical  contemplations may be referred those scholastic wits which spend much  time in the study and subtle examination of the mysteries of faith,  and have not for their end the increasing of divine love in their  hearts."   [*639] 

[iv.vi-p30]We cannot long read the works of the mystics without  coming across descriptions--often first-hand descriptions of  great psychological interest--of the processes through which the  self must pass, the discipline which it must undertake, in the course  of acquiring the art of contemplation. Most of these descriptions  differ in detail; in the divisions adopted, the emotions experienced,  the number of "degrees" through which the subject passes,  from the first painful attempt to gather up its faculties to the  supreme point at which it feels itself to be "lost in  God." In each there is that quality of uniqueness which is  inherent in every expression of life: in each the temperamental bias  and analytical powers of the writer have exerted a further modifying  influence. All, however, describe a connected experience, the  progressive concentration of the entire self under the spur of love  upon the contemplation [p. 306] [iv.vi-Page_306] of transcendental reality.  As the Mystic Way involves transcendence of character, the sublimation  of the instinctive life and movement of the whole man to higher levels  of vitality, his attainment of freedom, so the ascent of the ladder of  contemplation involves such a transcendence, or movement to high  levels of liberty, of his perceptive powers.

[iv.vi-p31]The steps of the ladder, the substance of the  progressive exercises undertaken by the developing self, its education  in the art of contemplation, are usually know by the Christian mystics  as the "degrees of prayer" or "orison." But  the common implications of the word "prayer," with its  suggestions of formal devotion, detailed petition--a definite  something asked for, and a definite duty done, by means of extemporary  or traditional allocutions--do not really suggest the nature of  those supersensual activities which the mystics mean to express in  their use of this term.

[iv.vi-p32]Mystical prayer, or "orison"--the  term which I propose for the sake of clearness to use here--has  nothing in common with petition. It is not articulate; it has no  forms. "It is," says "The Mirror of St.  Edmund," "naught else but yearning of soul."   [*640]   --the expression of man's metaphysical thirst. In it, says  Grou, "the soul is united to God in its ground, the created  intelligence to the Intelligence Increate, without the intervention of  imagination or reason, or of anything but a very simple attention of  the mind and an equally simple application of the will."   [*641]    On the psychological side its development involves a steady  discipline of the mystic's rich subliminal mind, slowly  preparing the channels in which the deeper consciousness is to flow.  This discipline reduces to some sort of order, makes effective for  life, those involuntary states of passivity, rapture and intuition  which are the characteristic ways in which an uncontrolled,  uncultivated genius for the Absolute breaks out. To the subject  himself, however, his orison seems rather a free and mutual act of  love; a supernatural intercourse between the soul and the divine, or  some aspect of the divine, sometimes full of light and joy, sometimes  dark and bare.   [*642]    In some of its degrees it is a placid, trustful waiting upon messages  from without. In others, it is an inarticulate communion, a wordless  rapture, a silent gazing upon God. The mystics have exhausted all the  resources of all tongues in their efforts to tell us of the rewards  [p. 307] [iv.vi-Page_307] which await those who will undertake this most  sublime and difficult of arts.

[iv.vi-p36]As we come to know our friends better by having  intercourse with them, so by this deliberate intercourse the self  enters more and more deeply into the Heart of Reality. Climbing like  Dante step by step up the ladder of contemplation, it comes at last to  the Empyrean, [iv.vi-p36.1]"ivi e perfetta,  matura ed intera ciascuna disianza."   [*643]    The true end of orison, like the true end of that mystical life  within which it flowers, is the supreme meeting between Lover and  Beloved, between God and the soul. Its method is the method of the  mystic life, transcendence: a gradual elimination of sensible image,  and bit by bit approximation of the contemplative self to reality,  gradually producing within it those conditions in which union can take  place. This entails a concentration, a turning inwards, of all those  faculties which the normal self has been accustomed to turn outwards,  and fritter upon the manifold illusions of daily life. It means,  during the hours of introversion, a retreat from and refusal of the  Many, in order that the mind may be able to apprehend the One.  "Behold," says Boehme, "if thou desirest to see  God's Light in thy Soul, and be divinely illuminated and  conducted, this is the short way that thou art to take; not to let the  Eye of thy Spirit enter into Matter or fill itself with any Thing  whatever, either in Heaven or Earth, but to let it enter by a naked  faith into the Light of the Majesty."   [*644] 

[iv.vi-p39]"What this opening of the ghostly eye is,"  says Hilton, "the greatest clerk on earth could not imagine by  his wit, nor show fully by his tongue. For it may not be got by study  nor through man's travail only, but principally by grace of the  Holy Ghost and with travail of man. I dread mickle to speak aught of  it, for me thinketh I cannot; it passeth mine assay, and my lips are  unclean. Nevertheless, for I expect love asketh and love biddeth,  therefore I shall say a little more of it as I hope love teacheth.  This opening of the ghostly eye is that lighty murkness and rich  nought that I spake of before, and it may be called:   Purity of spirit and ghostly rest, inward stillness and peace of  conscience, highness of thought and onlyness of soul, a lively feeling  of grace and privily of heart, the waking sleep of the spouse and  tasting of heavenly savour burning in love and shining in light, entry  of contemplation and reforming in feeling . . .    they are divers in showing of words, nevertheless they are all one in  sense of soothfastness."   [*645] 

[iv.vi-p41]"Human industry," says Hilton here, must  be joined to "grace." If the spiritual eye is to be  opened, definite work must be done. So long as the "eye which  looks upon Time" fills itself with things [p. 308] [iv.vi-Page_308] and  usurps the conscious field, that spiritual eye which "looks upon  Eternity" can hardly act at all: and this eye must not only be  opened, it must be trained, so that it may endure to gaze steadfastly  at the Uncreated Light. This training and purging of the  transcendental sight is described under many images; "diverse in  showing of words, one in sense and soothfastness." Its essence  is a progressive cleaning of the mirror, a progressive self-emptying  of all that is not real the attainment of that unified state of  consciousness which will permit a pure, imageless apprehension of the  final Reality which "hath no image" to be received by the  self. "Naked orison," "emptiness,"  "nothingness," "entire surrender,"  "peaceful love in life naughted," say the mystics again  and again. Where apprehension of the divine comes by way of vision or  audition, this is but a concession to human weakness; a sign, they  think, that "sensitive nature" is not yet wholly  transcended. It is a translation of the true tongue of angels into a  dialect that the normal mind can understand. A steady abolition of  sense imagery, a cutting off of all possible sources of illusion, all  possible encouragements of selfhood and pride--the most fertile  of all sources of deception--this is the condition of pure sight;  and the "degrees of orison," the "steep stairs of  love" which they climb so painfully, are based upon this  necessity.

[iv.vi-p42]The terms used by individual mystics, the divisions  which they adopt in describing the self's progress in  contemplation, are bewildering in their variety. Here, more than  elsewhere, the mania for classification has obsessed them. We find,  too, when we come to compare one with another, that the language which  they employ is not always so exact as it seems: nor are traditional  terms always used in the same sense. Sometimes by the word  "contemplation" they intend to describe the whole process  of introversion: sometimes they reserve it for the "orison of  union," sometimes identify it with ecstasy. It has been pointed  out by Delacroix that even St. Teresa's classification of her  own states is far from lucid, and varies in each of her principal  works.   [*646]    Thus in the "Life" she appears to treat Recollection and  Quiet as synonymous, whilst in "The Way of Perfection"  these conditions are sharply differentiated. In "The Interior  Castle" she adopts an entirely different system; the prayer of  quiet being there called "tasting of God."   [*647]    Finally, Augustine Baker, in treating of the "Prayer of  Interior Silence and Quiet," insists that by the term  "Quiet" St. Teresa did not mean this at all, but a form of  "supernatural contemplation."   [*648]    [p. 309] [iv.vi-Page_309]

[iv.vi-p46]Thus we are gradually forced to the conclusion that  the so-called "degrees of orison" so neatly tabulated by  ascetic writers are largely artificial and symbolic: that the process  which they profess to describe is really, like life itself, one and  continuous--not a stairway but a slope--and the parts into  which they break it up are diagrammatic. Nearly every mystic makes  these breaks in a different place, though continuing to use the  language of his predecessors. In his efforts towards self-analysis he  divides and subdivides, combines and differentiates his individual  moods. Hence the confusion of mind which falls upon those who try to  harmonize different systems of contemplation: to identify St.  Teresa's "Four Degrees"   [*649]    with Hugh of St. Victor's other four,   [*650]    and with Richard of St. Victor's "four steps of ardent  love":   [*651]    or to accommodate upon this diagram Hilton's simple and poetic  "three steps of contemplations--Knowing, Loving, and  Knowing-and-Loving--where the adventurer rather than the  map-maker speaks. Such fine shades, says Augustine Baker in this  connection, are "nicely distinguished" by the author  "rather out of a particular experience of the effects passing in  his own soul   [*652]    which perhaps are not the same in all" than for any more  general reason.   [*653] 

[iv.vi-p52]Some diagram, however, some set scheme, the writer on  introversion must have, if he is to describe with lucidity the normal  development of the contemplative consciousness: and so long as the  methodological nature of this diagram is kept in mind, there can be  little objection to the use of it. I propose then to examine under  three divisions that continuous and orderly growth, that gradual  process of change, by which the mystical consciousness matures, and  develops its apprehension of God. We will give to these three  divisions names familiar to all readers of ascetic literature:  Recollection, Quiet, and Contemplation. Each of these three parts of  the introversive experience may be discerned in embryo in that little  experiment at which the reader has been invited to assist: the act of  concentration, the silence, the new perception which results. Each has  a characteristic beginning which links it with its predecessor, and a  characteristic end which shades off into the next state. Thus  Recollection commonly begins in Meditation and develops into the  "Orison of Inward Silence or Simplicity," which again  melts into the true "Quiet." "Quiet" as it  becomes deeper passes into Ordinary Contemplation: and this [p. 310] [iv.vi-Page_310] grows through Contemplation proper to that Orison of  Passive Union which is the highest of the non-ecstatic introversive  states. Merely to state the fact thus is to remind ourselves how  smoothly continuous is this life-process of the soul.

[iv.vi-p53]It is the object of contemplative prayer, as it is the  object of all education, to discipline and develop certain growing  faculties. Here, the faculties are those of the "transcendental  self," the "new man"--all those powers which we  associate with the "spiritual consciousness." The  "Sons of God," however, like the sons of men, begin as  babies; and their first lessons must not be too hard. Therefore the  educative process conforms to and takes advantage of every step of the  natural process of growth: as we, in the education of our children,  make the natural order in which their faculties develop the basis of  our scheme of cultivation. Recollection, Quiet, and Contemplation,  then, answer to the order in which the mystic's powers unfold.  Roughly speaking, we shall find that the form of spiritual attention  which is called "Meditative" or "Recollective"  goes side by side with the Purification of the Self; that  "Quiet" tends to be characteristic of Illumination; that  Contemplation proper--at any rate in its higher forms--is  most fully experienced by those who have attained, or nearly attained,  the Unitive Way. At the same time, just as the self in its  "first mystic life," before it has passed through the dark  night of the spirit, often seems to run through the whole gamut of  spiritual states, and attain that immediate experience of the Absolute  which it seeks--though as a fact it has not reached those higher  levels of consciousness on which true and permanent union takes  place--so too in its orison. At any point in its growth it may  experience for brief periods that imageless and overpowering sense of  identity with the Absolute Life--that loving and exalted  absorption in God--which is called "passive union,"  and anticipates the consciousness which is characteristic of the  unitive life. Over and over again in its "prayerful  process" it recapitulates in little the whole great process of  its life. It runs up for an instant to levels where it is not yet  strong enough to dwell: "seeks God in its ground" and  finds that which it seeks. Therefore we must not be too strict in our  identification of the grades of education with the stages of  growth.

[iv.vi-p54]This education, rightly understood, is one coherent  process: it consists in a steady and voluntary surrender of the  awakened consciousness, its feeling, thought, and will, to the play of  those transcendental influences, that inflowing vitality, which it  conceives of as divine. In the preparative process of Recollection,  the unruly mind is brought into subjection. In "Quiet" the  eager will is silenced, the "wheel of imagination" is  stilled. In Contemplation, [p. 311] [iv.vi-Page_311] the heart at last comes  to its own--[iv.vi-p54.1]   Cor ad cor loquitur     .    In their simplest forms, these three states involve the deliberate  concentration upon, the meek resting in, the joyous communing with,  the ineffable Object of man's quest. They require a progressive  concentration of the mystic's powers, a gradual handing over of  the reins from the surface intelligence to the deeper mind; that  essential self which alone is capable of God. In Recollection the  surface-mind still holds, so to speak, the leading strings: but in  "Quiet" it surrenders them wholly, allowing consciousness  to sink into that "blissful silence in which God works and  speaks." This act of surrender, this deliberate negation of  thought, is an essential preliminary of the contemplative state.  "Lovers put out the candles and draw the curtains when they wish  to see the god and the goddess; and in the higher communion the night  of thought is the light of perception."   [*654] 

[iv.vi-p56]The education of the self in the successive degrees of  orison has been compared by St. Teresa, in a celebrated passage in her  Life, to four ways of watering the garden of the soul so that it may  bring forth its flowers and fruits.   [*655]    The first and most primitive of these ways is meditation. This, she  says, is like drawing water by hand from a deep well: the slowest and  most laborious of all means of irrigation. Next to this is the orison  of quiet, which is a little better and easier: for here soul seems to  receive some help,   i.e.   , with the stilling of the senses the subliminal faculties are brought  into play. The well has now been fitted with a windlass--that  little Moorish water-wheel possessed by every Castilian farm. Hence we  get more water for the energy we expend: more sense of reality in  exchange for our abstraction from the unreal. Also "the water is  higher, and accordingly the labour is much less than it was when the  water had to be drawn out of the depths of the well. I mean that the  water is nearer to it, for grace now reveals itself more distinctly to  the soul." In the third stage, or orison of union, we leave all  voluntary activities of the mind: the gardener no longer depends on  his own exertions, contact between subject and object is established,  there is no more stress and strain. It is as if a little river now ran  through our garden and watered it. We have but to direct the stream.  In the fourth and highest stage, God Himself waters our garden with  rain from heaven "drop by drop." The attitude of the self  is now that of perfect receptivity, "passive  contemplation," loving trust. Individual activity is sunk in the  "great life of the All."   [*656] 

[iv.vi-p59]The measure of the mystic's real progress is and  must always [p. 312] [iv.vi-Page_312] be his progress in love; for his  apprehension is an apprehension of the heart. His education, his  watering of the garden of the soul, is a cultivation of this one  flower--this Rosa Mystica which has its root in God. His advance  in contemplation, then, will be accompanied step by step by those  exalted feeling-states which Richard of St. Victor called the Degrees  of Ardent Love. Without their presence, all the drill in the world  will not bring him to the time contemplative state; though it may  easily produce abnormal powers of perception of the kind familiar to  students of the occult.

[iv.vi-p60]Thus our theory of mystic education is in close accord  with our theory of mystic life. In both, there is a progressive  surrender of selfhood under the steady advance of conquering love; a  stilling of that "I, Me, and Mine," which is linked by all  the senses, and by all its own desires, to the busy world of visible  things. This progressive surrender usually appears in the practice of  orison as a progressive inward retreat from circumference to centre,  to that ground of the soul, that substantial   somewhat    in man, deep buried for most of us beneath the great rubbish heap of  our surface-interests, where human life and divine life meet. To clear  away the rubbish-heap so that he may get down to this treasure-house  is from one point of view the initial task of the contemplative. This  clearing away is the first part of "introversion": that  journey inwards to his own centre where, stripped of all his  cleverness and merit, reduced to his "nothingness," he can  "meet God without intermediary." This ground of the soul,  this strange inward sanctuary to which the normal man so seldom  penetrates, is, says Eckhart, "immediately receptive of the  Divine Being," and "no one can move it but God  alone."   [*657]    There the finite self encounters the Infinite; and, by a close and  loving communion with and feeding on the attributes of the Divine  Substance, is remade in the interests of the Absolute Life. This  encounter, the consummation of mystical culture, is what we mean by  contemplation in its highest form. Here we are on the verge of that  great self-merging act which is of the essence of pure love: which  Reality has sought of us, and we have unknowingly desired of It. Here  contemplation and union are one. "Thus do we grow," says  Ruysbroeck, "and, carried above ourselves, above reason, into  the very heart of love, there do we feed according to the spirit; and  taking flight for the Godhead by naked love, we go to the encounter of  the Bridegroom, to the encounter of His Spirit, which is His love; and  thus we are brought forth by God, out of [p. 313] [iv.vi-Page_313] our  selfhood, into the immersion of love, in which we possess blessedness  and are one with God."   [*658] 

   

[iv.vi-p62.1]Recollection

[iv.vi-p63]The beginning of the process of introversion, the  first deliberate act in which the self turns towards the inward path,  will not merely be the yielding to an instinct, the indulgence of a  natural taste for reverie; it will be a voluntary and purposeful  undertaking. Like conversion, it entails a break with the obvious,  which must, of necessity, involve and affect the whole normal  consciousness. It will be evoked by the mystic's love, and  directed by his reason; but can only be accomplished by the strenuous  exercise of his will. These preparatory labours of the contemplative  life--these first steps upon the ladder--are, says St.  Teresa, very hard, and require greater courage than all the rest.   [*659]    All the scattered interests of the self have here to be collected;  there must be a deliberate and unnatural act of attention, a  deliberate expelling of all discordant images from the consciousness a  hard and ungrateful task. Since the transcendental faculties are still  young and weak, the senses not wholly mortified, it needs a stern  determination, a "wilful choice," if we are to succeed in  concentrating our attention upon the whispered messages from within,  undistracted by the loud voices which besiege us from without.

[iv.vi-p65]"How," says the Disciple to the Master in  one of Boehme's "Dialogues," "am I to seek in  the Centre this Fountain of Light which may enlighten me throughout  and bring my properties into perfect harmony? I am in Nature, as I  said before, and which way shall I pass through Nature and the light  thereof, so that I may come into the supernatural and supersensual  ground whence this true Light, which is the Light of Minds, doth  arise; and this without the destruction of my nature, or quenching the  Light of it, which is my reason?

[iv.vi-p66]  "Master.    Cease but from thine own activity, steadfastly fixing thine Eye upon   one Point. . . .    For this end, gather in all thy thoughts, and by faith press into the  Centre, laying hold upon the Word of God, which is infallible and  which hath called thee. Be thou obedient to this call, and be silent  before the Lord, sitting alone with Him in thy inmost and most hidden  cell, thy mind being centrally united in itself, and attending His  Will in the patience of hope. So shall thy Light break forth as the  morning, and after the redness thereof is passed, the Sun himself,  which thou waitest for, shall arise unto thee, and under his most  healing wings thou shalt greatly rejoice: ascending and descending in  [p. 314] [iv.vi-Page_314] his bright and health-giving beams. Behold, this is  the true Supersensual Ground of Life."   [*660] 

[iv.vi-p68]In this short paragraph Boehme has caught and  described the psychological state in which all introversion must  begin: the primary simplification of consciousness, steadfastly fixing  the soul's eye upon   one point,    and the turning inwards of the whole conative powers for a purpose  rather believed in than known, "by faith pressing into the  centre."

[iv.vi-p69]The unfortunate word   Recollection,    which the hasty reader is apt to connect with remembrance, is the  traditional term by which mystical writers define just such a  voluntary concentration, such a first collecting or gathering in of  the attention of the self to its "most hidden cell." That  self is as yet unacquainted with the strange plane of silence which so  soon becomes familiar to those who attempt even the lowest activities  of the contemplative life, where the self is released from succession,  the noises of the world are never heard, and the great adventures of  the spirit take place. It stands here between the two planes of its  being; the Eye of Time is still awake. It knows that it wants to enter  the inner world, that "interior palace where the King of Kings  is guest":   [*661]    but it must find some device to help it over the  threshold--rather, in the language of psychology, to shift that  threshold and permit its subliminal intuition of the Absolute to  emerge.

[iv.vi-p71]This device is as a rule the practice of meditation,  in which the state of Recollection usually begins: that is to say, the  deliberate consideration of and dwelling upon some one aspect of  Reality--an aspect most usually chosen from amongst the religious  beliefs of the self. Thus Hindu mystics will brood upon a sacred word,  whilst Christian contemplatives set before their minds one of the  names or attributes of God, a fragment of Scripture, an incident of  the life of Christ; and allow--indeed encourage--this  consideration and the ideas and feelings which flow from it, to occupy  the whole mental field. This powerful suggestion, kept before the  consciousness by an act of will, overpowers the stream of small  suggestions which the outer world pours incessantly upon the mind. The  self, concentrated upon this image or idea, dwelling on it more than  thinking about it--as one may gaze upon a picture that one  loves--falls gradually and insensibly into the condition of  reverie; and, protected by this holy day-dream from the more  distracting dream of life, sinks into itself, and becomes in the  language of asceticism "recollected" or gathered together.  Although it is deliberately ignoring the whole of its usual  "external universe," its faculties are wide awake: all  have had their part in [p. 315] [iv.vi-Page_315] the wilful production of  this state of consciousness: and this it is which marks off meditation  and recollection from the higher or "infused" degrees of  orison.

[iv.vi-p72]Such meditation as this, says Richard of St. Victor,  is the activity proper to one who has attained the first degree of  ardent love. By it, "God enters into the mind," and  "the mind also enters into itself"; and thus receives in  its inmost cell the "first visit of the Beloved." It is a  kind of half-way house between the perception of Appearance and the  perception of Reality. To one in whom this state is established  consciousness seems like a blank field, save for the "one  point" in its centre, the subject of the meditation. Towards  this focus the introversive self seems to press inwards from every  side; still faintly conscious of the buzz of the external world  outside its ramparts, but refusing to respond to its appeals.  Presently the subject of meditation begins to take on a new  significance; to glow with life and light. The contemplative suddenly  feels that he knows it; in the complete, vital, but indescribable way  in which one knows a friend. More, through it hints are coming to him  of mightier, nameless things. It ceases to be a picture, and becomes a  window through which the mystic peers out into the spiritual universe,  and apprehends to some extent--though how, he knows not--the  veritable presence of God.

[iv.vi-p73]In these meditative and recollective states, the self  still feels very clearly the edge of its own personality: its  separateness from the Somewhat Other, the divine reality set over  against the soul. It is aware of that reality: the subject of its  meditation becomes a symbol through which it receives a distinct  message from the transcendental world. But it is still operating in a  natural way--as mystical writers would say, "by means of  the faculties." There is yet no conscious fusion with a greater  Life; no resting in the divine atmosphere, as in the  "Quiet"; no involuntary and ecstatic lifting up of the  soul to direct apprehension of truth, as in contemplation.  Recollection is a definite psychic condition, which has logical  psychic results. Originally induced by meditation, or absorbed  brooding upon certain aspects of the Real, it develops in the Self, by  way of the strenuous control exercised by the will over the  understanding, a power of cutting its connection with the external  world, and retreating to the inner world of the spirit.

[iv.vi-p74]"True recollection," says St. Teresa,  "has characteristics by which it can be easily recognized. It  produces a certain effect which I do not know how to explain, but  which is well understood by those who have experienced it. . . . It is  true that recollection has several degrees, and that in the beginning  these great effects [p. 316] [iv.vi-Page_316] are not felt, because it is not  yet profound enough. But support the pain which you first feel in  recollecting yourself, despise the rebellion of nature, overcome the  resistance of the body, which loves a liberty which is its ruin, learn  self-conquest, persevere thus for a time, and you will perceive very  clearly the advantages which you gain from it. As soon as you apply  yourself to orison, you will at once feel your senses gather  themselves together: they seem like bees which return to the hive and  there shut themselves up to work at the making of honey: and this will  take place without effort or care on your part. God thus rewards the  violence which your soul has been doing to itself; and gives to it  such a domination over the senses that a sign is enough when it  desires to recollect itself, for them to obey and so gather themselves  together. At the first call of the will, they come back more and more  quickly. At last, after countless exercises of this kind, God disposes  them to a state of utter rest and of perfect contemplation."   [*662] 

[iv.vi-p76]This description makes it clear that  "recollection" is a form of spiritual gymnastics; less  valuable for itself than for the training which it gives, the powers  which it develops. In it, says St. Teresa again, the soul enters with  its God into that Paradise which is within itself, and shuts the door  behind it upon all the things of the world. "You should know, my  daughters," she continues, "that this is no supernatural  act, but depends upon our will, and that therefore we can do it with  that ordinary assistance of God which we need for all our acts and  even for our good thoughts. For here we are not concerned with the  silence of the faculties, but with a simple retreat of these powers  into the ground of the soul. There are various ways of arriving at it,  and these ways are described in different books. There it is said that  we must abstract the mind from exterior things, in order that we may  inwardly approach God: that even in our work we ought to retire within  ourselves, though it be only for a moment: that this remembrance of a  God who companions us within, is a great help to us; finally, that we  ought little by little to habituate ourselves to gentle and silent  converse with Him, so that He may make us feel His presence in the  soul."   [*663] 

   

[iv.vi-p77.1]Quiet

[iv.vi-p78]More important for us, because more characteristically  mystical, is the next great stage of orison: that curious and  extremely definite mental state which mystics call the Prayer of Quiet  or Simplicity, or sometimes the Interior Silence. This represents  [p. 317] [iv.vi-Page_317] the result for consciousness of a further degree of  that inward retreat which Recollection began.

[iv.vi-p79]Out of the deep, slow brooding and pondering on some  mystery, some incomprehensible link between himself and the Real, or  the deliberate practice of loving attention to God, the  contemplative--perhaps by way of a series of moods and acts which  his analytic powers may cause him "nicely to  distinguish"--glides, almost insensibly, on to a plane of  perception for which human speech has few equivalents. It is a plane  which is apparently characterized by an immense increase in the  receptivity of the self and by an almost complete suspension of the  reflective powers. The strange silence which is the outstanding  quality of this state--almost the only note in regard to it which  the surface-intelligence can secure--is not describable. Here, as  Samuel Rutherford said of another of life's secrets,   "Come and see    willtell you much:   come nearer    will say more." Here the self passes beyond the stage at which  its perceptions are capable of being dealt with by thought. It can no  longer "take notes": can only surrender itself to the  stream of an inflowing life, and to the direction of a larger will.  Discursive thought would only interfere with this process: as it  interferes with the vital processes of the body if it once gets them  under its control. That thought, then, already disciplined by  Recollection, gathered up, and forced to work in the interests of the  transcendental mind, is now to be entirely inhibited.

[iv.vi-p80]As Recollection becomes deeper, the self slides into a  certain dim yet vivid consciousness of the Infinite. The door tight  shut on the sensual world, it becomes aware that it is immersed in a  more real world which it cannot define. It rests quietly in this  awareness: quite silent, utterly at peace. In the place of the  struggles for complete concentration which mark the beginning of  Recollection, there is now "a living, somehow self-acting  recollection--with God, His peace, power, and presence, right in  the midst of this rose of spiritual fragrance."   [*664]    With this surrender to something bigger, as with the surrender of  conversion, comes an immense relief of strain. This is  "Quiet" in its most perfect form: this sinking, as it  were, of the little child of the Infinite into its Father's  arms. The giving up of I-hood, the process of self-stripping, which we  have seen to be the essence of the purification of the self, finds its  parallel in this phase of the contemplative experience. Here, in this  complete cessation of man's proud effort to do somewhat of  himself, Humility, who rules the Fourth Degree of Love, begins to be  known in her paradoxical beauty and power. Consciousness loses to  find, and dies that it may live. No longer, in Rolle's pungent  phrase, is it a "Raunsaker of the myghte [p. 318] [iv.vi-Page_318] of  Godd and of His Majeste."   [*665]    Thus the act by which it passes into the Quiet is a sacrament of the  whole mystic quest: of the turning from doing to being, the abolition  of separateness in the interests of the Absolute Life.

[iv.vi-p83]The state of "Quiet," we have said,  entails suspension of the surface-consciousness: yet consciousness of  the subject's personality remains. It follows, generally, on a  period of deliberate and loving recollection, of a slow and steady  withdrawal of the attention from the channels of sense. To one who is  entering this state, the external world seems to get further and  further away: till at last nothing but the paramount fact of his own  existence remains. So startling, very often, is the deprivation of all  his accustomed mental furniture, of the noise and flashing of the  transmitting instruments of sense, that the negative aspect of his  condition dominates consciousness; and he can but describe it as a  nothingness, a pure passivity, an emptiness, a "naked"  orison. He is there, as it were poised, resting, waiting, he does not  know for what: only he is conscious that all, even in this utter  emptiness, is well. Presently, however, he becomes aware that   Something    fills this emptiness; something omnipresent, intangible, like sunny  air. Ceasing to attend to the messages from without, he begins to  notice That which has always been within. His whole being is thrown  open to its influence: it permeates his consciousness.

[iv.vi-p84]There are, then, two aspects of the Orison of Quiet:  the aspect of deprivation, of emptiness which begins it, and the  aspect of acquisition, of something found, in which it is complete. In  its description, all mystics will be found to lean to one side or the  other, to the affirmative or negative element which it contains. The  austere mysticism of Eckhart and his followers, their temperamental  sympathy with the Neoplatonic language of Dionysius the Areopagite,  caused them to describe it and also very often the higher state of  contemplation to which it leads--as above all things an  emptiness, a divine dark, an ecstatic deprivation. They will not  profane its deep satisfactions by the inadequate terms proper to  earthly peace and joy: and, true to their school, fall back on the  paradoxically suggestive powers of negation. To St. Teresa, and  mystics of her type, on the other hand, even a little and inadequate  image of its joy seems better than none. To them it is a sweet calm, a  gentle silence, in which the lover apprehends the presence of the  Beloved: a God-given state over which the self has little control.

[iv.vi-p85]In Eckhart's writings enthusiastic descriptions  of the Quiet, of inward silence and passivity as the fruit of a  deliberate recollection, abound. In his view, the psychical state of  Quiet is preeminently [p. 319] [iv.vi-Page_319] that in which the soul of man  begins to be united with its "ground," Pure Being. It  marks the transition from "natural" to  "supernatural" prayer. The emptying of the field of  consciousness, its cleansing of all images--even of those symbols  of Reality which are the objects of meditation--is the necessary  condition under which alone this encounter can take place.

[iv.vi-p86]"The soul," he says, "with all its  powers, has divided and scattered itself in outward things, each  according to its functions: the power of sight in the eye, the power  of hearing in the ear, the power of taste in the tongue, and thus they  are the less able to work inwardly, for every power which is divided  is imperfect. So the soul, if she would work inwardly, must call home  all her powers and collect them from all divided things to one inward  work. . . . If a man will work an inward work, he must pour all his  powers into himself as into a corner of the soul, and must hide  himself from all images and forms, and then he can work. Then he must  come into a forgetting and a not-knowing. He must be in a stillness  and silence, where the Word may be heard. One cannot draw near to this  Word better than by stillness and silence: then it is heard and  understood in utter ignorance. When one knows nothing, it is opened  and revealed. Then we shall become aware of the Divine Ignorance, and  our ignorance will be ennobled and adorned with supernatural  knowledge. And when we simply keep ourselves receptive, we are more  perfect than when at work."   [*666] 

[iv.vi-p88]The psychic state of Quiet has a further value for the  mystic, as being the intellectual complement and expression of the  moral state of humility and receptivity: the very condition, says  Eckhart, of the New Birth. "It may be asked whether this Birth  is best accomplished in Man when he does the work and   forms and thinks himself into God,    or when he keeps himself in Silence, stillness and peace, so that God  may speak and work in him; . . . the best and noblest way in which  thou mayst come into this work and life is by keeping silence, and  letting God work and speak. When all the powers are withdrawn from  their work and images, there is this word spoken."   [*667] 

[iv.vi-p90]Eckhart's view of the primary importance of  "Quiet" as essentially the introverted state is shared by  all those mediaeval mystics who lay stress on the psychological rather  than the objective aspect of the spiritual life. They regard it as the  necessary preliminary of all contemplation; and describe it as a  normal phase of the inner experience, possible of attainment by all  those who have sufficiently disciplined themselves in patience,  recollection, and humility.

[iv.vi-p91]In an old English mystical tract by the author of  "The Cloud [p. 320] [iv.vi-Page_320] of Unknowing" there is a  curious and detailed instruction on the disposition of mind proper to  this orison of silence. It clearly owes much to the teaching of the  Areopagite, and something surely--if we may judge by its vivid  and exact instructions--to personal experience. "When thou  comest by thyself," says the master to the disciple for whom  this "pystle" was composed, "think not before what  thou shalt do after: but forsake as well good thoughts as evil  thoughts, and pray not with thy mouth, but lift thee right well. . . .  And look that nothing live in thy working mind but a naked intent  stretching unto God, not clothed in any special thought of God in  thyself, how He is in Himself or in any of His works, but only that He  is as He is. Let Him be so, I pray thee, and make Him on none  otherwise speech, nor search in Him by subtilty of wit: but   believe by thy ground.    This naked intent freely fastened and grounded by very belief, shall  be nought else to thy thought and thy feeling but a naked thought and  a blind feeling of thine own being. . . . That darkness be thy mirror  and thy mind whole. Think no further of thyself than I bid thee do of  thy God, so that thou be oned with Him in spirit as in thought,  without departing and scattering, for He is thy being and in Him thou  art that thou art: not only by cause and by being, but also He is in  thee both thy cause and thy being. And therefore think on God as in  this work as thou dost on thyself, and on thyself as thou dost on God,  that He is as He is, and thou art as thou art, and that thy thought be  not scattered nor departed but privied in Him that is All."   [*668] 

[iv.vi-p93]"Let Him be so, I pray thee!" It is an  admonition against spiritual worry, an entreaty to the individual,  already at work twisting experience to meet his own conceptions, to  let things be as they are, to receive and be content. Leave off doing,  that you may be. Leave off analysis, that you may know. "That  meek darkness be thy mirror"--humble receptivity is the  watchword of this state. "In this," says Eckhart finely,  "the soul is of equal capacity with God. As God is boundless in  giving, so the soul is boundless in receiving. And as God is almighty  in His work, se the soul is an abyss of receptivity: and so she is  formed anew with God and in God. . . . The disciples of St. Dionysius  asked him why Timotheus surpassed them all in perfection. Then said  Dionysius, 'Timotheus is receptive of God.' And thus thine  ignorance is not a defect but thy highest perfection, and thine  inactivity thy highest work. And so in this work thou must bring all  thy works to nought and all thy powers into silence, if thou wilt in  truth experience this birth within thyself."   [*669]    [p. 321] [iv.vi-Page_321]

[iv.vi-p95]It is interesting to contrast these descriptions of  the Quiet with St. Teresa's subjective account of the same  psychological state. Where the English mystic's teaching is full  of an implied appeal to the will, the Spanish saint is all for the  involuntary, or, as she would call it, the "supernatural"  actions of the soul. "This true orison of quiet," she  says, "has in it an element of the supernatural. We cannot, in  spite of all our efforts, procure it for ourselves. It is a sort of  peace in which the soul establishes herself, or rather in which God  establishes the soul, as He did the righteous Simeon. All her powers  are at rest. She understands, but otherwise than by the senses, that  she is already near her God, and that if she draws a little nearer,  she will become by union one with Him. She does not see this with the  eyes of the body, nor with the eyes of the soul. . . . It is like the  repose of a traveller who, within sight of the goal stops to take  breath, and then continues with new strength upon his way. One feels a  great bodily comfort, a great satisfaction of soul: such is the  happiness of the soul in seeing herself close to the spring, that even  without drinking of the waters she finds herself refreshed. It seems  to her that she wants nothing more: the faculties which are at rest  would like always to remain still, for the least of their movements is  able to trouble or prevent her love. Those who are in this orison wish  their bodies to remain motionless, for it seems to them that at the  least movement they will lose this sweet peace . . . they are in the  palace close to their King, and they see that He begins to give them  His kingdom. It seems to them that they are no longer in the world,  and they wish neither to hear nor to see it, but only God. . . . There  is this difference between the orison of quiet and that in which the  whole soul is united to God; that in this last the soul has not to  absorb the Divine Food. God deposits it with her, she knows not how.  The orison of quiet, on the other hand, demands, it seems to me, a  slight effort; but it is accompanied by so much sweetness that one  hardly feels it."   [*670] 

[iv.vi-p97]"A slight effort," says St. Teresa.  "A naked intent stretching," says the "Pystle of  Private Counsel." These words mark the frontier between the true  and healthy mystic state of "Quiet" and its morbid  perversion in "Quietism": the difference between the tense  stillness of the athlete and the limp passivity of the sluggard, who  is really lazy, though he looks resigned. True "Quiet" is  a means, not an end: is actively embraced, not passively endured. It  is a phase in the self's growth in contemplation; a bridge which  leads from its old and uncoordinated life of activity to its new  unified life of deep action--the real "mystic life"  of man. This [p. 322] [iv.vi-Page_322] state is desired by the mystic, not in  order that consciousness may remain a blank, but in order that the  "Word which is Alive" may be written thereon. Too often,  however, this fact has been ignored; and the Interior Silence has been  put by wayward transcendentalists to other and less admirable use.

[iv.vi-p98]"Quiet" is the danger-zone of  introversion. Of all forms of mystical activity, perhaps this has been  the most abused, the least understood. Its theory, seized upon,  divorced from its context, and developed to excess, produced the  foolish and dangerous exaggerations of Quietism: and these, in their  turn, caused a wholesale condemnation of the principle of passivity,  and made many superficial persons regard "naked orison" as  an essentially heretical act.   [*671]    The accusation of Quietism has been hurled at mystics whose only  fault was a looseness of language which laid them open to  misapprehension. Others, however, have certainly contrived, by a  perversion and isolation of the teachings of great contemplatives on  this point, to justify the deliberate production of a half-hypnotic  state of passivity. With this meaningless state of "absorption  in nothing at all" they were content; claiming that in it they  were in touch with the divine life, and therefore exempt from the  usual duties and limitations of human existence.  "Quietism," usually, and rather unfairly, regarded as the  special folly of Madame Guyon and her disciples, already existed in a  far more dangerous form in the Middle Ages: and was described and  denounced by Ruysbroeck, one of the greatest masters of true  introversion whom the Christian world has known.

[iv.vi-p100]"Such quietude," he says, "is nought  else but idleness, into which a man has fallen, and in which he  forgets himself and God and all things in all that has to do with  activity. This repose is wholly contrary to the supernatural repose  one possesses in God; for that is a loving self-mergence and simple  gazing at the Incomprehensible Brightness; actively sought with inward  desire, and found in fruitive inclination. . . . When a man possesses  this rest in false idleness, and all loving adherence seems a  hindrance to him, he clings to himself in his quietude and lives  contrary to the first way in which man is united with God; and this is  the beginning of all ghostly error."   [*672] 

[iv.vi-p102]There can be no doubt that for selves of a certain  psychical constitution, such a "false idleness" is only  too easy of attainment. They can by wilful self-suggestion  deliberately produce this emptiness, this inward silence, and  luxuriate in its peaceful effects. To do this from self-regarding  motives, or to do it to excess--to let [p. 323] [iv.vi-Page_323]  "peaceful enjoyment" swamp "active  love"--is a mystical vice: and this perversion of the  spiritual faculties, like perversion of the natural faculties, brings  degeneration in its train. It leads to the absurdities of "holy  indifference," and ends in the complete stultification of the  mental and moral life. The true mystic never tries deliberately to  enter the orison of quiet: with St. Teresa, he regards it as a  supernatural gift, beyond his control, though fed by his will and  love. That is to say, where it exists in a healthy form, it appears  spontaneously, as a phase in normal development; not as a self-induced  condition, a psychic trick.

[iv.vi-p103]The balance to be struck in this stage of introversion  can only be expressed, it seems, in paradox. The true condition of  quiet according to the great mystics, is at once active and passive:  it is pure surrender, but a surrender which is not limp  self-abandonment, but rather the free and constantly renewed  self-giving and self-emptying of a burning love. The departmental  intellect is silenced, but the totality of character is flung open to  the influence of the Real. Personality is not lost: only its hard edge  is gone. A "rest most busy," says Hilton. Like the soaring  of an eagle, says Augustine Baker, when "the flight is continued  for a good space with a great swiftness, but withal with great  stillness, quietness and ease, without any waving of the wings at all,  or the least force used in any member, being in as much ease and  stillness as if she were reposing in her nest."   [*673] 

[iv.vi-p105]"According to the unanimous teaching of the most  experienced and explicit of the specifically Theistic and Christian  mystics," says Von Hugel, "the appearance, the  soul's own impression, of a cessation of life and energy of the  soul in periods of special union with God, or of great advance in  spirituality, is an appearance only. Indeed this, at such times  strong, impression of rest springs most certainly from an unusually  large amount of actualized energy, an energy which is now penetrating,  and finding expression by ever pore and fibre of the soul. The whole  moral and spiritual creature expands and rests, yes; but this very  rest is produced by Action, 'unperceived because so fleet, so  near, so all-fulfilling.'"   [*674] 

[iv.vi-p107]The great teachers of Quietism, having arrived at and  experienced the psychological state of "quiet": having  known the ineffable peace and certainty, the bliss which follows on  its act of complete surrender, its utter and speechless resting in the  Absolute Life, believed themselves to have discovered in this halfway  house the goal of the mystic quest. Therefore, whilst much of their  teaching remains true, as a real description of a real and valid state  experienced by almost all contemplatives in the course [p. 324] [iv.vi-Page_324] of their development, the inference which they drew from  it, that in this mere blank abiding in the deeps the soul had reached  the end of her course, was untrue and bad for life.

[iv.vi-p108]Thus Molinos gives in the "Spiritual  Guide" many unexceptional maxims upon Interior Silence:  "By not speaking nor desiring, and not thinking," he says  justly enough of the contemplative spirit, "she arrives at the  true and perfect mystical silence wherein God speaks with the soul,  communicates Himself to it, and in the abyss of its own depth teaches  it the most perfect and exalted wisdom. He calls and guides it to this  inward solitude and mystical silence, when He says that He will speak  to it alone in the most secret and hidden part of the heart."  Here Molinos speaks the language of all mystics, yet the total result  of his teaching was to suggest to the ordinary mind that there was a  peculiar virtue in doing nothing at all, and that all deliberate  spiritual activities were bad.   [*675] 

[iv.vi-p110]Much of the teaching of modern "mystical"  cults is thus crudely quietistic. It insists on the necessity of  "going into the silence," and even, with a strange  temerity, gives preparatory lessons in subconscious meditation: a  proceeding which might well provoke the laughter of the saints. The  faithful, being gathered together, are taught by simple exercises in  recollection the way to attain the "Quiet." By this mental  trick the modern transcendentalist naturally attains to a state of  vacant placidity, in which he rests: and "remaining in a  distracted idleness and misspending the time in expectation of  extraordinary visits," believes--with a faith which many of  the orthodox might envy--that he is here "united with his  Principle." But, though the psychological state which  contemplatives call the prayer of quiet is a common condition of  mystical attainment, it is not by itself mystical at all. It is a  state of preparation: a way of opening the door. That which comes in  when the door is opened will be that which we truly and passionately  desire. The will makes plain the way: the heart--the whole  man--conditions the guest. The true contemplative, coming to this  plane of utter stillness, does not desire "extraordinary favours  and visitations," but the privilege of breathing for a little  while the atmosphere of Love. He is about that which St. Bernard  called "the business of all businesses": goes, in perfect  simplicity, to the encounter of Perfection, not to the development of  himself.

[iv.vi-p111]So, even at this apparently "passive"  stage of his progress, the mystic's operations are found on  analysis to have a dynamic and purposive character: his very repose is  the result of stress. He is a pilgrim that still seeks his country.  Urged by his innate tendency to transcendence, he is on his way to  higher levels, more [p. 325] [iv.vi-Page_325] sublime fulfilments, greater  self-giving acts. Though he may have forsaken all superficial  activity, deep, urgent action still remains. "The possession of  God," says Ruysbroeck, "demands and supposes active love.  He who thinks or feels otherwise is deceived. All our life as it is in  God is immersed in blessedness: all our life as it is in ourselves is  immersed in active love. And though we live wholly in ourselves and  wholly in God, it is but one life, but it is twofold and opposite  according to our feeling--rich and poor hungry and fulfilled,  active and quiet."   [*676]    The essential difference between this true "active" Quiet  and Quietism of all kinds has been admirably expressed by Baron von  Hugel. "Quietism, the doctrine of the One Act; passivity in  a literal sense, as the absence or imperfection of the power or use of  initiative on the soul's part, in any and every state; these  doctrines were finally condemned, and most rightly and necessarily  condemned, the Prayer of Quiet and the various states and degrees of  an ever-increasing predominance of Action over Activity--an  action which is all the more the soul's very own, because the  more occasioned, directed and informed by God's action and  stimulation--these and the other chief lines of the ancient  experience and practice remain as true, correct, and necessary as  ever."   [*677] 

[iv.vi-p114]The "ever-increasing predominance of Action over  Activity"--the deep and vital movement of the whole self,  too utterly absorbed for self-consciousness, set over against its  fussy surface-energies--here is the true ideal of orison. This  must inform all the soul's aspiration towards union with the  absolute Life and Love which waits at the door. It is an ideal which  includes Quiet, as surely as it excludes Quietism.

[iv.vi-p115]As for that doctrine of the One Act here mentioned,  which was preached by the more extreme quietists; it, like all else in  this movement, was the perversion of a great mystical truth. It taught  that the turning of the soul towards Reality, the merging of the will  in God, which is the very heart of the mystic life, was   One Act,    never to be repeated. This done, the self had nothing more to do but  to rest in the Divine Life, be its unresisting instrument. Pure  passivity and indifference were its ideal. All activity was forbidden  it, all choice was a negation of its surrender, all striving was  unnecessary and wrong. It needed only to rest for evermore and  "let God work and speak in the silence." This doctrine is  so utterly at variance with all that we know of the laws of life and  growth, that it hardly seems to stand in need of condemnation. Such a  state of indifference--which the quietists strove in vain to  identify with that state of Pure Love which "seeketh not its  own" [p. 326] [iv.vi-Page_326] in spiritual things--cannot coexist  with any of those "degrees of ardent charity" through  which man's spirit must pass on its journey to the One: and this  alone is enough to prove its non-mystical character.

[iv.vi-p116]It is only fair to Madame Guyon to say that she cannot  justly be charged with preaching this exaggeration of passivity,  though a loose and fluid style has allowed many unfortunate inferences  to be drawn from her works. "Some persons," she says,  "when they hear of the prayer of quiet, falsely imagine that the  soul remains stupid, dead, and inactive. But unquestionably it acteth  therein, more nobly and more extensively than it had ever done before,  for God Himself is the Mover and the soul now acteth by the agency of  His Spirit. . . . Instead, then, of promoting idleness we promote the  highest activity, by inculcating a total dependence on the Spirit of  God as our moving principle, for in Him we live and move and have our  being. . . . Our activity should therefore consist in endeavouring to  acquire and maintain such a state as may be most susceptible of divine  impressions, most flexile to all the operations of the Eternal Word.  Whilst a tablet is unsteady, the painter is unable to delineate a true  copy: so every act of our own selfish and proper spirit is productive  of false and erroneous lineaments, it interrupts the work and defeats  the design of this Adorable Artist."   [*678] 

[iv.vi-p118]The true mystics, in whom the Orison of Quiet develops  to this state of receptivity, seldom use in describing it the language  of "holy indifference." Their love and enthusiasm will not  let them do that. It is true, of course, that they are indifferent to  all else save the supreme claims of love: but then, it is of love that  they speak. [iv.vi-p118.1]  Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat      .    "This," says St. Teresa, "is a sleep of the powers  of the soul, which are not wholly lost, nor yet understanding how they  are at work. . . . To me it seems to be nothing else than a death, as  it were, to all the things of this world, and a fruition of God. I  know of no other words whereby to describe it or explain it; neither  does the soul then know what to do--for it knows not whether to  speak or be silent, whether it should laugh or weep. It is a glorious  folly, a heavenly madness wherein true wisdom is acquired; and to the  soul a kind of fruition most full of delight. . . . The faculties of  the soul now retain only the power of occupying themselves wholly with  God; not one of them ventures to stir, neither can we move one of them  without making great efforts to distract ourselves--and, indeed,  I do not think we can do it at all at this time."   [*679]    [p. 327] [iv.vi-Page_327]

[iv.vi-p120]Here, then, we see the Orison of Silence melting into  true contemplation: its stillness is ruffled by its joy. The Quiet  reveals itself as an essentially transitional state, introducing the  self into a new sphere of activity.

[iv.vi-p121]The second degree of ardent love, says Richard of St.  Victor,   binds   , sothat the soul which is possessed by it is unable to think of  anything else: it is not only "insuperable," but also  "inseparable."   [*680]    He compares it to the soul's bridal; the irrevocable act, by  which permanent union is initiated. The feeling-state which is the  equivalent of the Quiet is just such a passive and joyous yielding-up  of the virgin soul to its Bridegroom; a silent marriage-vow. It is  ready for all that may happen to it, all that may be asked of  it--to give itself and lose itself, to wait upon the pleasure of  its Love. From this inward surrender the self emerges to the new life,  the new knowledge which is mediated to it under the innumerable forms  of Contemplation.

[iv.vi-p123][p. 328] [iv.vi-Page_328]

Footnotes

^301:630 [iv.vi-p8.1][iv.vi-p9]          "The contemplative and the artist," says Maritain,    "are in a position to sympathize. . . . The contemplative,    having for object the causa altissima      from which all else depends, knows the place and    value of art, and understands the artist. The artist as such, cannot    judge the contemplative, but he can divine his greatness. If he    indeed loves Beauty, and if some moral vice does not chain his heart    to dulness, going over to the side of the contemplative he will    recognize Love and Beauty" (J. Maritain, "Art et    Scholastique," p. 139).

^301:631 [iv.vi-p10.1][iv.vi-p11]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. v.

^303:632 [iv.vi-p18.1][iv.vi-p19]          St. Bernard, "De Consideratione," bk. v. cap. iii.

^303:633 [iv.vi-p19.1][iv.vi-p20]          "De Imitatione Christi," I. iii. cap. xxxi.

^304:634 [iv.vi-p20.1][iv.vi-p21]          St. Bernard,     op. cit     ., bk. v. cap. v. So Lady Julian, "We are all in Him enclosed    and He is enclosed in us" ("Revelations of Divine    Love," cap. lvii.).

^304:635 [iv.vi-p22.1][iv.vi-p23]              Op. cit     ., cap. vii.

^304:636 [iv.vi-p24.1][iv.vi-p25]          Third Instruction ("The Inner Way," p. 323).

^305:637 [iv.vi-p25.1][iv.vi-p26]          Eckhart, Pred. lxix.

^305:638 [iv.vi-p27.1][iv.vi-p28]          Phaedo, 79c.

^305:639 [iv.vi-p28.1][iv.vi-p29]          "Holy Wisdom." Treatise iii.  section iv.cap. i.

^306:640 [iv.vi-p32.1][iv.vi-p33]          Cap. xvii.

^306:641 [iv.vi-p33.1][iv.vi-p34]          J. N. Grou, "L'Ecole de Jesus," vol. ii., p.    8.

^306:642 [iv.vi-p34.1][iv.vi-p35]          "I discover all truths in the interior of my soul,"    says Antoinette Bourignan, "especially when I am recollected    in my solitude in a forgetfulness of all Things. Then my spirit    communicates with Another Spirit, and they entertain one another as    two friends who converse about serious matters. And this    conversation is so sweet that I have sometimes passed a whole day    and a night in it without interruption or standing in need of meat    or drink" (MacEwen, "Antoinette Bourignan,    Quietist," p. 109).

^307:643 [iv.vi-p36.2][iv.vi-p37]          Par. xxii. 64.

^307:644 [iv.vi-p37.1][iv.vi-p38]          "Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p. 66.

^307:645 [iv.vi-p39.1][iv.vi-p40]          Hilton, "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii., cap.    xi.

^308:646 [iv.vi-p42.1][iv.vi-p43]          "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 18.

^308:647 [iv.vi-p43.1][iv.vi-p44]          Vida, cap. xiv.; "Camino do Perfeccion," cap. xxxi.;    "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Cuartas, cap. ii.

^308:648 [iv.vi-p44.1][iv.vi-p45]          "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section ii. cap. vii.

^309:649 [iv.vi-p46.1][iv.vi-p47]          Meditation, Quiet, a nameless "intermediate" degree,    and the Orison of Union (Vida, cap. xi.).

^309:650 [iv.vi-p47.1][iv.vi-p48]          Meditation, Soliloquy, Consideration, Rapture (Hugh of St. Victor,    "De Contemplatione").

^309:651 [iv.vi-p48.1][iv.vi-p49]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis."     Vide          supra,      p. 139.

^309:652 [iv.vi-p49.1][iv.vi-p50]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. I. caps. iv. to    viii.

^309:653 [iv.vi-p50.1][iv.vi-p51]          "Holy Wisdom,"     loc. cit     .,  section ii. cap. i.

^311:654 [iv.vi-p54.2][iv.vi-p55]          Coventry Patmore, 'The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,"    "Aurea Dicta," xiii.

^311:655 [iv.vi-p56.1][iv.vi-p57]          Vida, cap. xi.  section section 10 and 11.

^311:656 [iv.vi-p57.1][iv.vi-p58]          The detailed analysis of these four degrees fills caps.    xii.-xviii. of the     Vida     .

^312:657 [iv.vi-p60.1][iv.vi-p61]          Pred. i. This doctrine of man's latent absoluteness,    expressed under a multitude of different symbols, is the central    dogma of mysticism, and the guarantee of the validity of the    contemplative process. In its extreme form, it can hardly be    defended from the charge of pantheism; but the Christian mystics are    usually careful to steer clear of this danger.

^313:658 [iv.vi-p61.1][iv.vi-p62]          Ruysbroeck, "De Calculo" (condensed).

^313:659 [iv.vi-p63.1][iv.vi-p64]          Vida, cap. xi.  section 17.

^314:660 [iv.vi-p66.1][iv.vi-p67]          "Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p. 56.

^314:661 [iv.vi-p69.1][iv.vi-p70]          St. Teresa, "Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xxx.

^316:662 [iv.vi-p74.1][iv.vi-p75]          "Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xxx.

^316:663 [iv.vi-p76.1][iv.vi-p77]              Op. cit     ., cap. xxxi.

^317:664 [iv.vi-p80.1][iv.vi-p81]          F. von Hugel. "Letters to a Niece," p. 140.

^318:665 [iv.vi-p81.1][iv.vi-p82]          Prose Treatises of Richard Rolle (E.E.T.S. 20), p. 42.

^319:666 [iv.vi-p86.1][iv.vi-p87]          Meister Eckhart, Pred. ii.

^319:667 [iv.vi-p88.1][iv.vi-p89]              Ibid.     , Pred. i.

^320:668 [iv.vi-p91.1][iv.vi-p92]          "An Epistle of Private Counsel" (B.M. Harl. 674).    Printed, with slight textual variations, in "The Cloud of    Unknowing, and other Treatises," edited by Dom Justin    McCann.

^320:669 [iv.vi-p93.1][iv.vi-p94]          Eckhart, Pred. ii.

^321:670 [iv.vi-p95.1][iv.vi-p96]          "Camino de Perfeccion," cap. xxxiii. The whole chapter,    which is a marvel of subtle analysis, should be read in this    connection.

^322:671 [iv.vi-p98.1][iv.vi-p99]          Note, for instance, the cautious language of "Holy    Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section III. cap. vii.

^322:672 [iv.vi-p100.1][iv.vi-p101]          Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii.    caps. lxvi. (condensed).

^323:673 [iv.vi-p103.1][iv.vi-p104]          "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section iii. cap. vii.

^323:674 [iv.vi-p105.1][iv.vi-p106]          Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion,"    vol. ii. p. 132.

^324:675 [iv.vi-p108.1][iv.vi-p109]          He goes so far as to say in one of his "condemned"    propositions [iv.vi-p109.1], "Oportet hominem suas    potentias anshilare," and [iv.vi-p109.2]"velle operari active est Deum    offendere."

^325:676 [iv.vi-p111.1][iv.vi-p112]          "De Calculo," cap. ix.

^325:677 [iv.vi-p112.1][iv.vi-p113]          "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. ii. p.    143.

^326:678 [iv.vi-p116.1][iv.vi-p117]          "Moyen Court," cap. xxi. Madame Guyon's vague and    shifting language, however, sometimes lays her open to other and    more strictly "quietistic" interpretations.

^326:679 [iv.vi-p118.2][iv.vi-p119]          Vida, cap. xvi.  section section 1 and 4.

^327:680 [iv.vi-p121.1][iv.vi-p122]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne,    Patrologia Latina, vol. cxcvi. col. 1215 b).

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VII. Introversion. Part II: Contemplation

 [iv.vii][iv.vii-p1]We[iv.vii-p1.1] must now consider under the general name of Contemplation those  developed states of introversion in which the mystic attains somewhat:  the results and rewards of the discipline of Recollection and Quiet.  If this course of spiritual athletics has done its work, he has now  brought to the surface, trained and made efficient for life, a form of  consciousness--a medium of communication with reality--which  remains undeveloped in ordinary men. Thanks to this faculty, he is now  capable of the characteristic mystic experience: temporary union with  "that spiritual fount closed to all reactions from the world of  sense, where, without witnesses of any kind, God and our Freedom  meet."   [*681] 

[iv.vii-p3]The degrees of Recollection trained the self in  spiritual attention: and at the same time lifted it to a new level of  perception where, by means of the symbol which formed the  gathering-point of its powers, it received a new inflow of life. In  the degrees of Quiet it passed on to a state characterized by a tense  stillness, in which it rested in that Reality at which, as yet, it  dared not look. Now, in Contemplation, it is to transcend alike the  stages of symbol and of silence; and "energize  enthusiastically" on those high levels which are dark to the  intellect but radiant [p. 329] [iv.vii-Page_329] to the heart. We must expect  this contemplative activity to show itself in many different ways and  take many different names since its character will be largely governed  by individual temperament. It appears under the forms which ascetic  writers call "ordinary" and "extraordinary,"  "infused" or "passive" Contemplation; and as  that "orison of union" which we have already discussed.   [*682]    Sometimes, too, it shows itself under those abnormal psycho-physical  conditions in which the intense concentration of the self upon its  transcendental perceptions results in the narrowing of the field of  consciousness to a point at which all knowledge of the external world  is lost, all the messages of the senses are utterly ignored. The  subject then appears to be in a state of trance, characterized by  physical rigidity and more or less complete anaesthesia. These are the  conditions of Rapture or Ecstasy: conditions of which the physical  resemblances to certain symptoms of hysteria have so greatly reassured  the enemies of mysticism.

[iv.vii-p5]Rapture and Ecstasy differ from Contemplation proper  in being wholly involuntary states. Rapture, says St. Teresa who  frequently experienced it, is absolutely irresistible; we cannot  hinder it. Whereas the orison of union, which is one of the forms in  which pure Contemplation appears at its highest point of development,  is still controlled to a large extent by the will of the subject, and  "may be hindered, although that resistance be painful and  violent."   [*683]    There is thus a sharp distinction--a distinction both physical  and psychical--between the contemplative and the ecstatic states:  and we shall do well to avail ourselves of it in examining their  character.

[iv.vii-p7]First, then, as to Contemplation proper: what is it?  It is a supreme manifestation of that indivisible "power of  knowing" which lies at the root of all our artistic and  spiritual satisfactions. In it, man's "made Trinity"  of thought, love, and will, becomes a Unity: and feeling and  perception are fused, as they are in all our apprehensions of beauty,  our best contacts with life. It is an act, not of the Reason, but of  the whole personality working under the stimulus of mystic love.  Hence, its results feed every aspect of that personality: minister to  its instinct for the Good the Beautiful, and the True. Psychologically  it is an induced state, in which the field of consciousness is greatly  contracted: the whole of the self, its conative powers, being sharply  focussed, concentrated upon one thing. We pour ourselves out or, as it  sometimes seems to us,   in    towards this over-powering interest: seem to ourselves to reach it  and be merged with it. Whatever [p. 330] [iv.vii-Page_330] the thing may be,  in this act it is given to us and we   know    it, as we cannot know it by the ordinary devices of thought.

[iv.vii-p8]The turning of our attention from that crisp and  definite world of multiplicity, that cinematograph-show, with which  intelligence is accustomed and able to deal, has loosed new powers of  perception which we never knew that we possessed. Instead of sharply  perceiving the fragment, we apprehend, yet how we know not, the solemn  presence of the whole. Deeper levels of personality are opened up, and  go gladly to the encounter of the universe. That universe, or some  Reality hid between it and ourselves, responds to "the true  lovely will of our heart." Our ingoing concentration is balanced  by a great outgoing sense of expansion, of new worlds made ours, as we  receive the inflow of its life. So complete is the self's  absorption that it is for the time unconscious of any acts of mind or  will; in technical language, its "faculties are  suspended." This is the "ligature" frequently  mentioned by teachers of contemplative prayer, and often regarded as  an essential character of mystical states.

[iv.vii-p9]Delacroix has described with great subtlety the  psychological character of pure contemplation.

[iv.vii-p10]"When contemplation appears," he says:  "(  a   ) It produces a general condition of indifference, liberty, and peace,  an elevation above the world, a sense of beatitude. The Subject ceases  to perceive himself in the multiplicity and division of his general  consciousness. He is raised above himself. A deeper and a purer soul  substitutes itself for the normal self. (  b   ) In this state, in which consciousness of I-hood and consciousness of  the world disappear, the mystic is conscious of being in immediate  relation with God Himself; of participating in Divinity. Contemplation  installs a method of being and of knowing. Moreover, these two things  tend at bottom to become one. The mystic has more and more the  impression of being that which he knows, and of knowing that which he  is."   [*684]    Temporally rising, in fact, to levels of freedom, he knows himself  real, and therefore knows Reality.

[iv.vii-p12]Now, the object of the mystic's contemplation is  always some aspect of the Infinite Life: of "God, the one  Reality." Hence, that enhancement of vitality which artists or  other unselfconscious observers may receive from their communion with  scattered manifestations of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, is in him  infinitely increased. His uniformly rapturous language is alone enough  to prove this. In the contemplative act, his whole personality,  directed by love and will, transcends the sense-world, casts off its  fetters, and rises to freedom: becoming operative on those high levels  where, says Tauler, "reason cannot [p. 331] [iv.vii-Page_331]  come." There it apprehends the supra-sensible by immediate  contact, and knows itself to be in the presence of the "Supplier  of true Life." Such Contemplation--such positive attainment  of the Absolute--is the   whole act    of which the visions of poets, the intuition of philosophers, give us  hints.

[iv.vii-p13]It is a brief act. The greatest of the contemplatives  have been unable to sustain the brilliance of this awful vision for  more than a little while. "A flash," "an  instant," "the space of an Ave Maria," they say.  "My mind," says St. Augustine, in his account of his first  purely contemplative glimpse of the One Reality, "withdrew its  thoughts from experience, extracting itself from the contradictory  throng of sensuous images, that it might find out what that light was  wherein it was bathed. . . . And thus with the flash of one hurried  glance, it attained to the vision of   That Which Is.    And then at last I saw Thy invisible things understood by means of  the things that are made, but I could not sustain my gaze: my weakness  was dashed back, and I was relegated to my ordinary experience,  bearing with me only a loving memory, and as it were the fragrance of  those desirable meats on the which as yet I was not able to  feed."   [*685] 

[iv.vii-p15]This fragrance, as St. Augustine calls it, remains for  ever with those who have thus been initiated, if only for a moment,  into the atmosphere of the Real: and this--the immortal and  indescribable memory of their communion with That Which Is--gives  to their work the perfume of the "Inviolate Rose," and is  the secret of its magic power. But they can never tell us in exact and  human language   what    it was that they attained in their ecstatic flights towards the  thought of God: their momentary mergence in the Absolute Life.

[iv.vii-p16]"That Which Is," says St. Augustine;  "The One," "the Supplier of true Life," says  Plotinus; "the energetic Word," says St. Bernard;  "Eternal Light," says Dante; "the Abyss," says  Ruysbroeck; "Pure Love," says St. Catherine of  Genoa--Poor symbols of Perfection at the best. But, through and  by these oblique utterances, they give us the assurance that the  Object of their discovery is one with the object of our quest.

[iv.vii-p17]William James considered "ineffability"  and "noetic quality" to be the constant characteristics of  the contemplative experience.   [*686]    Those who have seen are quite convinced: those who have not seen, can  never be told. There is no certitude to equal the mystic's  certitude: no impotence more complete than that which falls on those  who try to communicate it. "Of these most excellent and divine  workings in the soul, when God doth manifest Himself," [p. 332] [iv.vii-Page_332] says Angela of Foligno, "we can in no wise speak, or  even stammer."   [*687]    Nevertheless, the greater part of mystical literature is concerned  with the attempts of the mystics to share their discoveries. Under a  variety of images, by a deliberate exploitation of the musical and  suggestive qualities of words--often, too, by the help of  desperate paradoxes, those unfailing stimulants of man's  intuitive power--they try to tell others somewhat of that  veritable country which "eye hath not seen." Their  success--partial though it be--can only be accounted for  upon the supposition that somewhere within us lurks a faculty, a  spark, a "fine point of spirit" which has known this  country from its birth; which dwells in it, partakes of Pure Being,  and can under certain conditions be stung to consciousness. Then  "transcendental feeling," waking from its sleep,  acknowledges that these explorers of the Infinite have really gazed  upon the secret plan.

[iv.vii-p20]Contemplation is not, like meditation, one simple  state, governed by one set of psychic conditions. It is a general name  for a large group of states, partly governed--like all other  forms of mystical activity--by the temperament of the subject,  and accompanied by feeling-states which vary from the extreme of  quietude or "peace in life naughted" to the rapturous and  active love in which "thought into song is turned." Some  kinds of Contemplation are inextricably entwined with the phenomena of  "intellectual vision" and "inward voices." In  others we find what seems to be a development of the  "Quiet": a state which the subject describes as a blank  absorption, a darkness, or "contemplation in   caligine." [*688]    Sometimes the contemplative tells us that he passes through this  darkness to the light:   [*689]    sometimes it seems to him that he stays for ever in the  "beneficent dark."   [*690]    In some cases the soul says that even in the depths of her  absorption, she "knows her own bliss": in others she only  becomes aware of it when contemplation is over and the  surface-intelligence reassumes the reins.

[iv.vii-p24]In this welter of personal experiences, it becomes  necessary to adopt some basis of classification, some rule by which to  distinguish true Contemplation from other introversive states. Such a  basis is not easy to find. I think, however, that there are two marks  of the real condition: (A) The Totality and Givenness of the Object.  (B) Self-Mergence of the subject. These we may safely use in our  attempt to determine its character. [p. 333] [iv.vii-Page_333]

[iv.vii-p25](A) Whatever terms he may employ to describe it, and  however faint or confused his perceptions may be, the mystic's  experience in Contemplation is the experience of the All, and this  experience seems to him to be   given    rather than attained. It is indeed the Absolute which is revealed to  him: not, as in meditation or vision, some partial symbol or aspect  thereof.

[iv.vii-p26](B) This revealed Reality is apprehended by way of  participation, not by way of observation. The passive receptivity of  the Quiet is here developed into an active, outgoing self-donation,  which is the self's response to the Divine initiative. By a free  act, independent of man's effort, God is self-disclosed to the  soul; and that soul rushes out willingly to lose itself in Him. Thus a  "give and take"--a divine osmosis--is set up  between the finite and the Infinite life. That dreadful consciousness  of a narrow and limiting I-hood which dogs our search for freedom and  full life, is done away. For a moment, at least, the independent  spiritual life is achieved. The contemplative is merged in it  "like a bird in the air, like a fish in the sea": loses to  find and dies to live.

[iv.vii-p27]"We must," says Dionysius the Areopagite,  "be transported wholly out of ourselves and given unto  God."   [*691]    This is the "passive union" of Contemplation: a temporary  condition in which the subject receives a double conviction of  ineffable happiness and ultimate reality. He may try to translate this  conviction into "something said" or "something  seen": but in the end he will be found to confess that he can  tell nothing, save by implication. The essential fact is that he was   there:    as the essential fact for the returning exile is neither landscape  nor language, but the homely spirit of place.

[iv.vii-p29]"To see and to have seen that Vision,"  says Plotinus in one of his finest passages, "is reason no  longer. It is more than reason, before reason, and after reason, as  also is the vision which is seen. . . . And perhaps we should not here  speak of   sight:    for that which is seen is not discerned by the seer--if indeed  it is possible here to distinguish seer and seen as separate things. .  . .Therefore this vision is hard to tell of: for how can a man  describe as other than himself that which, when he discerned it,  seemed not other, but one with himself indeed?"   [*692] 

[iv.vii-p31]Ruysbroeck, who continued in the mediaeval world the  best traditions of Neoplatonic mysticism, also describes a condition  of supreme insight, a vision of Truth, which is closely related to the  Plotinian ecstasy. "Contemplation," he says, "places  us in a purity and a radiance which is far above our understanding . .  . and none can attain to it by knowledge, by subtlety, or by any  exercise whatsoever: but he whom God chooses to unite to [p. 334] [iv.vii-Page_334] Himself, and to illuminate by Himself, he and no other can  contemplate God. . . . But few men attain to this divine  contemplation, because of our incapacity and of the hiddenness of that  light in which one sees. And this is why none by his own knowledge, or  by subtle consideration, will ever really understand these things. For  all words and all that one can learn or understand in a creaturely  way, are foreign to the truth that I mean and far below it. But he who  is united to God, and illumined by this truth--he can understand  Truth by Truth.   [*693] 

[iv.vii-p33]This final, satisfying knowledge of reality--this  understanding of Truth by Truth--is, at bottom, that which all  men desire. The saint's thirst for God, the philosopher's  passion for the Absolute; these are nothing else than the crying need  of the spirit, variously expressed by the intellect and by the heart.  The guesses of science, the diagrams of metaphysics, the intuitions of  artists; all are pressing towards this. "Adam sinned when he  fell from Contemplation. Since then, there has been division in  man."   [*694] 

[iv.vii-p35]Man's soul, says Hilton, "Feeleth well  that there is somewhat above itself that it knoweth not nor hath not  yet, but it would have it, and burningly yearneth for it. And that is  nought else but the sight of Jerusalem without-forth, the which is  like to a city that the prophet Ezechiel saw in his visions.

[iv.vii-p36]"He saith that he saw a city set upon an hill  sloping to the south, that to his sight when it was measured was no  more of length and of breadth than a rood, that was six cubits and a  palm of length; but as soon as he was brought into the city and looked  about him, then thought him that it was wonder mickle, for he saw many  halls and chambers both open and privy, he saw gates and porches,  outward and inward, and mickle more building than I say now, on length  and on breadth many hundred cubits. Then was this wonder to him, how  this city within was so long and so large, that was so little to his  sight when he was without. This city betokeneth the perfect love of  God, set in the hill of contemplation; the which unto the sight of a  soul that is without the feeling of it and travaileth in desire  toward, seemeth somewhat, but it seemeth but a little thing, no more  than a rood, that is six cubits and a palm in length. By six cubits is  understood the perfection of man's work, by the palm a little  touching of contemplation. He seeth well that there is such a thing,  that passeth the desert of all working of man a little, as the palm  passeth over the six cubits, but he seeth not within what that is.  Nevertheless, [p. 335] [iv.vii-Page_335] if he may come within the city of  contemplation, then seeth he mickle more than he saw first."   [*695] 

[iv.vii-p38]As in the case of vision, so here, all that we who  "without the feeling travail in desire" can really know  concerning Contemplation--its value for life, the knowledge it  confers--must come from those who have "come within the  city": have, in the metaphor of Plotinus, "taken flight  towards the Thought of God." What, in effect, can they tell us  about the knowledge of reality which they attained in that brief  communion with the Absolute?

[iv.vii-p39]They tell us chiefly, when we come to collate their  evidence, two apparently contradictory things. They speak, almost in  the Same breath, of an exceeding joy, a Beatific Vision, an intense  communion, and a "loving sight": and of an exceeding  emptiness, a barren desert, an unfathomable Abyss, a nescience, a  Divine Dark. Again and again these pairs of opposites occur in all  first-hand descriptions of pure contemplation: Remoteness and  Intimacy, Darkness and Light. Bearing in mind that these four  metaphors all describe the same process seen "through a  temperament," and represent the reaction of that temperament  upon Absolute Reality, we may perhaps by their comparison obtain some  faint idea of the totality of that indescribable experience at which  they hint.

[iv.vii-p40]Note first that the emotional accompaniments of his  perceptions will always and necessarily be the stuff from which the  mystic draws suggestive language, by which to hint at his experience  of supernal things. His descriptions will always lean to the  impressionistic rather than to the scientific side. The "deep  yet dazzling darkness," the "unfathomable abyss,"  the Cloud of Unknowing, the "embrace of the Beloved," all  represent, not the Transcendent but his relation with the  Transcendent; not an object observed, but an overwhelming impression  felt, by the totality of his being during his communion with a Reality  which is One.

[iv.vii-p41]It is not fair, however, to regard Contemplation on  this account as pre-eminently a "feeling state"; and hence  attribute to it, as many modern writers do, a merely subjective  validity. It is of course accompanied, as all humanity's supreme  and vital acts are accompanied, by feeling of an exalted kind: and  since such emotions are the least abnormal part of it, they are the  part which the subject finds easiest to describe. These elusive  combinations of Fear, Amazement, Desire, and Joy are more or less  familiar to him. The accidents of sensual life have developed them.  His language contains words which are capable of [p. 336] [iv.vii-Page_336]  suggesting them to other men. But his total experience transcends mere  feeling, just as it transcends mere intellect. It is a complete act of  perception, inexpressible by these departmental words: and its agent  is the   whole man,    the indivisible personality whose powers and nature are only  partially hinted at in such words as Love, Thought, or Will.

[iv.vii-p42]The plane of consciousness, however--the  objective somewhat--of which this personality becomes aware in  contemplation, is not familiar to it; neither is it related to its  systems of thought. Man, accustomed to dwell amongst spatial images  adapted to the needs of daily life, has no language that will fit it.  So, a person hearing for the first time some masterpiece of classical  music, would have no language in which to describe it objectively; but  could only tell us how it made him   feel.    This is one reason why feeling-states seem to preponderate in all  descriptions of the mystic act. Earthly emotions provide a parallel  which enables the subject to tell us by implication something of that  which he felt: but he cannot describe to us--for want of  standards of comparison--that Wholly Other which induced him thus  to feel. His best efforts to fit words to this elusive but objective  experience generally result in the evaporation alike of its fragrance  and of its truth. As St. Augustine said of Time, he knows what it is  until he is asked to define it.

[iv.vii-p43]How symbolic and temperamental is all verbal  description of mystical activity, may be seen by the aspect which  contemplation took in the music-loving soul of Richard Rolle; who  always found his closest parallels with Reality, not in the concepts  of intimate union, or of self-loss in the Divine Abyss, but in the  idea of the soul's participation in a supernal  harmony--that sweet minstrelsy of God in which "thought  into song is turned." "To me," he says, "it  seems that contemplation is joyful song of God's love taken in  mind, with sweetness of angels' praise. This is jubilation, that  is the end of perfect prayer and high devotion in this life. This is  that mirth in mind, had ghostily by the lover everlastingly, with  great voice outbreaking. . . . Contemplative sweetness not without  full great labour is gotten, and with joy untold it is possessed.  Forsooth, it is not man's merit but God's gift; and yet  from the beginning to this day never might man be ravished in  contemplation of Love Everlasting, but if he before parfitely all the  world's vanity had forsaken."   [*696] 

[iv.vii-p45]We must, then, be prepared to accept, sift, and use  many different descriptions of evoked emotion in the course of our  inquiry into the nature of the contemplative's perceptions of  the [p. 337] [iv.vii-Page_337] Absolute. We find on analysis that these evoked  emotions separate themselves easily into two groups. Further, these  two groups answer to the two directions in which the mystic  consciousness of Reality is extended, and to the pairs of descriptions  of the Godhead which we have found to be characteristic of mystical  literature:   i.e.   , the personal and spatial, immanental and transcendental, indwelling  Life and Unconditioned Source; (  a   ) the strange, dark, unfathomable Abyss of Pure Being always dwelt  upon by mystics of the metaphysical type, and (  b   ) the divine and loved Companion of the soul, whose presence is so  sharply felt by those selves which lean to the concept of Divine  Personality.

[iv.vii-p46]  A. The Contemplation of Transcendence.--   The first group of feeling-states, allied to those which emphasize the  theological idea of Divine Transcendence, is born of the  mystic's sense of his own littleness, unworthiness, and  incurable ignorance in comparison with the ineffable greatness of the  Absolute Godhead which he has perceived, and in which he desires to  lose himself; of the total and incommunicable difference   in kind    between the Divine and everything else. Awe and self-abasement, and  the paradoxical passion for self-loss in the All, here govern his  emotional state. All affirmative statements seem to him blasphemous,  so far are they from an ineffable truth which is "more than  reason, before reason, and after reason." To this group of  feelings, which usually go with an instinctive taste for Neoplatonism,  an iconoclastic distrust of personal imagery, we owe all negative  descriptions of supreme Reality. For this type of self, God is the  Unconditioned, the Wholly Other for whom we have no words, and whom  all our poor symbols insult. To see Him is to enter the Darkness, the  "Cloud of Unknowing," and "know only that we know  nought." Nothing else can satisfy this extreme spiritual  humility; which easily degenerates into that subtle form of pride  which refuses to acquiesce in the limitations of its own creaturely  state.

[iv.vii-p47]"There is none other God but He that none may  know, which may not be known," says this contemplative soul.  "No, soothly no! Without fail, No, says she. He only is my God  that none can one word of say, nor all they of Paradise one only point  attain nor understand, for all the knowing that they have of  Him."   [*697] 

[iv.vii-p49]When they try to be geographically exact, to define  and describe their apprehension of, and contact with, the  Unconditioned One who is the only Country of the Soul, contemplatives  of this type become, like their great master the Areopagite, [p. 338] [iv.vii-Page_338] impersonal and remote. They seem to have been caught up to  some measureless height, where the air is too rarefied for the lungs  of common men. When we ask them the nature of the life on these  summits, they are compelled as a rule to adopt the Dionysian concept  of Divine Darkness, or the parallel idea of the fathomless Abyss, the  Desert of the Godhead, the Eckhartian "still wilderness where no  one is at home."

[iv.vii-p50]Oddly enough, it is in their language concerning this  place or plane of reality, in which union with the Super-essential  Godhead takes place--this "lightsome darkness and rich  nought"--that they come nearer to distinct affirmation, and  consequently offer more surprises to sentimental and anthropomorphic  piety, than in any other department of their work. Unquestionably this  language, with its constant reference to a "still desert,"  a "vast sea," an "unplumbed abyss" in which  the "emptiness," the "nothing," the  "Dark" on which the self entered in the Orison of Quiet is  infinitely increased, yet positive satisfaction is at last attained,  does correspond with a definite psychological experience. It is not  merely the convention of a school. These descriptions, incoherent as  they are, have a strange note of certainty, a stranger note of  passion, an odd realism of their own: which mean, wherever we meet  them, that experience not tradition is their source. Driven of  necessity to a negation of all that their surface-minds have ever  known--with language, strained to the uttermost, failing them at  every turn--these contemplatives are still able to communicate to  us a definite somewhat; news as to a given and actual Reality, an  unchanging Absolute, and a beatific union with it, most veritably  attained. They agree in their accounts of it, in a way which makes it  obvious that all these reporters have sojourned in the same land, and  experienced the same spiritual state. Moreover, our inmost minds bear  witness for them. We meet them half-way. We know instinctively and  irrefutably that they tell true; and they rouse in us a passionate  nostalgia, a bitter sense of exile and of loss.

[iv.vii-p51]One and all, these explorers of the Infinite fly to  language expressive of great and boundless spaces. In their withdrawal  from the busy, fretful sense-world they have sunk down to the  "ground" of the soul and of the apparent universe: Being,  the Substance of all that Is. Multiplicity is resolved into Unity: a  unity with which the perceiving self is merged. Thus the mystic, for  the time of this "union with the Divine," does find  himself, in Tauler's words, to be "simply in  God."

[iv.vii-p52]"The great wastes to be found in this divine  ground," says that great master, "have neither image nor  form nor condition, for they are neither here nor there. They are like  unto a fathomless [p. 339] [iv.vii-Page_339] Abyss, bottomless and floating in  itself. Even as water ebbs and flows, up and down; now sinking into a  hollow, so that it looks as if there were no water there, and then  again in a little while rushing forth as if it would engulf  everything, so does it come to pass in this Abyss. This, truly, is  much more God's Dwelling-place than heaven or man. A man who  verily desires to enter will surely find God here, and himself simply  in God; for God never separates Himself from this ground. God will be  present with him, and he will find and enjoy Eternity here. There is  no past nor present here, and no created light can reach unto or shine  into this divine Ground; for here only is the dwelling-place of God  and His sanctuary.

[iv.vii-p53]"Now this Divine Abyss can be fathomed by no  creatures; it can be filled by none, and it satisfies none, God only  can fill it in His Infinity. For this abyss belongs only to the Divine  Abyss of which it is written: [iv.vii-p53.1]  Abysses abyssum invocal     .    He who is truly conscious of this ground, which shone into the powers  of his soul, and lighted and inclined its lowest and highest powers to  turn to their pure Source and true Origin, must diligently examine  himself, and remain alone, listening to the voice which cries in the  wilderness of this ground. This ground is so desert and bare that no  thought has ever entered there. None of all the thoughts of man which,  with the help of reason, have been devoted to meditation on the Holy  Trinity (and some men have occupied themselves much with these  thoughts) have ever entered this ground. For it is so close and yet so  far off, and so far beyond all things, that it has neither time nor  place. It is a simple and unchanging condition. A man who really and  truly enters, feels as though he had been here throughout eternity,  and as though he were one therewith."   [*698] 

[iv.vii-p55]Many other mystics have written to the same effect:  have described with splendour the ineffable joys and terrors of the  Abyss of Being "where man existed in God from all  Eternity," the soul's adventures when, "stripped of  its very life," it "sails the wild billows of the sea  divine." But their words merely amaze the outsider and give him  little information. The contemplative self who has attained this  strange country can only tell an astonished and incredulous world that  here his greatest deprivation is also his greatest joy; that here the  extremes of possession and surrender are the same, that ignorance and  knowledge, light and dark, are   One.    Love has led him into that timeless, spaceless world of Being which  is the peaceful ground, not only of the individual striving spirit,  but also of the striving universe; and he can but cry with Philip,  "  It is      enough."    [p. 340] [iv.vii-Page_340]

[iv.vii-p56]"Here," says Maeterlinck, "we stand  suddenly at the confines of human thought, and far beyond the Polar  circle of the mind. It is intensely cold here; it is intensely dark,  and yet you will find nothing but flames and light. But to those who  come without having trained their souls to these new perceptions, this  light and these flames are as dark and as cold as if they were  painted. Here we are concerned with the most exact of sciences: with  the exploration of the harshest and most uninhabitable headlands of  the divine 'Know thyself': and the midnight sun reigns  over that rolling sea where the psychology of man mingles with the  psychology of God."   [*699] 

[iv.vii-p58]On one hand "flames and light"--the  flame of living and creative love which fills the universe--on  the other the "quiet desert of Godhead," transcending all  succession and dark to the single sight of earth-born men. Under these  two metaphors, one affirmative, one negative, resumed in his most  daring paradox nearly the whole of man's contemplative  experience of the Absolute can be and is expressed. We have considered  his negative description of Utmost Transcendence: that confession of  "divine ignorance" which is a higher form of knowledge.  But this is balanced, in a few elect spirits, by a positive  contemplation of truth; an ecstatic apprehension of the "secret  plan."

[iv.vii-p59]Certain rare mystics seem able to describe to us a  Beatific Vision experienced here and now: a knowledge by contact of  the flaming heart of Reality, which includes in one great whole the  planes of Being and Becoming, the Simultaneous and the Successive, the  Eternal Father, and His manifestation in the "energetic  Word." We saw something of this power, which is characteristic  of mystical genius of a high order, in studying the characteristics of  Illumination. Its finest literary expression is found in that passage  of the "Paradiso" where Dante tells us how he pierced, for  an instant, the secret of the Empyrean. Already he had enjoyed a  symbolic vision of two-fold Reality as the moving River of Light and  the still white Rose.   [*700]    Now these two aspects vanished, and he saw the One.

   [iv.vii-p60.1] ". . . la mia vista,  venendo sincera
   e piu e piu entrava per lo raggio
   dell' alta luce, che da se e  vera.
   Da quinci innanzi il mio veder fu maggio
   che il parlar nostro ch' a tal vista cede,
   e cede la memoria a tanto oltraggio. [p. 341] [iv.vii-Page_341]
   Qual e colui che somniando vede,
   che dopo il sogno la passione impressa
   rimane, e l' altro alla mente non riede;
   cotal son io, che quasi tutta cessa
   mia visione, ed ancor mi distilla
   nel cor lo dolce che nacque da essa.
   . . . .
   Io credo, per l' acume ch' io  soffersi
   del vivo raggio, ch' io sarei smarrito,
   se gli occhi miei da lui fossero aversi.
   E mi ricorda ch' io fui piu ardito
   per questo a sostener tanto ch' io giunsi
   l' aspetto mio col valor infinito.
   Cosi la mente mia, tutta sospesa,
   mirava fissa, immobile ed attenta,
   e sempre del mirar faceasi accesa.
   A quella luce cotal si diventa,
   che volgersi da lei per altro aspetto
   e impossibil che mai si consenta.
   Pero che il Ben, ch' e del volere  obbietto,
   tutto s'accoglie in lei, e fuor di quella
   e difettivo cio che li e  perfetto." [*701]  
  [iv.vii-p62]Intermediate between the Dantesque apprehension of  Eternal Reality and the contemplative communion with Divine  Personality, is the type of mystic whose perceptions of the  suprasensible are neither wholly personal nor wholly cosmic and  transcendental in type. To him, God is pre-eminently the  Perfect--Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, Light, Life, and  Love--discovered in a moment of lucidity at the very door of the  seeking self. Here the symbols under which He is perceived are still  the abstractions of philosophy; but in the hands of the mystic these  terms cease to be abstract, are stung to life. Such contemplatives  preserve the imageless and ineffable character of the Absolute, but  are moved by its contemplation to a joyous and personal love.

[iv.vii-p63]Thus, in a striking passage of her revelations, Angela  of Foligno [p. 342] [iv.vii-Page_342] suddenly exclaims, "I saw  God!" "And I, the writing brother," says her  secretary, "asked her what she saw, how she saw, and if she saw  any bodily thing. She replied thus: 'I beheld a fullness and a  clearness, and felt them within me so abundantly that I cannot  describe it, or give any likeness thereof. I cannot say I saw anything  corporeal. It was as though it were in heaven: a beauty so great that  I can say nought concerning it, save that it was supreme Beauty and  sovereign Good.'" Again, "I beheld the ineffable  fullness of God: but I can relate nothing of it, save that I have seen  in it the Sovereign Good."   [*702] 

[iv.vii-p65]  B. The Contemplation of Immanence.--   The second group of contemplatives is governed by that "Love  which casteth out fear": by a predominating sense of the  nearness, intimacy, and sweetness, rather than the strangeness and  unattainable transcendence, of that same Infinite Life at whose being  the first group could only hint by amazing images which seem to be  borrowed from the poetry of metaphysics. These are, says Hilton, in a  lovely image, "Feelingly fed with the savour of His invisible  blessed Face."   [*703]    All the feelings which flow from joy, confidence, and affection,  rather than those which are grouped about rapture and awe--though  awe is always present in some measure, as it is always present in all  perfect love--here contribute towards a description of the  Truth.

[iv.vii-p67]These contemplatives tell us of their attainment of  That which Is, as the closest and most joyous of all communions; a  coming of the Bridegroom; a rapturous immersion in the Uncreated  Light. "Nothing more profitable, nothing merrier than grace of  contemplation!" cries Rolle, "that lifts us from this low  and offers to God. What is grace of contemplation but beginning of  joy? what is parfiteness of joy but grace confirmed?   [*704]    In such "bright contemplation" as this, says "The  Mirror of Simple Souls," "the soul is full gladsome and  jolly." Utter peace and wild delight, every pleasure-state known  to man's normal consciousness, are inadequate to the description  of her joy. She has participated for an instant in the Divine Life;  knows all, and knows nought. She has learnt the world's secret,  not by knowing, but by being: the only way of really knowing  anything.

[iv.vii-p69]Where the dominant emotion is that of intimate  affection, and where the training or disposition of the mystic  inclines him to emphasize the personal and Incarnational rather than  the abstract and Trinitarian side of Christianity, the contemplative  of this type will always tend to describe his secret to us as above  [p. 343] [iv.vii-Page_343] all things an experience of adorable Friendship.  Reality is for him a Person, not a State. In the "orison of  union" it seems to him that an actual communion, a merging of  his self with this other and strictly personal Self takes place.  "God," he says, then "meets the soul in her  Ground":   i.e.   , in that secret depth of personality where she participates in the  Absolute Life. Clearly, the "degree of contemplation," the  psychological state, is here the same as that in which the mystic of  the impersonal type attained the "Abyss." But from the  point of view of the subject, this joyful and personal encounter of  Lover and Beloved will be a very different experience from the  soul's immersion in that "desert of Deity," as  described by Eckhart and his school. "In this oning," says  Hilton, "is the marriage made betwixt God and the soul, that  shall never be broken."   [*705] 

[iv.vii-p71]St. Teresa is the classic example of this intimate and  affective type of contemplation: but St. Gertrude, Suso, Julian,  Mechthild of Magdeburg, and countless others, provide instances of its  operation. We owe to it all the most beautiful and touching  expressions of mystic love. Julian's "I saw Him and sought  Him: and I had Him, I wanted Him" expresses in epigram its  combination of rapturous attainment and insatiable desire: its  apprehension of a Presence at once friendly and divine. So too does  her description of the Tenth Revelation of Love, when "with this  sweet enjoying He showed unto mine understanding in part   the blessed Godhead,    stirring then the poor soul to understand, as it may be said; that  is, to think on the endless Love that was without beginning, and is,  and shall be ever. And with this our good Lord said full blissfully,   Lo, how that I loved thee,    as if He had said, My   darling, behold and see thy Lord, thy God that is thy Matter, and  thine endless joy."    [*706] 

[iv.vii-p73]"The eyes of her soul were opened," says  the scribe to whom Angela of Foligno dictated her revelations.  "And she saw Love advancing gently towards her; and she saw the  beginning, but not the end, for it was continuous. And there was no  colour to which she could compare this Love; but directly it reached  her she beheld it with the eyes of the soul, more clearly than she  might do with the eyes of the body, take as towards her the semblance  of a sickle. Not that there was any actual and measurable likeness,  but this love took on the semblance of a sickle, because it first  withdrew itself, not giving itself so fully as it had allowed itself  to be understood and she had understood it; the which caused her to  yearn for it the more."   [*707]    [p. 344] [iv.vii-Page_344]

[iv.vii-p75]It is to Mechthild of Magdeburg, whose contemplation  was emphatically of the intimate type, that we owe the most perfect  definition of this communion of the mystic with his Friend.  "Orison," she says, "draws the great God down into  the small heart: it drives the hungry soul out to the full God. It  brings together the two lovers, God and the soul, into a joyful room  where they speak much of love."   [*708] 

[iv.vii-p77]We have already seen that the doctrine of the Trinity  makes it possible for Christian mystics, and, still more, for  Christian mysticism as a whole, to reconcile this way of apprehending  Reality with the "negative" and impersonal perception of  the ineffable One; the Absolute which "hath no image."  Though they seem in their extreme forms to be so sharply opposed as to  justify Eckhart's celebrated distinction between the unknowable  totality of the Godhead and the knowable personality of God, the  "image" and the "circle" yet represent diverse  apprehensions of one whole. All the mystics feel--and the German  school in particular have expressed--Dante's conviction  that these two aspects of reality, these two planes of being, however  widely they seem to differ, are   One   .   [*709]    Both are ways of describing man's partial contacts with that  Absolute Truth, "present yet absent, near, yet far," that  Triune Fact, [iv.vii-p78.1]  di      tre colori e d' una continenza     ,    which is God. Both are necessary if we are to form any idea of that  complete Reality, imperfect as any such idea must be: as, when two men  go together to some undiscovered country, one will bring home news of  its great spaces, its beauty of landscape, another of its geological  formation, or the flora and fauna that express its life, and both must  be taken into account before any just estimate of the real country can  be made.

[iv.vii-p79]Since it is of the essence of the Christian religion  to combine personal and metaphysical truth, a transcendent and an  incarnate God,   [*710]    it is not surprising that we should find in Christianity a  philosophic and theological basis for this paradox of the  contemplative experience. Most often, though not always, the Christian  mystic identifies the personal and intimate Lover of the soul, of  whose elusive presence he is so sharply aware, with the person of  Christ; the unknowable and transcendent Godhead with that [iv.vii-p80.1]eterna luce,    the Undifferentiated One in Whom the Trinity of Persons is resumed.  Temperamentally, most practical contemplatives lean to either one or  other of these apprehensions of Reality: to a personal and immanental  meeting in the "ground of the soul," or to the austere  joys of the "naughted soul" abased before an impersonal  Transcendence which no language but [p. 345] [iv.vii-Page_345] that of  negation can define. In some, however, both types of perception seem  to exist together: and they speak alternately of light and darkness,  of the rapturous encounter with Love and of supreme self-loss in the  naked Abyss, the desert of the Essence of God. Ruysbroeck is the  perfect example of this type of contemplative; and his works contain  numerous and valuable passages descriptive of that synthetic  experience which resumes the personal and transcendental aspects of  the mystic fact.

[iv.vii-p81]"When we have become seeing," he  says--that is to say, when we have attained to spiritual  lucidity--"we are able to contemplate in joy the eternal  coming of the Bridegroom; and this is the second point on which I  would speak. What, then, is this eternal coming of our Bridegroom? It  is a perpetual new birth and a perpetual new illumination: for the  ground whence the Light shines and which is Itself the Light, is  life-giving and fruitful: and hence the manifestation of the Eternal  Light is renewed without interruption in the hiddenness of the spirit.  Behold! here all human works and active virtues must cease; for here  God works alone at the apex of the soul. Here there is nought else but  an eternal seeing and staring at that Light, by the Light and in the  Light. And the coming of the Bridegroom is so swift, that He comes  perpetually, and He dwells within us with His abysmal riches, and He  returns to us anew in His Person without interruption; with such new  radiance, that He seems never to have come to us before. For His  coming consists, outside all Time, in an   Eternal Now,    always welcomed with new longing and new joy. Behold! the delights  and the joys which this Bridegroom brings in His coming are fathomless  and limitless, for they are Himself: and this is why the eyes by which  the spirit contemplates the Bridegroom, are opened so widely that they  can never close again. . . . Now this active meeting, and this loving  embrace, are in their essence fruitive and unconditioned; for the  infinite Undifferentiation of the Godhead is so dark and so naked of  all image, that it conceals within itself all the divine qualities and  works, all the attributes of the Persons, in the all-enfolding  richness of the Essential Unity, and brings about a divine fruition in  the Abyss of the Ineffable. And here there is a death in fruition, and  a melting and dying into the nudity of Pure Being; where all the Names  of God, and all conditions, and all the living images which are  reflected in the mirror of divine truth, are absorbed into the  Ineffable Simplicity, the Absence of image and of knowledge. For in  this limitless Abyss of Simplicity, all things are embraced in the  bliss of fruition; but the Abyss itself remains uncomprehended, except  by the Essential Unity. The Persons and all that which lives [p. 346] [iv.vii-Page_346] in God, must give place to this. For there is nought else  here but an eternal rest in the fruitive embrace of an outpouring  love: and this is the wayless Being that all interior souls have  chosen above all other things. This is the dim silence where all  lovers lose themselves."   [*711] 

[iv.vii-p83]Here Ruysbroeck, beginning with a symbol of the Divine  Personality as Bridegroom of the Soul, which would have been congenial  to the mind of St. Catherine of Siena, ends upon the summits of  Christian metaphysics; with a description of the loving immersion of  the self in that Unconditioned One who transcends the Persons of  theology and beggars human speech. We seem to see him desperately  clutching at words and similes which may, he hopes, give some hint of  the soul's fruition of Reality: its immeasurable difference in  kind from the dreams and diagrams of anthropomorphic religion. His  strange statements in respect of this Divine Abyss are on a par with  those which I have already quoted from the works of other  contemplatives, who, refusing to be led away by the emotional aspect  of their experience, have striven to tell us--as they  thought--not merely what they felt but what they beheld.  Ruysbroeck's mystical genius, however, the depth and wholeness  of his intuition of Reality, does not allow him to be satisfied with a  merely spatial or metaphysical description of the Godhead. The  "active meeting" and the "loving embrace" are,  he sees, an integral part of the true contemplative act. In "the  dim silence where lovers lose themselves," a Person meets a  person: and   this    it is, not the philosophic Absolute, which "all interior souls  have chosen above all other thing."

[iv.vii-p84]We must now look more closely at the method by which  the contemplative attains to his unique communion with the Absolute  Life: the kind of activity which seems to him to characterize his  mergence with Reality. As we might expect, that activity, like its  result, is of two kinds; personal and affirmative, impersonal and  negative. It is obvious that where Divine Perfection is conceived as  the soul's companion, the Bridegroom, the Beloved, the method of  approach will be very different from that which ends in the  self's immersion in the paradoxical splendour of the Abyss, the  "still wilderness where no one is at home." It is all the  difference between the preparations for a wedding and for an  expedition to the Arctic Seas. Hence we find, at one end of the scale,  that extreme form of personal and intimate communion--the going  forth of lover to beloved--which the mystics call "the  orison of union": and at the other end, the "dark  contemplation," by which alone selves of the transcendent and  [p. 347] [iv.vii-Page_347] impersonal type claim that they draw near to the  Unconditioned One.

[iv.vii-p85]Of the dim and ineffable contemplation of Unnameable  Transcendence, the imageless absorption in the Absolute, Dionysius the  Areopagite of course provides the classic example. It was he who gave  to it the name of Divine Darkness: and all later mystics of this type  borrow their language from him. His directions upon the subject are  singularly explicit: his descriptions, like those of St. Augustine,  glow with an exultant sense of a Reality attained, and which others  may attain if they will but follow where he leads.

[iv.vii-p86]"As for thee, dear Timothy," he says,  "I counsel that in the earnest exercise of mystical  contemplation thou leave the senses and the operations of the  intellect and all things that the senses or the intellect can  perceive, and all things in this world of nothingness or that world of  being; and that, thine understanding being laid to rest, thou ascend  (so far as thou mayest) towards union with Him whom neither being nor  understanding can contain. For by the unceasing and absolute  renunciation of thyself and all things, thou shalt in pureness cast  all things aside, and be released from all, and so shalt be led  upwards to the Ray of that Divine Darkness which exceetedth all  existence."   [*712]    Again, "The Divine Dark is nought else but that inaccessible  light wherein the Lord is said to dwell. Although it is invisible  because of its dazzling splendours and unsearchable because of the  abundance of its supernatural brightness, nevertheless, whosoever  deserves to see and know God rests therein; and, by the very fact that  he neither sees nor knows, is truly in that which surpasses all truth  and all knowledge."   [*713] 

[iv.vii-p95]It has become a commonplace with writers on mysticism  to say, that all subsequent contemplatives took from Dionysius this  idea of "Divine Darkness," and entrance therein as the  soul's highest privilege: took it, so to speak, ready-made and  on faith, and incorporated it in their tradition. To argue thus is to  forget that mystics are above all things practical people. They do not  write for the purpose of handing on a philosophical scheme, but in  order to describe something which they have themselves [p. 348] [iv.vii-Page_348] experienced; something which they feel to be of  transcendent importance for humanity. If, therefore, they  persist--and they do persist--in using this simile of  "darkness" to describe their experience in contemplation,  it can only be because it fits the facts. No Hegelian needs to be told  that we shall need the addition of its opposite before we can hope to  approach the truth: and it is exactly the opposite of this "dim  ignorance" which is offered us by mystics of the  "joyous" or "intimate" type, who find their  supreme satisfaction in the positive experience of  "union," the "mystical marriage of the  soul."

[iv.vii-p96]What, then, do those who use this image of the  "dark" really mean by it? They mean this: that God in His  absolute Reality is unknowable--is dark--to man's  intellect: which is, as Bergson has reminded us, adapted to other  purposes than those of divine intuition. When, under the spur of  mystic love, the whole personality of man comes into contact with that  Reality, it enters a plane of experience to which none of the  categories of the intellect apply. Reason finds itself, in a most  actual sense, "in the dark"--immersed in the Cloud of  Unknowing. This dimness and lostness of the mind, then, is a necessary  part of the mystic's ascent to the Absolute. That  Absolute--the [iv.vii-p96.1]  Mysterium tremendum et fascinans      [*714]   --willnot be "known of the heart" until we  acknowledge that It is "unknown of the intellect"; and  obey the Dionysian injunction to leave "the operations of the  understanding" on one side. The movement of the contemplative  must be a movement of the whole man: he is to "precipitate  himself, free and unfettered," into the bosom of Reality. Only  when he has thus transcended sight and knowledge, can he be sure that  he has also transcended the world with which these faculties are  competent to deal; and is   in    that Wholly Other which surpasses all image and all idea.

   [iv.vii-p97.1] "This is Love: to fly heavenward,
   To rend, every instant, a hundred veils,
   The first moment, to renounce life;
   The last step, to fare without feet.
   To regard this world as invisible,
   Not to see what appears to oneself."   [*715]  
  [iv.vii-p99]This acknowledgment of our intellectual ignorance,  this humble surrender, is the entrance into the "Cloud of  Unknowing": the first step towards mystical knowledge of the  Absolute. "For Truth and Humility are full true sisters,"  says Hilton, [p. 349] [iv.vii-Page_349] "fastened together in love and  charity, and there is no distance of counsel betwixt them two."   [*716] 

[iv.vii-p101]"Thou askest me and sayest," says the  author of "The Cloud of Unknowing," "How shall I  think on Himself and what is He? and to this I cannot answer thee but  thus: I wot not.

[iv.vii-p102]"For thou hast brought me with thy question,  into that same darkness and into that same cloud of unknowing that I  would thou wert in thyself. For of all other creatures and their  works, yea and of the works of God's self may a man through  grace have fulhead of knowledge, and well he can think of them; but of  God Himself can no man think. And therefore I will leave all that  thing that I can think, and choose to my love that thing that I cannot  think. For why; He may well be loved, but not thought. By love may He  be gotten and holden, but by thought never. . . . Smite upon that  thick cloud of unknowing with a sharp dart of longing love; and go not  thence for thing that befalleth."   [*717] 

[iv.vii-p104]So long, therefore, as the object of the  mystic's contemplation is amenable to thought, is something  which he can "know," he may be quite sure that it is not  the Absolute; but only a partial image or symbol of the Absolute. To  find that final Reality, he must enter into the "cloud of  unknowing"--must pass beyond the plane on which the  intellect can work.

[iv.vii-p105]"When I say darkness," says the same great  mystic, "I mean thereby a lack of knowing. . . . And for this  reason it is not called a cloud of the air, but a cloud of unknowing,  that is between thee and thy God."   [*718] 

[iv.vii-p107]The business of the contemplative, then, is to enter  this cloud: the "good dark," as Hilton calls it. The  deliberate inhibition of discursive thought and rejection of images,  which takes place in the "orison of quiet," is one of the  ways in which this entrance is effected: personal surrender, or  "self-naughting," is another. He who, by dint of  detachment and introversion, enters the "nothingness" or  "ground of the soul," enters also into the  "Dark": a statement which seems simple enough until we try  to realize what it means.

[iv.vii-p108]"O where," says the bewildered disciple in  one of Boehme's dialogues, "is this naked Ground of the  Soul void of all Self? And how shall I come at the hidden centre,  where God dwelleth and not man? Tell me plainly, loving Sir, where it  is, and how it is to be found of me, and entered into?

[iv.vii-p109]  "Master.    There where the soul hath slain its own Will and willeth no more any  Thing as from itself. . . . [p. 350] [iv.vii-Page_350]

[iv.vii-p110]  "Disciple.    But how shall I comprehend it?

[iv.vii-p111]  "Master.    If thou goest about to comprehend it, then it will fly away from  thee, but if thou dost surrender thyself wholly up to it, then it will  abide with thee, and become the Life of thy Life, and be natural to  thee."   [*719] 

[iv.vii-p113]The author of "The Cloud of Unknowing" is  particularly explicit as to the sense of dimness and confusion which  overwhelms the self when it first enters this Dark; a proceeding which  is analogous to that annihilation of thought in the interests of  passive receptivity which we have studied in the  "Quiet."

[iv.vii-p114]"At the first time when thou dost it," he  says of the neophyte's first vague steps in contemplation,  "thou findest but a darkness, and as it were a cloud of  unknowing thou knowest not what, saving that thou feelest in thy will  a naked intent unto God. This darkness and this cloud is, howsoever  thou dost, betwixt thee and thy God, and letteth thee, that thou  mayest neither see Him clearly by light of understanding in thy  reason, nor feel Him in sweetness of love in thine affection. And  therefore shape thee to bide in this darkness as long as thou mayest,  evermore crying after Him that thou lovest. For if ever thou shalt  feel Him or see Him as it may be here, it behoveth always to be in  this cloud and this darkness."   [*720] 

[iv.vii-p116]From the same century, but from a very different  country and temperament, comes another testimony as to the supreme  value of this dark contemplation of the Divine: this absorption,  beyond the span of thought or emotion, in the "substance of all  that Is." It is one of the most vivid and detailed accounts of  this strange form of consciousness which we possess; and deserves to  be compared carefully with the statements of "The Cloud of  Unknowing," and of St. John of the Cross. We owe it to that  remarkable personality, the Blessed Angela of Foligno, who was  converted from a life of worldliness to become not only a Franciscan,  but also a Platonic mystic. In it we seem to hear the voice of  Plotinus speaking from the Vale of Spoleto.

[iv.vii-p117]"Whilst I was questioning her," says her  secretary, "Christ's faithful one was suddenly rapt in  spirit and seemed not to understand my words. And then was given her a  wondrous grace. After a short time . . . she began to tell me what  follows. 'My soul has just been rapt to a state in which I  tasted unspeakable joy. I knew all I longed to know, possessed all I  longed to possess. I saw all Good.' She said further: 'In  this state the soul cannot believe that this Good will ever depart  from her, or that she will depart from it, or that she will again be  separated from it. But [p. 351] [iv.vii-Page_351] she delights herself in that  Sovereign Good. My soul sees nothing whatever that can be told of the  lips or the heart, she sees nothing, and she sees All . . . No good  that can be described or conceived is now the object of my hope; for I  have put all my hope in a secret Good, most hid and secret, which I  apprehend in great darkness.' And as I, the brother, could not  receive or understand this dark, Christ's faithful one wishing  to explain said: 'If I see it in the dark, it is because it  surpasses all good. All, all the rest is but darkness. All which the  soul or heart can reach is inferior to this Good. That which I have  told hitherto, namely, all the soul grasps when she sees all creatures  filled with God, when she sees the divine power, and when she sees the  divine will, is inferior to this most secret Good; because this Good  which I see in the darkness is the All, and all other things are but  parts.' And she added, 'Though inexpressible, these other  things bring delight; but this vision of God in darkness brings no  smile to the lips, no devotion or fervour of love to the soul. . . .  All the countless and unspeakable favours God has done to me, all the  words He has said to me, all you have written are, I know, so far  below the Good I see in that great darkness that I do not put in them  my hope' . . . Christ's faithful one told me that her mind  had been uplifted but three times to this most high and ineffable mode  of beholding God in great darkness, and in a vision so marvellous and  complete. Certainly she had seen the Sovereign Good countless times  and always darkly; yet never in such a high manner and through such  great dark."   [*721] 

[iv.vii-p119]These words, and indeed the whole idea which lies at  the bottom of "dark contemplation," will perhaps be better  understood in the light of Baron von Hugel's deeply  significant saying "Souls loving God in His Infinite  Individuality will necessarily love Him beyond their intellectual  comprehension of Him; the element of devoted trust, of free  self-donation to One fully known   only through and in such an act,    will thus remain to man for ever."   [*722]    Hence, the contemplative act, which is an act of loving and  self-forgetting concentration upon the Divine--the outpouring of  man's little and finite personality towards the Absolute  Personality of God--will, in so far as it transcends thought,  mean darkness for the intellect; but it may mean radiance for the  heart. Psychologically, it will mean the necessary depletion of the  surface-consciousness, the stilling of the mechanism of thought, in  the interests of another centre of consciousness. Since this new  centre makes enormous demands on the self's stock of vitality  its establishment must involve, for the time that it is active, the  withdrawal [p. 352] [iv.vii-Page_352] of energy from other centres. Thus the  "night of thought" becomes the strictly logical corollary  of the "light of perception."

[iv.vii-p121]No one has expressed this double character of the  Divine Dark--its "nothingness" for the dissecting  knife of reason, its supreme fruitfulness for expansive, active  love--with so delicate an insight as St. John of the Cross. In  his work the Christian touch of personal rapture vivifies the exact  and sometimes arid descriptions of the Neoplatonic mystics. A great  poet as well as a great mystic, in his poem on the "Obscure  Night," he brings to bear on the actual and ineffable experience  of the introverted soul all the highest powers of artistic expression,  all the resources of musical rhythm, the suggestive qualities of  metaphor.

   [iv.vii-p121.1] "Upon an obscure night
   Fevered with Love's anxiety
   (O hapless, happy plight!)
   I went, none seeing me,
   Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.
   By night, secure from sight
   And by a secret stair, disguisedly,
   (O hapless, happy plight!)
   By night, and privily
   Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.
   Blest night of wandering
   In secret, when by none might I be spied,
   Nor I see anything:
   Without a light to guide
   Save that which in my heart burnt in my side.
   That light did lead me on,
   More surely than the shining of noontide
   Where well I knew that One
   Did for my coming bide;
   Where He abode might none but He abide.
   O night that didst lead thus
   O night more lovely than the dawn of light;
   O night that broughtest us,
   Lover to lover's sight,
   Lover to loved, in marriage of delight!
   Upon my flowery breast
   Wholly for Him and save Himself for none,
   There did I give sweet rest
   To my beloved one:
   The fanning of the cedars breathed thereon."   [*723]    [p. 353] [iv.vii-Page_353]
  [iv.vii-p123]Observe in these verses the perfect fusion of personal  and metaphysical imagery; each contributing by its suggestive  qualities to a total effect which conveys to us, we hardly know how,  the obscure yet flaming rapture of the mystic, the affirmation of his  burning love and the accompanying negation of his mental darkness and  quiet--that "hapless, happy plight." All is here: the  secrecy of the contemplative's true life, unseen of other men  his deliberate and active abandonment of the comfortable house of the  senses, the dim, unknown plane of being into which his ardent spirit  must plunge--a "night more lovely than the dawn of  light"--the Inward Light, the fire of mystic love, which  guides his footsteps "more surely than the shining of  noon-tide": the self-giving ecstasy of the consummation  "wholly for Him, and save Himself for none," in which  lover attains communion with Beloved "in marriage of  delight."

[iv.vii-p124]In his book, "The Dark Night of the Soul,"  St. John has commented upon the opening lines of this poem; and the  passages in which he does this are amongst the finest and most subtle  descriptions of the psychology of contemplation which we possess.

[iv.vii-p125]"The soul," he says, "calls the dim  contemplation, by which it ascends to the union of love, a secret  stair; and that because of two properties of this contemplation which  I shall explain separately. First, this dark contemplation is called  secret, because it is, as I have said before, the mystical theology  which theologians call secret wisdom, and which according to St.  Thomas is infused into the soul more especially by love. This happens  in a secret hidden way, in which the natural operations of the  understanding and the other powers have no share. . . . The soul can  neither discern nor give it a name, neither desires so to do; and  besides, it can discover no way nor apt comparison by which to make  known a knowledge so high, a   spiritual impression so delicate and infused.    Sothat even if the soul felt the most lively desire to explain  itself, and heaped up explanations, the secret would remain a secret  still. Because this interior wisdom is so simply, general, and  spiritual, that it enters not into the understanding under the guise  of any form or image perceptible to sense. Therefore the senses and  the imagination--which have not served as intermediaries, and  have perceived no sensible form or colour--cannot account for it,  nor form any conception of it, so as to speak about it; though the  soul be distinctly aware that it feels and tastes this strange wisdom.  The soul is like a man who sees an object for the first time, the like  of which he has never seen before; he perceives it and likes it, yet  he cannot say what it is, nor give it a name, do what he will, though  it be even an object cognisable by the senses. How much less, then can  that [p. 354] [iv.vii-Page_354] be described which does not enter in by the  senses. . . . Inexpressible in its natures as we have said, it is  rightly called secret. And for yet another reason it is so called; for  this mystical wisdom has the property of hiding the soul within  itself. For beside its ordinary operation, it sometimes happens that  this wisdom absorbs the soul and plunges it in a secret abyss wherein  it sees itself distinctly as far away, and separated from, all created  things; it looks upon itself as one that is placed in a profound and  vast solitude whither no creature can come, and which seems an immense  Wilderness without limits. And this solitude is the more delicious,  sweet, and lovely, the more it is deep, vast, and empty. There the  soul is the more hidden, the more it is raised up above all created  things.

[iv.vii-p126]"This abyss of wisdom now lifts up and enlarges  the soul, giving it to drink at the very sources of the science of  love. Thereby it perceives how lowly is the condition of all creatures  in respect to the supreme knowledge and sense of the Divine. It also  understands how low, defective, and, in a certain sense, improper, are  all the words and phrases by which in this life we discuss divine  things; that they escape the best efforts of human art and science,  and that only the mystical theology can know and taste what these  things are in their reality."   [*724] 

[iv.vii-p128]In this important passage we have a reconciliation of  the four chief images under which contemplation has been described:  the darkness and the light, the wilderness and the union of love. That  is to say, the self's paradoxical sense of an ignorance which is  supreme knowledge, and of a solitude which is intimate companionship.  On the last of these antitheses, the "wilderness that is more  delicious, sweet, and lovely, the more it is wide, vast, and  empty," I cannot resist quoting, as a gloss upon the dignified  language of the Spanish mystic, the quaint and simple words of Richard  Rolle.

[iv.vii-p129]"In the wilderness . . . speaks the loved to the  heart of the lover, as it were a bashful lover, that his sweetheart  before men entreats not, nor friendly-wise but commonly and as a  stranger he kisses. A devout soul safely from worldly business in mind  and body departed . . . anon comes heavenly joy, and it marvellously  making merry melody, to her springs; whose token she takes, that now  forward worldly sound gladly she suffers not. [p. 355] [iv.vii-Page_355] This  is ghostly music, that is unknown to all that with worldly business  lawful or unlawful are occupied. No man there is that this has known,  but he that has studied to God only to take heed."   [*725] 

[iv.vii-p131]Doubtless the "dark transcendence"  reported and dwelt upon by all mystics of the Dionysian type, is  nearest the truth of all our apprehensions of God:   [*726]    though it can be true only in the paradoxical sense that it uses the  suggestive qualities of negation--the Dark whose very existence  involves that of Light--to hint at the infinite Affirmation of  All that Is. But the nearer this language is to the Absolute, the  further it is from ourselves. Unless care be taken in the use of it,  the elimination of falsehood may easily involve for us the elimination  of everything else. Man is not yet pure spirit, has not attained the  Eternal. He is in via and will never arrive if impatient amateurs of  Reality insist on cutting the ground from under his feet. Like Dante,  he needs a ladder to the stars, a ladder which goes the whole way from  the human to the divine. Therefore the philosophic exactitude of these  descriptions of the dark must be balanced, as they are in St. John of  the Cross, by the personal, human, and symbolic affirmations of Love,  if we would avoid a distorted notion of the Reality which the  contemplative attains in his supreme "flights towards  God." Consciousness has got to be helped across the gap which  separates it from its Home.

[iv.vii-p133]The "wilderness," the dread Abyss, must be  made homely by the voice of "the lover that His sweetheart  before men entreats not." Approximate as we know such an image  of our communion with the Absolute to be, it represents a real aspect  of the contemplative experience which eludes the rule and compass of  metaphysical thought. Blake, with true mystic insight, summed up the  situation as between the two extreme forms of contemplation when he  wrote:--   [*727] 

   [iv.vii-p134.1] "God appears, and God is Light
   To those poor souls who dwell in night:
   But doth a human form display
   To those who dwell in realms of day."
  [iv.vii-p135]In the "orison of union" and the  "Spiritual Marriage," those contemplatives whose  temperament inclines them to "dwell in realms of day"  receive just such a revelation of the "human form"--a  revelation which the Christian dogma of the Incarnation brings to a  point. They apprehend the personal and passionate aspect of the  Infinite Life; and the love, at once intimate and expansive,  all-demanding and all-renouncing, which plays like [p. 356] [iv.vii-Page_356]  lightning between it and the desirous soul. "Thou saidst to me,  my only Love, that Thou didst will to make me Thyself; and that Thou  wast all mine, with all that Thou hadst and with all Paradise, and  that I was all Thine. That I should leave all, or rather the nothing;  and that (then) thou wouldst give me the all. And that Thou hadst  given me this name--at which words I heard within me [iv.vii-p135.1]'dedi te in lucem  gentium'--not without good reason. And it  seemed then, as though I had an inclination for nothing except the  purest Union, without any means, in accordance with that detailed  sight which Thou hadst given me. So then I said to Thee: These other  things, give them to whom Thou wilt; give me but this most pure Union  with Thee, free from every means."   [*728] 

[iv.vii-p137]"Our work is the love of God," cries  Ruysbroeck. "Our satisfaction lies in submission to the Divine  Embrace." This utter and abrupt submission to the Divine Embrace  is the essence of that form of contemplation which is called the  Orison of Union. "Surrender" is its secret: a personal  surrender, not only of finite to Infinite, but of bride to Bridegroom,  heart to Heart. This surrender, in contemplatives of an appropriate  temperament, is of so complete and ecstatic a type that it involves a  more or less complete suspension of normal consciousness, an  entrancement; and often crosses the boundary which separates  contemplation from true ecstasy, producing in its subject physical as  well as psychical effects. In this state, says St. Teresa,  "There is no sense of anything: only fruition, without  understanding what that may be the fruition of which is granted. It is  understood that the fruition is of a certain good, containing in  itself all good together at once; but this good is not comprehended.  The senses are all occupied in this fruition in such a way, that not  one of them is at liberty so as to be able to attend to anything else,  whether outward or inward. . . . But this state of complete  absorption, together with the utter rest of the imagination--for  I believe that the imagination is then wholly at rest--lasts only  for a short time; though the faculties do not so completely recover  themselves as not to be for some hours afterwards as if in disorder. .  . . He who has had experience of this will understand it in some  measure, for it cannot be more clearly described, because what then  takes place is so obscure. All I am able to say is, that the soul is  represented as being close to God; and that there abides a conviction  thereof so certain and strong that it cannot possibly help believing  so. All the faculties fail now, and are suspended in such a way that,  as I said before, their operations cannot be [p. 357] [iv.vii-Page_357]  traced. . . . The will must be fully occupied in loving, but it  understands not how it loves; the understanding, if it understands,  does not understand how it understands. It does not understand, as it  seems to me, because, as I said just now, this is a matter which  cannot be understood."   [*729]    Clearly, the psychological situation here is the same as that in  which mystics of the impersonal type feel themselves to be involved in  the Cloud of Unknowing, or Divine Dark.

[iv.vii-p139]"Do not imagine," says St. Teresa in  another place, "that this orison, like that which went before [  i.e.   , the quiet] is a sort of drowsiness: (I call it drowsiness, because  the soul seems to slumber being neither thoroughly asleep, nor  thoroughly awake). In the prayer of union the soul is asleep; fast  asleep as regards herself and earthly things. In fact, during the  short time that this state lasts she is deprived of all feeling, and  though she wishes it, she can think of nothing. Thus she needs no  effort in order to suspend her thoughts; if the soul can  love--she knows not how or when she loves, nor what she desires .  . . she is, as it were, entirely dead to the world, the better to live  in God."   [*730] 

[iv.vii-p141]It may be asked, in what way does such contemplation  as this differ from unconsciousness. The difference, according to St.  Teresa, consists in the definite   somewhat    which takes place during this inhibition of the  surface-consciousness: a "somewhat" of which that  surface-consciousness becomes aware when it awakes. True  contemplation, as the mystics are constantly assuring us, must always  be judged by its fruits. If it be genuine, work has been done during  the period of apparent passivity. The deeper self has escaped, has  risen to freedom, and returns other than it was before. We must  remember that Teresa is speaking from experience, and that her  temperamental peculiarities will modify the form which this experience  takes. "The soul," she says, "neither sees, hears,  nor understands anything while this state lasts; but this is usually a  very short time, and seems to the soul even shorter than it really is.  God visits the soul in a way that prevents it doubting when it comes  to itself   that is has been in God and God in it;    and so firmly is it convinced of this truth that, though years may  pass before this state recurs, the soul can never forget it nor doubt  its reality. . . . But you will say, how can the soul see and  comprehend that she is in God and God in her, if during this union she  is not able either to see or understand? I reply, that she does not  see it at the time, but that afterwards she perceives it clearly: not  by a vision, but by a certitude which remains in the heart which God  alone can give."   [*731] 

[iv.vii-p143][p. 358] [iv.vii-Page_358]

Footnotes

^328:681 [iv.vii-p1.2][iv.vii-p2]          Recejac, "Fondements de la Connaissance    Mystique," p. 176.

^329:682 [iv.vii-p3.1][iv.vii-p4]              Supra     , p. 245.

^329:683 [iv.vii-p5.1][iv.vii-p6]          St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xx.  section 1 and 3.

^330:684 [iv.vii-p10.1][iv.vii-p11]          "Etudes sur le Mysticisme," p. 370.

^331:685 [iv.vii-p13.1][iv.vii-p14]          Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xvii.

^331:686 [iv.vii-p17.1][iv.vii-p18]          "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 380.

^332:687 [iv.vii-p18.1][iv.vii-p19]          St. Angele de Foligno, "Le Livre de    l'Experience des Vrais Fideles," p. 238    (English translation, p. 189).

^332:688 [iv.vii-p20.1][iv.vii-p21]          Compare Baker, "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section iv.    cap. iv.

^332:689 [iv.vii-p21.1][iv.vii-p22]          See Hilton, "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap.    xxv.

^332:690 [iv.vii-p22.1][iv.vii-p23]              Vide infra     , p. 347.

^333:691 [iv.vii-p27.1][iv.vii-p28]          "De Divinis Nominibus," vii. 1.

^333:692 [iv.vii-p29.1][iv.vii-p30]          Ennead vi. 9, 10.

^334:693 [iv.vii-p31.1][iv.vii-p32]          Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. iii.    cap. i.

^334:694 [iv.vii-p33.1][iv.vii-p34]          J. Maritain, "Art et Scholastique," p. 141.

^335:695 [iv.vii-p36.1][iv.vii-p37]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxv.

^336:696 [iv.vii-p43.1][iv.vii-p44]          Richard Rolle, "The Mending of Life," cap. xii.

^337:697 [iv.vii-p47.1][iv.vii-p48]          "The Mirror of Simple Souls," Div. iii. cap. xiii.

^339:698 [iv.vii-p53.2][iv.vii-p54]          Tauler, Sermon on St. John the Baptist ("The Inner    Way," pp. 97-99).

^340:699 [iv.vii-p56.1][iv.vii-p57]          Maeterlinck, Introduction to Ruysbroeck's    "L'Ornement des Noces Spirituelles," p. v.    Theologians will recognize here a poetic account of the soul's    contact with that aspect of Divine Reality emphasized in the work of    Rudolf Otto and of Karl Barth.

^340:700 [iv.vii-p59.1][iv.vii-p60]          Par. xxx. 61-128. Compare p. 286.

^341:701 [iv.vii-p60.30][iv.vii-p61]          Par. xxxiii. 52-63, 76-81, 97-105. "My vision, becoming    purified, entered deeper and deeper into the ray of that Supernal    Light which in itself is true. Thenceforth my vision was greater    than our language, which fails such a sight; and memory too fails    before such excess. As he who sees in a dream, and after the dream    is gone the impression or emotion remains, but the rest returns not    to the mind, such am I for nearly the whole of my vision fades, and    yet there still wells within my heart the sweetness born therefrom.    . . . I think that by the keenness of the living ray which I endured    I had been lost, had I once turned my eyes aside. And I remember    that for this I was the bolder so long to sustain my gaze, as to    unite it with the Power Infinite. . . . Thus did my mind, wholly in    suspense, gaze fixedly, immovable and intent, ever enkindled by its    gazing. In the presence of that Light one becomes such, that never    could one consent to turn from it to any other sight. Because the    Good, which is the object of the will, is therein wholly gathered;    and outside of this, that is defective which therein is    perfect."

^342:702 [iv.vii-p63.1][iv.vii-p64]          St. Angele de Foligno, "Le Livre de    l'Experience des Vrais Fideles," pp. 78 and    116 (English translation, here very imperfect, pp. 169, 174).

^342:703 [iv.vii-p65.1][iv.vii-p66]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xli.

^342:704 [iv.vii-p67.1][iv.vii-p68]          "The Mending of Life," cap. xii.

^343:705 [iv.vii-p69.1][iv.vii-p70]          Scale of Perfection," bk. i. cap. viii.

^343:706 [iv.vii-p71.1][iv.vii-p72]          "Fevelations of Divine Love," cap. xxiv.

^343:707 [iv.vii-p73.1][iv.vii-p74]          St. Angele,     op. cit     ., p. 156 (English translations p. 178).

^344:708 [iv.vii-p75.1][iv.vii-p76]          "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. v. cap.    13.

^344:709 [iv.vii-p77.1][iv.vii-p78]          Par. xxxiii. 137.

^344:710 [iv.vii-p79.1][iv.vii-p80]          Compare     supra     , Pt. I. Cap. V.

^346:711 [iv.vii-p81.1][iv.vii-p82]          Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," bk. iii.    caps. ii. and iv.

^347:712 [iv.vii-p86.1][iv.vii-p87]          Dionysius the Areopagite, "De Mystica Theologia," i.    1.

^347:713 [iv.vii-p87.1][iv.vii-p88]              Ibid.,      Letter to Dorothy the Deacon. This passage seems to be the source    of Vaughan's celebrated verse in "The    Night"--

[iv.vii-p89]"There is in God, some say

[iv.vii-p90]A deep but dazzling darkness, as men    here

[iv.vii-p91]Say it is late and dusky because they

[iv.vii-p92]See not all clear.

[iv.vii-p93]O for that Night! where I in Him

[iv.vii-p94]Might live invisible and dim."

^348:714 [iv.vii-p96.2][iv.vii-p97]          R. Otto, "The Idea of the Holy," caps. iii. and iv. The    whole of this work should be studied in its bearing on the    contemplation of supra-rational Reality.

^348:715 [iv.vii-p97.8][iv.vii-p98]          Jalalu 'd Din, "Selected Poems from the Divan,"    p. 137.

^349:716 [iv.vii-p99.1][iv.vii-p100]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xiii.

^349:717 [iv.vii-p102.1][iv.vii-p103]          "The Cloud of Unknowing," cap. vi.

^349:718 [iv.vii-p105.1][iv.vii-p106]              Ibid     ., cap. iv.

^350:719 [iv.vii-p111.1][iv.vii-p112]          Boehme, "Three Dialogues of the Supersensual Life," p.    71.

^350:720 [iv.vii-p114.1][iv.vii-p115]          "The Cloud of Unknowing," cap. iii.

^351:721 [iv.vii-p117.1][iv.vii-p118]          St. Angele,     loc. cit     ., pp. 210-12 (English translation, p. 181).

^351:722 [iv.vii-p119.1][iv.vii-p120]          "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. ii. p.    257.

^352:723 [iv.vii-p121.32][iv.vii-p122]          "En una Noche Escura." This translation, by Mr. Arthur    Symons, will be found in vol. ii. of his Collected Poems.

^354:724 [iv.vii-p126.1][iv.vii-p127]          St. John of the Cross, "Noche Escura del Alma," I. ii.    cap. xvii. It is perhaps advisable to warn the reader that in this    work St. John applies the image of "darkness" to three    absolutely different things:     i.e     ., to a purgation of mind which he calls the "night of    sense", to dim contemplation, or the Dionysian "Divine    Dark", and to the true "dark night of the soul,"    which he calls the "night of the spirit." The result has    been a good deal of confusion, in modern writers on mysticism upon    the subject of the "Dark Night."

^355:725 [iv.vii-p129.1][iv.vii-p130]          "The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap. vii.

^355:726 [iv.vii-p131.1][iv.vii-p132]          Compare Baker, "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section iv.    cap iv.

^355:727 [iv.vii-p133.1][iv.vii-p134]          "Auguries of Innocence."

^356:728 [iv.vii-p135.2][iv.vii-p136]          Colloquies of Battista Vernazza: quoted by Von Hugel,    "The Mystical Element of Religion," vol. i. p. 350.

^357:729 [iv.vii-p137.1][iv.vii-p138]          Vida, cap. xviii.  section section 2, 17, 19.

^357:730 [iv.vii-p139.1][iv.vii-p140]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Quintas, cap. i.

^357:731 [iv.vii-p141.1][iv.vii-p142]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

VIII. Ecstasy and Rapture

 [iv.viii][iv.viii-p1]Since[iv.viii-p1.1] the object of all contemplation is the production of that state of  intimate communion in which the mystics declare that the self is  "in God and God is in her," it might be supposed that the  orison of union represented the end of mystical activity, in so far as  it is concerned with the attainment of a transitory but exalted  consciousness of "oneness with the Absolute." Nearly all  the great contemplatives, however, describe as a distinct, and regard  as a more advanced phase of the spiritual consciousness, the group of  definitely ecstatic states in which the concentration of interest on  the Transcendent is so complete, the gathering up and pouring out of  life on this one point so intense, that the subject is more or less  entranced, and becomes, for the time of the ecstasy, unconscious of  the external world. In ordinary contemplation he refused to attend to  that external world: it was there, a blurred image, at the fringe of  his conscious field, but he deliberately left it on one side. In  ecstasy he   cannot    attend to it. None of its messages reach him: not even those most  insistent of all messages which are translated into the terms of  bodily pain.

[iv.viii-p2]All mystics agree in regarding such ecstasy as an  exceptionally favourable state; the one in which man's spirit is  caught up to the most immediate union with the divine. The word has  become a synonym for joyous exaltation, for the inebriation of the  Infinite. [p. 359] [iv.viii-Page_359] The induced ecstasies of the Dionysian  mysteries, the metaphysical raptures of the Neoplatonists, the  voluntary or involuntary trance of Indian mystics and Christian  saints--all these, however widely they may differ in  transcendental value, agree in claiming such value, in declaring that  this change in the quality of consciousness brought with it a valid  and ineffable apprehension of the Real. Clearly, this apprehension  will vary in quality and content with the place of the subject in the  spiritual scale. The ecstasy is merely the psycho-physical condition  which accompanies it. "It is hardly a paradox to say,"  says Myers, "that the evidence for ecstasy is stronger than the  evidence for any other religious belief. Of all the subjective  experiences of religion, ecstasy is that which has been most urgently,  perhaps to the psychologist most convincingly asserted; and it is not  confined to any one religion. . . . From the medicine man of the  lowest savages up to St. John, St. Peter, and St. Paul, with Buddha  and Mahomet on the way, we find records which, though morally and  intellectually much differing, are in psychological essence the  same."   [*732] 

[iv.viii-p4]There are three distinct aspects under which the  ecstatic state may be studied: (  a   ) the physical, (  b   ) the psychological, (  c   ) the mystical. Many of the deplorable misunderstandings and still  more deplorable mutual recriminations which surround its discussion  come from the refusal of experts in one of these three branches to  consider the results arrived at by the other two.

[iv.viii-p5]A. Physically considered, ecstasy is a trance; more or  less deep, more or less prolonged. The subject may slide into it  gradually from a period of absorption in, or contemplation of, some  idea which has filled the field of consciousness: or, it may come on  suddenly, the appearance of the idea--or even some word or symbol  suggesting the idea--abruptly throwing the subject into an  entranced condition. This is the state which some mystical writers  call Rapture. The distinction, however, is a conventional one: and the  works of the mystics describe many intermediate forms.

[iv.viii-p6]During the trance, breathing and circulation are  depressed. The body is more or less cold and rigid, remaining in the  exact position which it occupied at the oncoming of the ecstasy,  however difficult and unnatural this pose may be. Sometimes  entrancement is so deep that there is complete anaesthesia, as in the  case which I quote from the life of St. Catherine of Siena.   [*733]    Credible witnesses report that Bernadette, the visionary of Lourdes,  held the flaming end of a candle in her hand for fifteen minutes  during one of her ecstasies. She felt no pain, neither did the flesh  show any marks [p. 360] [iv.viii-Page_360] of burning. Similar instances of  ecstatic anesthesia abound in the lives of the saints, and are also  characteristic of certain pathological states.   [*734] 

[iv.viii-p9]The trance includes, according to the testimony of the  ecstatics, two distinct phases--(  a   ) the short period of lucidity and (  b   ) a longer period of complete unconsciousness, which may pass into a  death like catalepsy, lasting for hours; or, as once with St. Teresa,  for days. "The difference between union and trance," says  Teresa, "is this: that the latter lasts longer and is more  visible outwardly, because the breathing gradually diminishes, so that  it becomes impossible to speak or to open the eyes. And though this  very thing occurs when the soul is in union, there is more violence in  a trance, for the natural warmth vanishes, I know not how, when the  rapture is deep, and in all these kinds of orison there is more or  less of this. When it is deep, as I was saying, the hands become cold  and sometimes stiff and straight as pieces of wood; as to the body if  the rapture comes on when it is standing or kneeling it remains so;  and the soul is so full of the joy of that which Our Lord is setting  before it, that it seems to forget to animate the body and abandons  it. If the rapture lasts, the nerves are made to feel it."   [*735] 

[iv.viii-p11]Such ecstasy as this, so far as its physical symptoms  go, is not of course the peculiar privilege of the mystics. It is an  abnormal bodily state, caused by a psychic state: and this causal  psychic state may be healthy or unhealthy, the result of genius or  disease. It is common in the little understood type of personality  called "sensitive" or mediumistic: it is a well-known  symptom of certain mental and nervous illnesses. A feeble mind  concentrated on one idea--like a hypnotic subject gazing at one  spot--easily becomes entranced; however trivial the idea which  gained possession of his consciousness. Apart from its content, then,  ecstasy carries no guarantee of spiritual value. It merely indicates  the presence of certain abnormal psycho-physical conditions: an  alteration of the normal equilibrium, a shifting of the threshold of  consciousness, which leaves the body, and the whole usual  "external world" outside instead of inside the conscious  field, and even affects those physical functions--such as  breathing--which are almost entirely automatic. Thus ecstasy,  physically considered, may occur in any person in whom (1) the  threshold of consciousness is exceptionally mobile and (2) there is a  tendency to dwell upon one governing idea or intuition. Its worth  depends entirely on the objective value of that idea or intuition.

[iv.viii-p12]In the hysterical patient, thanks to an unhealthy  condition of the centres of consciousness, any trivial or irrational  idea, any [p. 361] [iv.viii-Page_361] one of the odds and ends stored up in the  subliminal region, may thus become fixed, dominate the mind, and  produce entrancement. Such ecstasy is an illness: the emphasis is on  the pathological state which makes it possible. In the mystic, the  idea which fills his life is so great a one--the idea of  God--that, in proportion as it is vivid, real, and intimate, it  inevitably tends to monopolize the field of consciousness. Here the  emphasis is on the overpowering strength of spirit, not on the feeble  and unhealthy state of body or mind.   [*736]    This true ecstasy, says Godferneaux, is not a malady, but "the  extreme form of a state which must be classed amongst the ordinary  accidents of conscious life."   [*737] 

[iv.viii-p15]The mystics themselves are fully aware of the  importance of this distinction. Ecstasies, no less than visions and  voices, must they declare, be subjected to unsparing criticism before  they are recognized as divine: whilst some are undoubtedly "of  God," others are no less clearly "of the devil."  "The great doctors of the mystic life," says Malaval,  "teach that there are two sorts of rapture, which must be  carefully distinguished. The first are produced in persons but little  advanced in the Way, and still full of selfhood; either by the force  of a heated imagination which vividly apprehends a sensible object, or  by the artifice of the Devil. These are the raptures which St. Teresa  calls, in various parts of her works, Raptures of Feminine Weakness.  The other sort of Rapture is, on the contrary, the effect of pure  intellectual vision in those who have a great and generous love for  God. To generous souls who have utterly renounced themselves, God  never fails in these raptures to communicate high things."   [*738] 

[iv.viii-p17]All the mystics agree with Malaval in finding the test  of a true ecstasy, not in its outward sign, but in its inward grace,  its after-value: and here psychology would do well to follow their  example. The ecstatic states, which are supreme instances of the close  connection between body and soul, have bodily as well as mental  results: and those results are as different and as characteristic as  those observed in healthy and in morbid organic processes. If the  concentration has been upon the highest centre of consciousness, the  organ of spiritual perception--if a door has really been opened  by which the self has escaped for an instant to the vision of That  Which Is--the ecstasy will be good for life. The entrancement of  [p. 362] [iv.viii-Page_362] disease, on the contrary is always bad for life.  Its concentration being upon the lower instead of the higher levels of  mentality, it depresses rather than enhances the vitality, the  fervour, or the intelligence of its subject: and leaves behind it an  enfeebled will, and often moral and intellectual chaos.   [*739]    "Ecstasies that do not produce considerable profit either to  the persons themselves or others, deserve to be suspected," says  Augustine Baker, "and when any marks of their approaching are  perceived, the persons ought to divert their minds some other  way."   [*740]    It is the difference between a healthy appetite for nourishing food  and a morbid craving for garbage. The same organs of digestion are  used in satisfying both: yet he would be a hardy physiologist who  undertook to discredit all nutrition by a reference to its degenerate  forms.

[iv.viii-p20]Sometimes both kinds of ecstasy, the healthy and the  psychopathic, are seen in the same person. Thus in the cases of St.  Catherine of Genoa and St. Catherine of Siena it would seem that as  their health became feebler and the nervous instability always found  in persons of genius increased, their ecstasies became more frequent;  but these were not healthy ecstasies, such as those which they  experienced in the earlier stages of their careers, and which brought  with them an access of vitality. They were the results of increasing  weakness of body, not of the overpowering strength of the spirit: and  there is evidence that Catherine of Genoa, that acute self-critic, was  conscious of this. "Those who attended on her did not know how  to distinguish one state from the other. And hence on coming to; she  would sometimes say, 'Why did you let me remain in this  quietude, from which I have almost died?'"   [*741]    Her earlier ecstasies, on the contrary, had in a high degree the  positive character of exaltation and life-enhancement consequent upon  extreme concentration on the Absolute; as well as the merely negative  character of annihilation of the surface-consciousness. She came from  them with renewed health and strength, as from a resting in heavenly  places and a feeding on heavenly food: and side by side with this  ecstatic life, fulfilled the innumerable duties of her active vocation  as hospital matron and spiritual mother of a large group of disciples.  "Many times," says her legend, "she would hide  herself in some secret place and there stay: and being sought she was  found upon the ground, her face hidden in her hands, altogether beyond  herself, in such a state of joy as is beyond thought or speech: and  being called--yea, even in a loud voice--she heard not. And  at other times she would go up and down. . . . [p. 363] [iv.viii-Page_363] as  if beyond herself, drawn by the impulse of love, she did this. And  certain other times she remained for the space of six hours as if  dead: but hearing herself called, suddenly she got up, and answering  she would at once go about all that needed to be done even the  humblest things.   [*742]    And in thus leaving the All, she went without any grief, because she  fled all selfhood (la proprieta)    as if it were the devil. And when she came forth from her  hiding-place her face was rosy as it might be a cherub's; and it  seemed as if she might have said, 'Who shall separate me from  the love of God?'"   [*743]    "Very often," says St. Teresa, describing the results of  such rapturous communion with Pure Love as that from which St.  Catherine came joyous and rosy-faced, "he who was before sickly  and full of pain comes forth healthy and even with new strength: for  it is something great that is given to the soul in rapture."   [*744] 

[iv.viii-p25]B. Psychologically considered, all ecstasy is a  form--the most perfect form--of the state which is  technically called "complete mono-ideism," That withdrawal  of consciousness from circumference to centre, that deliberate  attention to   one thing   , which we discussed in Recollection, is here pushed--voluntarily  or involuntarily--to its logical conclusion. It is (1) always  paid for by psycho-physical disturbances; (2) rewarded in healthy  cases by an enormous lucidity, a supreme intuition in regard to the  one thing on which the self's interest has been set.

[iv.viii-p26]Such ecstasy, then, is an exalted form of  contemplation, and might be expected in appropriate subjects to  develop naturally from that state. "A simple difference of  degree," says Maury, "separates ecstasy from the action of  forcibly fixing an idea in the mind. Contemplation implies exercise of  will, and the power of interrupting the extreme tension of the mind.  In ecstasy, which is contemplation carried to its highest pitch, the  will, although in the strictest sense able to provoke the state, is  nevertheless unable to suspend it."   [*745] 

[iv.viii-p28]In "complete mono-ideism" then, the  attention to one thing and the inattention to all else, is so entire  that the subject is entranced. Consciousness has been withdrawn from  those centres which receive and respond to the messages of the  external world: he neither sees, feels, nor hears. The [iv.viii-p28.1]   Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat     of the contemplative ceases to be a metaphor, and  becomes a realistic description. It must be remembered that the whole  trend [p. 364] [iv.viii-Page_364] of mystical education has been toward the  production of this fixity of attention. Recollection and Quiet lead up  to it. Contemplation cannot take place without it. All the mystics  assure us that a unification of consciousness, in which all outward  things are forgot, is the necessary prelude of union with the Divine;  for consciousness of the Many and consciousness of the One are  mutually exclusive states. Ecstasy, for the psychologist, is such a  unification in its extreme form. The absorption of the self in the one  idea, the one desire, is so profound--and in the case of the  great mystics so impassioned--that everything else is blotted  out. The tide of life is withdrawn, not only from those higher centres  which are the seats of perception and of thought, but also from those  lower centres which govern the physical life. The whole vitality of  the subject is so concentrated on the transcendental world--or,  in a morbid ecstatic, on the idea which dominates his mind--that  body and brain alike are depleted of their energy in the interests of  this supreme act.

[iv.viii-p29]Since mystics have, as a rule, the extreme  susceptibility to suggestions and impressions which is characteristic  of artistic and creative types, it is not surprising that their  ecstasies are often evoked, abruptly, by the exhibition of, or  concentration upon, some loved and special symbol of the divine. Such  symbols form the rallying-points about which are gathered a whole  group of ideas and intuitions. Their presence--sometimes the  sudden thought of them--will be enough, in psychological  language, to provoke a discharge of energy along some particular path:  that is to say, to stir to life all those ideas and intuitions which  belong to the self's consciousness of the Absolute, to  concentrate vitality on them, and introduce the self into that world  of perception of which they are, as it were, the material keys. Hence  the profound significance of symbols for some mystics: their  paradoxical clinging to outward forms, whilst declaring that the  spiritual and intangible alone is real.

[iv.viii-p30]For the Christian mystics, the sacraments and  mysteries of faith have always provided such a   point d'appui;   and these often play a large part in the production of their  ecstasies. For St. Catherine of Siena, and also very often for her  namesake of Genoa, the reception of Holy Communion was the prelude to  ecstasy. Julian of Norwich   [*746]    and St. Francis of Assissi   [*747]    became entranced whilst gazing on the crucifix. We are told of Denis  the Carthusian that towards the end of his life, hearing the   Veni Creator    or certain verses of the psalms, he was at once rapt in God and  lifted up from the earth.   [*748]    [p. 365] [iv.viii-Page_365]

[iv.viii-p34]Of St. Catherine of Siena, her biographer says that  "she used to communicate with such fervour that immediately  afterwards she would pass into the state of ecstasy, in which for  hours she would be totally unconscious. On one occasion, finding her  in this condition, they (the Dominican friars) forcibly threw her out  of the church at midday, and left her in the heat of the sun watched  over by some of her companions till she came to her senses."  Another, "catching sight of her in the church when she was in  ecstasy, came down and pricked her in many places with a needle.  Catherine was not aroused in the least from her trance, but  afterwards, when she came back to her senses, she felt the pain in her  body and perceived that she had thus been wounded."   [*749] 

[iv.viii-p36]It is interesting to compare with this objective  description, the subjective account of ecstatic union which St.  Catherine gives in her "Divine Dialogue." Here, the deeper  self of the mystic is giving in a dramatic form its own account of its  inward experiences: hence we see the inward side of that outward state  of entrancement, which was all that onlookers were able to perceive.  As usual in the Dialogue, the intuitive perceptions of the deeper self  are attributed by St. Catherine to the Divine Voice speaking in her  soul.

[iv.viii-p37]"Oftentimes, through the perfect union which the  soul has made with Me, she is raised from the earth almost as if the  heavy body became light. But this does not mean that the heaviness of  the body is taken away, but that the union of the soul with Me is more  perfect than the union of the body with the soul; wherefore the  strength of the spirit, united with Me, raises the weight of the body  from the earth, leaving it as if immoveable and all pulled to pieces  in the affection of the soul. Thou rememberest to have heard it said  of some creatures, that were it not for My Goodness, in seeking  strength for them, they would not be able to live; and I would tell  thee that, in the fact that the souls of some do not leave their  bodies, is to be seen a greater miracle than in the fact that some  have arisen from the dead, so great is the union which they have with  Me. I, therefore, sometimes for a space withdraw from the union,  making the soul return to the vessel of her body . . . from which she  was separated by the affection of love. From the body she did not  depart, because that cannot be except in death; the bodily powers  alone departed, becoming united to Me through affection of love. The  memory is full of nothing but Me, the intellect, elevated, gazes upon  the object of My Truth; the affection, which follows the intellect,  loves and becomes united with that which the intellect sees. These  powers being united and gathered together and immersed and inflamed in  Me, the body loses its [p. 366] [iv.viii-Page_366] feeling, so that the seeing  eye sees not, and the hearing ear hears not, and the tongue does not  speak; except as the abundance of the heart will sometimes permit it,  for the alleviation of the heart and the praise and glory of My Name.  The hand does not touch and the feet walk not, because the members are  bound with the sentiment of Love."   [*750] 

[iv.viii-p39]A healthy ecstasy so deep as this seems to be the  exclusive prerogative of the mystics: perhaps because so great a  passion, so profound a concentration, can be produced by nothing  smaller than their flaming love of God. But as the technique of  contemplation is employed more or less consciously by all types of  creative genius--by inventors and philosophers, by poets,  prophets, and musicians, by all the followers of the "Triple  Star," no less than by the mystic saints--so too this  apotheosis of contemplation, the ecstatic state, sometimes appears in  a less violent form, acting healthily and normally, in artistic and  creative personalities at a complete stage of development. It may  accompany the prophetic intuitions of the seer, the lucidity of the  great metaphysician, the artist's supreme perception of beauty  or truth. As the saint is "caught up to God," so these are  "caught up" to their vision: their partial apprehensions  of the Absolute Life. Those joyous, expansive outgoing sensations,  characteristic of the ecstatic consciousness, are theirs also. Their  greatest creations are translations to us, not of something they have  thought, but of something they have known, in a moment of ecstatic  union with the "great life of the All."

[iv.viii-p40]We begin, then, to think that the "pure  mono-ideism," which the psychologist identifies with ecstasy,  though doubtless a part, is far from being the whole content of this  state, True, the ecstatic is absorbed in his one idea, his one love:  he is in it and with it: it fills his universe. But this unified state  of consciousness does not merely pore upon something already  possessed. When it only does this, it is diseased. Its true business  is pure perception. It is outgoing, expansive: its goal is something  beyond itself. The rearrangement of the psychic self which occurs in  ecstasy is not merely concerned with the normal elements of  consciousness. It is rather a temporary unification of consciousness  round that centre of transcendental perception which mystics call the  "apex" or the "spark of the soul." Those  deeper layers of personality which normal life keeps below the  threshold are active in it: and these are fused with the surface  personality by the governing passion, the transcendent love which lies  at the basis of all sane ecstatic states. The result is not merely a  mind concentrated on one idea nor a heart fixed on one desire, nor  even a mind and a [p. 367] [iv.viii-Page_367] heart united in the interests of  a beloved thought: but a whole being welded into one, all its  faculties, neglecting their normal universe, grouped about a new  centre, serving a new life, and piercing like a single flame the  barriers of the sensual world. Ecstasy is the psycho-physical state  which may accompany this brief synthetic act.

[iv.viii-p41]C. Therefore, whilst on its physical side ecstasy is  an entrancement, on its mental side a complete unification of  consciousness, on its mystical side it is an exalted act of  perception. It represents the greatest possible extension of the  spiritual consciousness in the direction of Pure Being: the  "blind intent stretching" here receives its reward in a  profound experience of Eternal Life. In this experience the  departmental activities of thought and feeling the consciousness of  I-hood, of space and time--all that belongs to the World of  Becoming and our own place therein--are suspended. The vitality  which we are accustomed to split amongst these various things, is  gathered up to form a state of "pure apprehension": a  vivid intuition of--or if you like conjunction with--the  Transcendent. For the time of his ecstasy the mystic is, for all  practical purposes, as truly living in the supersensual world as the  normal human animal is living in the sensual world. He is experiencing  the highest and most joyous of those temporary and unstable  states--those "passive unions"--in which his  consciousness escapes the limitations of the senses, rises to freedom,  and is united for an instant with the "great life of the  All."

[iv.viii-p42]Ecstasy, then, from the contemplative's point of  view, is the development and completion of the orison of union, and he  is not always at pains to distinguish the two degrees, a fact which  adds greatly to the difficulties of students.   [*751]    In both states--though he may, for want of better language,  describe his experience in terms of sight--the Transcendent is  perceived by contact, not by vision: as, enfolded in darkness with one  whom we love, we obtain a knowledge far more complete than that  conferred by the sharpest sight the most perfect mental analysis. In  Ecstasy, the apprehension is perhaps more definitely  "beatific" than in the orison of union. Such memory of his  feeling-state as the ecstatic brings back with him is more often  concerned with an exultant certainty--a conviction that he has  known for once the Reality which hath no image, and solved the paradox  of life--than with meek self-loss in that Cloud of Unknowing  where the contemplative in union is content to meet his Beloved. The  true note of ecstasy, however, its only valid distinction from infused  contemplation, lies in [p. 368] [iv.viii-Page_368]   entrancement;    in "being ravished out of fleshly feeling," as St. Paul  caught up to the Third Heaven,   [*752]    not in "the lifting of mind unto God." This, of course,  is an outward distinction only, and a rough one at that, since  entrancement has many degrees: but it will be found the only practical  basis of classification.

[iv.viii-p45]Probably none but those who have experienced these  states know the actual difference between them. Even St.  Teresa's psychological insight fails her here, and she is  obliged to fall back on the difference between voluntary and  involuntary absorption in the divine: a difference, not in spiritual  values, but merely in the psycho-physical constitution of those who  have perceived these values. "I wish I could explain with the  help of God," she says, "wherein union differs from  rapture, or from transport, or from flight of the spirit, as they call  it, or from trance, which are all one. I mean that all these are only  different names for that   one and the same thing, which is also called ecstasy.    It is more excellent than union, the fruits of it are much greater,  and its other operations more manifold, for union is uniform in the  beginning, the middle, and the end, and is so also interiorly; but as  raptures have ends of a much higher kind, they produce effects both  within and without [  i.e.   , both physical and psychical]. . . . A rapture is absolutely  irresistible; whilst union, inasmuch as we are then on our own ground,  may be hindered, though that resistance be painful and violent."   [*753] 

[iv.viii-p47]From the point of view of mystical psychology, our  interest in ecstasy will centre in two points. (1) What has the mystic  to tell us of the Object of his ecstatic perception? (2) What is the  nature of the peculiar consciousness which he enjoys in his trance?  That is to say, what news does he bring us as to the Being of God and  the powers of man?

[iv.viii-p48]It may be said generally that on both these points he  bears out, amplifies, and expresses under formulae of greater  splendour, with an accent of greater conviction, the general testimony  of the contemplatives. In fact, we must never forget that an ecstatic  is really nothing else than a contemplative of a special kind, with a  special psycho-physical make-up. Moreover, we have seen that it is not  always easy to determine the exact point at which entrancement takes  place, and deep contemplation assumes the ecstatic form. The  classification, like all classifications of mental states, is an  arbitrary one. Whilst the extreme cases present no difficulty, there  are others less complete, which form a graduated series between the  deeps of the "Quiet" and the heights of  "Rapture." We shall never know, for instance, whether the  ecstasies of Plotinus and of Pascal involved true bodily entrancement,  or [p. 369] [iv.viii-Page_369] only a deep absorption of the  "unitive" kind. So, too, the language of many Christian  mystics when speaking of their "raptures" is so vague and  metaphorical that it leaves us in great doubt as to whether they mean  by Rapture the abrupt suspension of normal consciousness, or merely a  sudden and agreeable elevation of soul.

[iv.viii-p49]"Ravishing," says Rolle, "as it is  showed, in two ways is to be understood. One manner, forsooth, in  which a man is ravished out of fleshly feeling; so that for the time  of his ravishing plainly he feels nought in flesh, nor what is done of  his flesh, and yet he is not dead but quick, for yet the soul to the  body gives life. And on this manner saints sometime are ravished, to  their profit and other men's learning; as Paul ravished to the  third heaven. And on this manner sinners also in vision sometime are  ravished, that they may see joys of saints and pains of damned for  their correction.   [*754]    And many other as we read of. Another manner of ravishing there is,  that is lifting of mind into God by contemplation. And this manner of  ravishing is in all that are perfect lovers of God, and in none of  them but that love God. And as well this is called a ravishing as the  other; for with a violence it is done, and as it were against  nature."   [*755] 

[iv.viii-p52]It is, however, very confusing to the anxious inquirer  when--as too often--"lifting of mind by  contemplation" is "as well called a ravishing as the  other," and ecstasy is used as a synonym for gladness of heart.  Here, so far as is possible, these words will be confined to their  strict meaning, and not applied generally to the description of all  the outgoing and expansive states of the transcendental  consciousness.

[iv.viii-p53]What does the mystic claim that he attains in this  abnormal condition--this irresistible trance? The price that he  pays is heavy, involving much psycho-physical wear and tear. He  declares that his rapture or ecstasy includes a moment--often a  very short, and always an indescribable moment--in which he  enjoys a supreme knowledge of or participation in Divine Reality. He  tells us under various metaphors that he then attains Pure Being, his  Source, his Origin, his Beloved: "is engulphed in the very thing  for which he longs, which is God."   [*756]    "Oh, wonder of wonders," cries Eckhart, "when I  think of the union the soul has with God! He makes the enraptured soul  to flee out of herself, for she is no more satisfied with anything  that can be named. The spring of [p. 370] [iv.viii-Page_370] Divine Love flows  out of the soul and draws her out of herself into the unnamed Being,  into her first source, which is God alone."   [*757] 

[iv.viii-p56]This momentary attainment of the Source, the Origin,  is the theme of all descriptions of mystic ecstasy. In Rulman  Merswin's "Book of the Nine Rocks," that brief and  overwhelming rapture is the end of the pilgrim's long trials and  ascents. "The vision of the Infinite lasted only for a moment:  when he came to himself he felt inundated with life and joy. He asked,  'Where have I been?' and he was answered, 'In the  upper school of the Holy Spirit. There you were surrounded by the  dazzling pages of the Book of Divine Wisdom.   [*758]    Your soul plunged therein with delight, and the Divine Master of the  school has filled her with an exuberant love by which even your  physical nature has been transfigured.'"   [*759]    Another Friend of God, Ellina von Crevelsheim, who was of so abnormal  a psychic constitution that her absorption in the Divine Love caused  her to remain dumb for seven years, was "touched by the Hand of  God" at the end of that period, and fell into a five-days'  ecstasy, in which "pure truth" was revealed to her, and  she was lifted up to an immediate experience of the Absolute. There  she "saw the interior of the Father's heart," and  was "bound with chains of love, enveloped in light, and filled  with peace and joy."   [*760] 

[iv.viii-p60]In this transcendent act of union, the mystic  sometimes says that he is "conscious of nothing." But it  is clear that this expression is figurative, for otherwise he would  not have known that there had been an act of union: were his  individuality abolished, it could not have been aware of its  attainment of God. What he appears to mean is that consciousness so  changes its form as to be no longer recognizable or describable in  human speech. In the paradoxical language of Richard of St. Victor,  "In a wondrous fashion remembering we do not remember, seeing we  do not see, understanding we not understand, penetrating we do not  penetrate."   [*761]    In this indescribable but most actual state, the whole self, exalted  and at white heat, is unified and poured out in one vivid act of  impassioned perception, which leaves no room for reflection or  self-observation. That aloof "somewhat" in us which  watches all our actions, splits our consciousness, has been submerged.  The mystic is attending exclusively to Eternity, not to [p. 371] [iv.viii-Page_371] his own perception of Eternity. That he can only consider  when the ecstasy itself is at an end.

   [iv.viii-p61.1] "All things I then forgot,
   My cheek on Him Who for my coming came,
    [iv.viii-p61.4]   All ceased, and I was not,
   Leaving my cares and shame
   Among the lilies, and forgetting them." [*762]  
  [iv.viii-p63]This is that perfect unity of consciousness, that  utter concentration on an experience of love, which excludes all  conceptual and analytic acts. Hence, when the mystic says that his  faculties were suspended, that he "knew all and knew  nought," he really means that he was so concentrated on the  Absolute that he ceased to consider his separate existence: so merged  in it that he could not perceive it as an object of thought, as the  bird cannot see the air which supports it, nor the fish the ocean in  which it swims. He really "knows all" but  "thinks" nought: "perceives all," but  "conceives nought."

[iv.viii-p64]The ecstatic consciousness is not self-conscious: it  is intuitive not discursive. Under the sway of a great passion,  possessed by a great Idea, it has become "a single state of  enormous intensity."   [*763]    In this state, it transcends our ordinary processes of knowledge, and  plunges deep into the Heart of Reality. A fusion which is the  anticipation of the unitive life takes place: and the ecstatic returns  from this brief foretaste of freedom saying, "I know, as having  known, the meaning of Existence; the sane centre of the  universe--at once the wonder and the assurance of the  soul."   [*764]    "This utter transformation of the soul in God," says St.  Teresa, describing the same experience in the official language of  theology, "continues only for an instant: yet while it continues  no faculty of the soul is aware of it, or knows what is passing there.  Nor can it be understood while we are living on the earth; at least  God will not have us understand it, because we must be incapable of  understanding it.   I know is    by   experience.   "   [*765]   Theutterances of those who know by experience are here of more worth  than all the statements of psychology, which are concerned of  necessity with the "outward signs" of this "inward  and spiritual grace." To these we must go if we would obtain  some hint of that which ecstasy may mean to the ecstatic.

[iv.viii-p68]"When the soul, forgetting itself, dwells in  that radiant darkness," says Suso, "it loses all its  faculties and all its qualities, as St. Bernard has said. And this,  more or less completely, according [p. 372] [iv.viii-Page_372] to whether the  soul--whether in the body or out of the body--is more or  less united to God. This forgetfulness of self is, in a measure, a  transformation in God; who then becomes, in a certain manner, all  things for the soul, as Scripture saith. In this rapture the soul  disappears, but not yet entirely. It acquires, it is true, certain  qualities of divinity, but does not naturally become divine. . . . To  speak in the common language, the soul is rapt, by the divine power of  resplendent Being, above its natural faculties, into the nakedness of  the Nothing."   [*766] 

[iv.viii-p70]Here Suso is trying to describe his rapturous  attainment of God in the negative terms of Dionysian theology. It is  probable that much of the language of that theology originated, not in  the abstract philosophizings, but in the actual ecstatic experience,  of the Neoplatonists, who--Christian and Pagan  alike--believed in, and sometimes deliberately induced, this  condition as the supreme method of attaining the One. The whole  Christian doctrine of ecstasy, on its metaphysical side, really  descends from that great practical transcendentalist Plotinus: who is  known to have been an ecstatic, and has left in his Sixth Ennead a  description of the mystical trance obviously based upon his own  experiences. "Then," he says, "the soul neither  sees, nor distinguishes by seeing, nor imagines that there are two  things; but becomes as it were another thing, ceases to be itself and  belong to itself. It belongs to God and is one with Him, like two  concentric circles: concurring they are One; but when they separate,  they are two. . . . Since in this conjunction with Deity there were  not two things, but the perceiver was one with the thing perceived, if  a man could preserve the memory of what he was when he mingled with  the Divine, he would have within himself an image of God. . . . For  then nothing stirred within him, neither anger, nor desire, nor even  reason, nor a certain intellectual perception nor, in short, was he  himself moved, if we may assert this; but being in an ecstasy,  tranquil and alone with God, he enjoyed an unbreakable calm."   [*767]    Ecstasy, says Plotinus in another part of the same treatise, is  "another mode of seeing, a simplification and abandonment of  oneself, a desire of contact, rest, and a striving after union."  All the phases of the contemplative experience seem to be summed up in  this phrase.

[iv.viii-p72]It has been said by some critics that the ecstasy of  Plotinus was different in kind from the ecstasy of the Christian  saints: that it was a philosophic rhapsody, something like  Plato's "saving madness," which is also regarded on  somewhat insufficient evidence as being an affair of the head and  entirely unconnected with the heart. At first sight the arid  metaphysical language in which [p. 373] [iv.viii-Page_373] Plotinus tries to  tell his love, offers some ground for this view. Nevertheless the  ecstasy itself is a practical matter; and has its root, not in reason,  but in a deep-seated passion for the Absolute which is far nearer to  the mystic's love of God than to any intellectual curiosity,  however sublime. The few passages in which it is mentioned tell us  what his mystical genius drove him to do: and not what his  philosophical mind encouraged him to think or say. At once when we  come to these passages we notice a rise of temperature, an alteration  of values. Plotinus the ecstatic is sure whatever Plotinus the  metaphysician may think, that the union with God is a union of hearts:  that "by love He may be gotten and holden, but by thought  never." He, no less than the mediaeval contemplatives, is  convinced--to quote his own words--that the Vision is only  for the desirous; for him who has that "loving passion"  which "causes the lover to rest in the object of his  love."   [*768]    The simile of marriage, of conjunction as the soul's highest  bliss, which we are sometimes told that we owe in part to the  unfortunate popularity of the Song of Songs, in part to the sexual  aberrations of celibate saints, is found in the work of this  hardheaded Pagan philosopher: who was as celebrated for his practical  kindness and robust common sense as for his transcendent intuitions of  the One.

[iv.viii-p74]The greatest of the Pagan ecstatics then, when  speaking from experience, anticipates the Christian contemplatives.  His words, too, when compared with theirs, show how delicate are the  shades which distinguish ecstasy such as this from the highest forms  of orison. "Tranquil and alone with God"--mingled for  an instant of time "like two concentric circles" with the  Divine Life," "perceiver and perceived made  one"--this is as near as the subtle intellect of Alexandria  can come to the reality of that experience in which the impassioned  mono-ideism of great spiritual genius conquers the rebellious senses,  and becomes, if only for a moment, operative on the highest levels  accessible to the human soul. Self-mergence, then--that state of  transcendence in which, the barriers of selfhood abolished, we  "receive the communication of Life and of Beatitude, in which  all things are consummated and all things are renewed"   [*769]   --is the secret of ecstasy, as it was the secret of  contemplation. On their spiritual side the two states cannot, save for  convenience of description, be divided. Where contemplation becomes  expansive, out-going, self-giving, and receives a definite fruition of  the Absolute in return, its content is already ecstatic. Whether its  outward form shall be so depends on the body of the mystic, not on his  soul. [p. 374] [iv.viii-Page_374]

   [iv.viii-p75.1] "Se l' atto  della mente
   e tutto consopito,
   en Dio stando rapito,
   ch' en se non se retrova.
   . . . .
   En mezo de sto mare
   essendo si abissato,
   gia non ce trova lato
   onde ne possa uscire,
   De se non puo pensare
   ne dir como e formato,
   pero che, trasformato,
   altro si ha vestire.
   Tutto lo suo sentire
   en ben si va notando,
   belleza contemplando
   la qual non ha colore." [*770]  
  [iv.viii-p77]Thus sang Jacopone da Todi of the ecstatic soul:  and here the descriptive powers of one who was both a poet and a  mystic bring life and light to the dry theories of psychology.

[iv.viii-p78]He continues--and here, in perhaps the finest of  all poetic descriptions of ecstasy, he seems to echo at one point  Plotinus, at another Richard of St. Victor: at once to veil and reveal  the utmost secrets of the mystic life:--

   [iv.viii-p78.1] "Aperte son le  porte
   facta ha conjunzione,
   et e in possessione
   de tutto quel de Dio.
   Sente que non sentio,
   que non cognove vede,
   possede que non crede,
   gusta senza sapere.
   Pero ch' ha se perduto
   tutto senza misura,
   possede quel' altura
   de summa smesuranza.
   Perche non ha tenuto
   en se altra mistura,
   quel ben senza figura
   recere en abondanza." [*771]    [p. 375] [iv.viii-Page_375]
  [iv.viii-p80]This ineffable "awareness," [iv.viii-p80.1]   en dio stando rapito     ,    this union with the Imageless Good, is not the only--though it  is the purest--form taken by ecstatic apprehension. Many of the  visions and voices described in a previous chapter were experienced in  the entranced or ecstatic state; generally when the first violence of  the rapture was passed. St. Francis and St. Catherine of Siena both  received the stigmata in ecstasy: almost all the entrancements of Suso  and many of those of St. Teresa and Angela of Foligno, entailed  symbolic vision, rather than pure perception of the Absolute. More and  more, then, we are forced to the opinion that ecstasy, in so far as it  is not a synonym for joyous and expansive contemplation, is really the  name of the outward condition rather than of any one kind of inward  experience.

   

[iv.viii-p80.2]Rapture

[iv.viii-p81]In all the cases which we have been  considering--and they are characteristic of a large  group--the onset of ecstasy has been seen as a gradual, though  always involuntary process. Generally it has been the culminating  point of a period of contemplation. The self, absorbed in the orison  of quiet or of union, or some analogous concentration on its  transcendental interests, has passed over the limit of these states;  and slid into a still ecstatic trance, with its outward  characteristics of rigid limbs, cold, and depressed respiration.

[iv.viii-p82]The ecstasy, however, instead of developing naturally  from a state of intense absorption in the Divine Vision, may seize the  subject abruptly and irresistibly, when in his normal state of  consciousness. This is strictly what ascetic writers mean by Rapture.  We have seen that the essence of the mystic life consists in the  remaking of personality: its entrance into a conscious relation with  the Absolute. This process is accompanied in the mystic by the  development of an art expressive of his peculiar genius: the art of  contemplation. His practice of this art, like the practice of poetry,  music, or any other form of creation, may follow normal lines, at  first amenable to the control of his will, and always dependent on his  own deliberate attention to the supreme Object of his quest; that is  to say, on his orison. His mystic states, however they may end, will  owe their beginning to some voluntary act upon his part: a deliberate  response to the invitation of God, a turning from the visible to the  invisible world. Sometimes, however, his [p. 376] [iv.viii-Page_376] genius for  the transcendent becomes too strong for the other elements of  character, and manifests itself in psychic disturbances--abrupt  and ungovernable invasions from the subliminal region--which make  its exercise parallel to the "fine frenzy" of the prophet,  the composer, or the poet. Such is   Rapture:    a violent and uncontrollable expression of genius for the Absolute,  which temporarily disorganizes and may permanently injure the nervous  system of the self. Often, but not necessarily, Rapture--like its  poetic equivalent--yields results of great splendour and value  for life. But it is an accident, not an implicit of mystical  experience: an indication of disharmony between the subject's  psychophysical make-up and his transcendental powers.

[iv.viii-p83]Rapture, then, may accompany the whole development of  selves of an appropriate type. We have seen that it is a common  incident in mystical conversion. The violent uprush of subliminal  intuitions by which such conversion is marked disorganizes the normal  consciousness, overpowers the will and the senses, and entails a more  or less complete entrancement. This was certainly the case with Suso  and Rulman Merswin, and perhaps with Pascal: whose "Certitude,  Peace, Joy" sums up the exalted intuition of Perfection and  Reality--the conviction of a final and unforgettable  knowledge--which is characteristic of all ecstatic  perception.

[iv.viii-p84]In her Spiritual Relations, St. Teresa speaks in some  detail of the different phases or forms of expression of these violent  ecstatic states: trance, which in her system means that which we have  called ecstasy, and transport, or "flight of the spirit,"  which is the equivalent of rapture. "The difference between  trance and transport," she says, "is this. In a trance the  soul gradually dies to outward things, losing the senses and living  unto God. But a transport comes on by one sole act of His Majesty,  wrought in the innermost part of the soul with such swiftness that it  is as if the higher part thereof were carried away, and the soul were  leaving the body."   [*772] 

[iv.viii-p86]Rapture, says St. Teresa in another place,  "comes in general as a shock, quick and sharp, before you can  collect your thoughts, or help yourself in any way; and you see and  feel it as a cloud, or a strong eagle rising upwards and carrying you  away on its wings. I repeat it: you feel and see yourself carried  away, you know not whither."   [*773]    This carrying-away sensation may even assume the concrete form which  is known as levitation: when the upward and outward sensations so  dominate the conscious field that the subject is convinced that she is  raised bodily from the ground. "It seemed to me, when I tried to  make some resistance, as if a great force beneath my feet lifted me  up. I know of nothing with which to compare it; but it was much more  violent than the other [p. 377] [iv.viii-Page_377] spiritual visitations, and I  was therefore as one ground to pieces . . . And further, I confess  that it threw me into a great fear, very great indeed at first; for  when I saw my body thus lifted up from the earth, how could I help it?  Though the spirit draws it upwards after itself, and that with great  sweetness if unresisted, the senses are not lost;   at least I was so much myself as to be able to see that I was being  lifted up   ."   [*774] 

[iv.viii-p89]So Rulman Merswin said that in the rapture which  accompanied his conversion, he was carried round the garden with his  feet off the ground:   [*775]    and St. Catherine of Siena, in a passage which I have already quoted,  speaks of the strength of the spirit, which raises the body from the  earth.   [*776] 

[iv.viii-p92]The subjective nature of this feeling of levitation is  practically acknowledged by St. Teresa when she says, "When the  rapture was over, my body seemed frequently to be buoyant, as if all  weight had departed from it; so much so, that now and then I scarcely  knew that my feet touched the ground. But during the rapture the body  is very often as it were dead, perfectly powerless. It continues in  the position it was in when the rapture came upon it--if sitting,  sitting." Obviously here the outward conditions of physical  immobility coexisted with the subjective sensation of being  "lifted Up."   [*777] 

[iv.viii-p94]The self's consciousness when in the condition  of rapture may vary from the complete possession of her faculties  claimed by St. Teresa to a complete entrancement. However abrupt the  oncoming of the transport, it does not follow that the mystic  instantly loses his surface-consciousness. "There remains the  power of seeing and hearing; but it is as if the things heard and seen  were at a great distance far away."   [*778]    They have retreated, that is to say, to the fringe of the conscious  field, but may still remain just within it. Though the senses may not  be entirely entranced, however, it seems that the power of movement is  always lost. As in ecstasy, breathing and circulation are much  diminished.

[iv.viii-p96]"By the command of the Bridegroom when He  intends ravishing the soul," says St. Teresa, "the doors  of the mansions and even those of the keep and of the whole castle are  closed; for He takes away the power of speech, and although  occasionally the other faculties are retained rather longer, no word  can be uttered. Sometimes the person is at once deprived of all the  senses, the [p. 378] [iv.viii-Page_378] hands and body becoming as cold as if  the soul had fled; occasionally no breathing can be detected. This  condition lasts but a short while, I mean in the same degree, for when  this profound suspension diminishes the body seems to come to itself  and gain strength to return again to this  death    which gives more vigorous   life    to the soul."   [*779] 

[iv.viii-p98]This spiritual storm, then, in St. Teresa's  opinion, enhances the vitality of those who experience it: makes them  "more living than before." It initiates them into  "heavenly secrets," and if it does not do this it is no  "true rapture," but a "physical weakness such as  women are prone to owing to their delicacy of constitution." Its  sharpness and violence, however, leave considerable mental disorder  behind: "This supreme state of ecstasy never lasts long, but  although it ceases, it leaves the will so inebriated, and the mind so  transported out of itself that for a day, or sometimes for several  days, such a person is incapable of attending to anything but what  excites the will to the love of God; although wide awake enough to  this, she seems asleep as regards all earthly matters."   [*780] 

[iv.viii-p100]But when equilibrium is re-established, the true  effects of this violent and beatific intuition of the Absolute begin  to invade the normal life. The self which has thus been caught up to  awareness of new levels of Reality, is stimulated to fresh activity by  the strength of its impressions. It now desires an eternal union with  that which it has known; with which for a brief moment it seemed to be  merged. The peculiar talent of the mystic--power of apprehending  Reality which his contemplations have ordered and developed, and his  ecstasies express--here reacts upon his life-process, his slow  journey from the Many to the One. His nostalgia has been increased by  a glimpse of the homeland. His intuitive apprehension of the Absolute,  which assumes in ecstasy its most positive form, spurs him on towards  that permanent union with the Divine which is his goal. "Such  great graces," says St. Teresa, "leave the soul avid of  total possession of that Divine Bridegroom who has conferred  them."   [*781] 

[iv.viii-p102]Hence the ecstatic states do not merely lift the self  to an abnormal degree of knowledge: they enrich her life, contribute  to the remaking of her consciousness, develop and uphold the  "strong and stormy love which drives her home." They give  her the clearest vision she can have of that transcendent standard to  which she must conform: entail her sharpest consciousness of the  inflow of that Life on which her little striving life depends. Little  wonder, then, that--though the violence of the onset may often  [p. 379] [iv.viii-Page_379] try his body to the full--the mystic comes  forth from a "good ecstasy" as Pascal from the experience  of the Fire, humbled yet exultant, marvellously strengthened; and  ready, not for any passive enjoyments, but rather for the struggles  and hardships of the Way, the deliberate pain and sacrifice of  love.

[iv.viii-p103]In the third Degree of Ardent Love, says Richard of  St. Victor, love paralyses action. Union   (copula)    is the symbol of this state: ecstasy is its expression. The desirous  soul, he says finely, no longer thirsts  for    God but   into    God. The pull of its desire draws it into the Infinite Sea. The mind  is borne away into the abyss of Divine Light; and, wholly forgetful of  exterior things, knows not even itself, but passes utterly into its  God. In this state, all earthly desire is absorbed in the heavenly  glory. "Whilst the mind is separated from itself, and whilst it  is borne away into the secret place of the divine mystery and is  surrounded on all sides by the fire of divine love, it is inwardly  penetrated and inflamed by this fire, and utterly puts off itself and  puts on a divine love: and being conformed to that Beauty which it has  beheld, it passes utterly into that other glory."   [*782] 

[iv.viii-p105]Thus does the state of ecstasy contribute to the  business of deification; of the remaking of the soul's susbtance  in conformity with the Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which is God,  "Being conformed to that Beauty which it has beheld, it passes  utterly into that other glory"; into the flaming heart of  Reality, the deep but dazzling darkness of its home.

[iv.viii-p106][p. 380] [iv.viii-Page_380]

Footnotes

^359:732 [iv.viii-p2.1][iv.viii-p3]          "Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death,"    vol. ii. p. 260.

^359:733 [iv.viii-p6.1][iv.viii-p7]              Vide infra,      p. 365.

^360:734 [iv.viii-p7.1][iv.viii-p8]          An interesting modern case is reported in the     Lancet,      18 March, 1911.

^360:735 [iv.viii-p9.1][iv.viii-p10]          Relaccion, viii. 8.

^361:736 [iv.viii-p12.1][iv.viii-p13]          St. Thomas proves ecstasies to be inevitable on just this    psychological ground. "The higher our mind is raised to the    contemplation of spiritual things," he says, "the more    it is abstracted from sensible things. But the final term to which    contemplation can possibly arrive is the divine substance. Therefore    the mind that sees the divine substance must be totally divorced    from the bodily senses, either by death or     by          some rapture"      ("Sultana contra Gentiles," I. iii. cap. xlvii.,    Rickaby's translation).

^361:737 [iv.viii-p13.1][iv.viii-p14]          "Sur la Psychologie du Mysticisme"     (Revue Philosophique,      February, 1902).

^361:738 [iv.viii-p15.1][iv.viii-p16]          Malaval, "La Pratique de la Vraye Theologie    Mystique," vol. i. p. 89.

^362:739 [iv.viii-p17.1][iv.viii-p18]          Pierre Janet ("The Major Symptoms of Hysteria," p. 316)    says that a lowering of the mental level in an invariable symptom or    "stigma" of hysteria.

^362:740 [iv.viii-p18.1][iv.viii-p19]          "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section iv. cap. iii.

^362:741 [iv.viii-p20.1][iv.viii-p21]          Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element of Religion,"    vol. i. p. 206    . 

^363:742 [iv.viii-p21.1][iv.viii-p22]          This power of detecting and hearing the call of duty, though she    was deaf to everything else, is evidently related to the peculiarity    noticed by Ribot; who says that an ecstatic hears no sounds, save,    in some cases, the voice of one specific person, which is always    able to penetrate the trance. ("Les Maladies de la    Volonte," p. 125.)

^363:743 [iv.viii-p22.1][iv.viii-p23]          Vita e Dottrina, cap. v.

^363:744 [iv.viii-p23.1][iv.viii-p24]          Vida, cap. xx.  section 29.

^363:745 [iv.viii-p26.1][iv.viii-p27]          A. Maury, "Le Sommeil et les Reves," p. 235.

^364:746 [iv.viii-p30.1][iv.viii-p31]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. iii.

^364:747 [iv.viii-p31.1][iv.viii-p32]              Vide          supra,      p. 181.

^364:748 [iv.viii-p32.1][iv.viii-p33]          D. A. Mougel, "Denys le Chartreux," p. 32.

^365:749 [iv.viii-p34.1][iv.viii-p35]          E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 50.

^366:750 [iv.viii-p37.1][iv.viii-p38]          Dialogo, cap. lxxix.

^367:751 [iv.viii-p42.1][iv.viii-p43]          In the case of Dante, for instance, we do not know whether his    absorption in the Eternal light did or did not entail the condition    of trance.

^368:752 [iv.viii-p43.1][iv.viii-p44]          [iv.viii-p44.1][iv.viii-p44.1].

^368:753 [iv.viii-p45.1][iv.viii-p46]          Vida, cap. xx.  section section 1 and 3.

^369:754 [iv.viii-p49.1][iv.viii-p50]          Compare Dante, Letter to Can Grande, sect. 28, where he adduces    this fact of "the ravishing of sinners for their    correction," in support of his claim that the "Divine    Comedy" is the fruit of experience, and that he had indeed    "navigated the great Sea of Being" of which he    writes.

^369:755 [iv.viii-p50.1][iv.viii-p51]          Richard Rolle, "The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap.    vii.

^369:756 [iv.viii-p53.1][iv.viii-p54]          Dante,     loc. cit. 

^370:757 [iv.viii-p54.1][iv.viii-p55]          Eckhart, "On the Steps of the Soul" (Pfeiffer, p.    153).

^370:758 [iv.viii-p56.1][iv.viii-p57]          Compare Par. xxxiii. 85 (    vide supra     , p. 135).

^370:759 [iv.viii-p57.1][iv.viii-p58]          Jundt, "Rulman Merswin," p. 27. Note that this was a    "good ecstasy," involving healthful effects for    life.

^370:760 [iv.viii-p58.1][iv.viii-p59]          Jundt, "Les Amis de Dieu," p. 39. Given also by Rufus    Jones, "Studies in Mystical Religion," p. 271.

^370:761 [iv.viii-p60.1][iv.viii-p61]          "Benjamin Major."

^371:762 [iv.viii-p61.8][iv.viii-p62]          St. John of the Cross, "En una Noche Escura."

^371:763 [iv.viii-p64.1][iv.viii-p65]          Ribot, "Psychologie de l'Attention," cap.    iii.

^371:764 [iv.viii-p65.1][iv.viii-p66]          B. P. Blood. See William James, "A Pluralistic Mystic,"    in the     Hibbert Journal,      July, 1910    . 

^371:765 [iv.viii-p66.1][iv.viii-p67]          Vida, cap. xx.  section 24.

^372:766 [iv.viii-p68.1][iv.viii-p69]          Leben, cap. vl.

^372:767 [iv.viii-p70.1][iv.viii-p71]          Ennead vi. 9

^373:768 [iv.viii-p72.1][iv.viii-p73]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

^373:769 [iv.viii-p74.1][iv.viii-p75]          Ruysbroeck, "De Calculo," cap. xii.

^374:770 [iv.viii-p75.19][iv.viii-p76]          "The activity of the mind is lulled to rest: rapt in God, It    can no longer find itself. . . . Being so deeply engulphed in that    ocean, now it can find no place to issue therefrom. Of itself it    cannot think, nor can it say what it is like: because transformed,    it hath another vesture. All its perceptions have gone forth to gaze    upon the Good, and contemplate that Beauty which has no    likeness" (Lauda xci.).

^374:771 [iv.viii-p78.18][iv.viii-p79]          "The doors are flung wide: conjoined to God, it possesses all    that is in Him. It feels that which it felt not: sees that which it    knew not, possesses that which it believed not, tastes, though it    savours not. Because it is wholly lost to itself, it possesses that    height of Unmeasured Perfection. Because it has not retained in    itself the mixture of any other thing, it has received in abundance    that Imageless Good" (    op. cit     .).

^376:772 [iv.viii-p84.1][iv.viii-p85]          Relaccion viii. 8 and 10.

^376:773 [iv.viii-p86.1][iv.viii-p87]          Vida, cap. xx.  section 3.

^377:774 [iv.viii-p87.1][iv.viii-p88]          St. Teresa,     op. cit., loc. cit.,       section section 7 and 9.

^377:775 [iv.viii-p89.1][iv.viii-p90]              Supra     , p. 186.

^377:776 [iv.viii-p90.1][iv.viii-p91]          Dialogo, cap. lxxix.

^377:777 [iv.viii-p92.1][iv.viii-p93]          Vida, cap, xx.  section 23. At the same time in the present state of    our knowledge and in view of numerous attested cases of levitation,    it is impossible to dogmatise on this subject. The supernaturalist    view is given in its extreme form by Farges, "Mystical    Phenomena," pp. 536     seq. 

^377:778 [iv.viii-p94.1][iv.viii-p95]          Teresa,     loc. cit. 

^378:779 [iv.viii-p96.1][iv.viii-p97]          St. Teresa, "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas,    cap. iv.

^378:780 [iv.viii-p98.1][iv.viii-p99]              Op. cit., loc. cit     .

^378:781 [iv.viii-p100.1][iv.viii-p101]          St. Teresa,     op. cit.,      cap. vi.

^379:782 [iv.viii-p103.1][iv.viii-p104]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis"    (paraphrase).

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

IX. The Dark Night of the Soul

 [iv.ix][iv.ix-p1]We[iv.ix-p1.1] have wandered during the last few chapters from our study of the  mystical life-process in man, the organic growth of his transcendental  consciousness, in order to examine the byproducts of that process, its  characteristic forms of self-expression: the development of its normal  art of contemplation, and the visions and voices, ecstasies and  raptures which are frequent--though not  essential--accompaniments of its activity.

[iv.ix-p2]But the mystic, like other persons of genius, is man  first and artist afterwards. We shall make a grave though common  mistake if we forget this and allow ourselves to be deflected from our  study of his growth in personality by the wonder and interest of his  art. Being, not Doing, is the first aim of the mystic; and hence  should be the first interest of the student of mysticism. We have  considered for convenience' sake all the chief forms of mystical  activity at the half-way house of the transcendental life: but these  activities are not, of course, peculiar to any one stage of that life.  Ecstasy, for instance, is as common a feature of mystical conversion  [p. 381] [iv.ix-Page_381] as of the last crisis, or "mystic  marriage" of the soul:   [*783]    whilst visions and voices--in selves of a visionary or auditive  type--accompany and illustrate every phase of the inward  development. They lighten and explain the trials of Purgation as often  as they express the joys of Illumination, and frequently mark the  crisis of transition from one mystic state to the next.

[iv.ix-p4]One exception, however, must be made to this rule. The  most intense period of that great swing-back into darkness which  usually divides the "first mystic life," or Illuminative  Way, from the "second mystic life," or Unitive Way, is  generally a period of utter blankness and stagnation, so far as  mystical activity is concerned. The "Dark Night of the  Soul," once fully established, is seldom lit by visions or made  homely by voices. It is of the essence of its miseries that the  once-possessed power of orison or contemplation now seems wholly lost.  The self is tossed back from its hard-won point of vantage. Impotence,  blankness, solitude, are the epithets by which those immersed in this  dark fire of purification describe their pains. It is this episode in  the life-history of the mystic type to which we have now come.

[iv.ix-p5]We have already noticed   [*784]    the chief psychological characteristics of all normal mystical  development. We have seen that its essence consists in the effort to  establish a new equilibrium, to get, as it were, a firm foothold upon  transcendent levels of reality; and that in its path towards this  consummation the self experiences a series of oscillations between  "states of pleasure" and "states of pain." Put  in another way, it is an orderly movement of the whole consciousness  towards higher centres, in which each intense and progressive  affirmation fatigues the immature transcendental powers, and is paid  for by a negation; a swing-back of the whole consciousness, a  stagnation of intellect, a reaction of the emotions, or an inhibition  of the will.

[iv.ix-p7]Thus the exalted consciousness of Divine Perfection  which the self acquired in its "mystical awakening" was  balanced by a depressed and bitter consciousness of its own inherent  imperfection, and the clash of these two perceptions spurred it to  that laborious effort of accommodation which constitutes the  "Purgative Way." The renewed and ecstatic awareness of the  Absolute which resulted, and which was the governing characteristic of  Illumination, brought its own proper negation: the awareness, that is  to say, of the self's continued separation from and  incompatibility with that Absolute which it has perceived. During the  time in which the illuminated consciousness is fully established, the  self, as a rule, is perfectly content: believing that in its vision  [p. 382] [iv.ix-Page_382] of Eternity, its intense and loving consciousness  of God, it has reached the goal of its quest. Sooner or later,  however, psychic fatigue sets in; the state of illumination begins to  break up, the complementary negative consciousness appears, and shows  itself as an overwhelming sense of darkness and deprivation. This  sense is so deep and strong that it inhibits all consciousness of the  Transcendent; and plunges the self into the state of negation and  misery which is called the Dark Night.

[iv.ix-p8]We may look at the Dark Night, as at most other  incidents of the Mystic Way, from two points of view: (1) We may see  it, with the psychologist, as a moment in the history of mental  development, governed by the more or less mechanical laws which so  conveniently explain to him the psychic life of man: or (2) with the  mystic himself, we may see it in its spiritual aspect as contributing  to the remaking of character, the growth of the "New Man";  his "transmutation in God."

[iv.ix-p9](1) Psychologically considered, the Dark Night is an  example of the operation of the law of reaction from stress. It is a  period of fatigue and lassitude following a period of sustained  mystical activity. "It is one of the best established laws of  the nervous system," says Starbuck, "that it has periods  of exhaustion if exercised continuously in one direction, and can only  recuperate by having a period of rest."   [*785]    However spiritual he may be, the mystic--so long as he is in the  body--cannot help using the machinery of his nervous and cerebral  system in the course of his adventures. His development, on its  psychic side, consists in the taking over of this machinery, the  capture of its centres of consciousness, in the interests of his  growing transcendental life. In so far, then, as this is so, that  transcendental life will be partly conditioned by psychic necessities,  and amenable to the laws of reaction and of fatigue. Each great step  forward will entail lassitude and exhaustion for that mental machinery  which he has pressed unto service and probably overworked. When the  higher centres have been submitted to the continuous strain of a  developed illuminated life, with its accompanying periods of intense  fervour, lucidity, deep contemplation--perhaps of visionary and  auditive phenomena--the swing-back into the negative state occurs  almost of necessity.

[iv.ix-p11]This is the psychological explanation of those strange  and painful episodes in the lives of great saints--indeed, of  many spiritual persons hardly to be classed as saints--when,  perhaps after a long life passed in faithful correspondence with the  transcendental order, growing consciousness of the "presence of  God," the whole inner experience is suddenly swept away, and  only a [p. 383] [iv.ix-Page_383] blind reliance on past convictions saves  them from unbelief.   [*786]    The great contemplatives, those destined to attain the full stature  of the mystic, emerge from this period of destitution, however long  and drastic it may be, as from a new purification. It is for them the  gateway to a higher state. But persons of a less heroic spirituality,  if they enter the Night at all may succumb to its dangers and pains.  This "great negation" is the sorting-house of the  spiritual life. Here we part from the "nature mystics,"  the mystic poets, and all who shared in and were contented with the  illuminated vision of reality. Those who go on are the great and  strong spirits, who do not seek to   know,    but are driven to   be. 

[iv.ix-p13]We are to expect, then, as a part of the conditions  under which human consciousness appears to work that for every  affirmation of the mystic life there will be a negation waiting for  the unstable self. Progress in contemplation, for instance, is marked  by just such an alternation of light and shade: at first between  "consolation" and "aridity"; then between  "dark contemplation" and sharp intuitions of Reality. So  too in selves of extreme nervous instability, each joyous ecstasy  entails a painful or negative ecstasy. The states of darkness and  illumination coexist over a long period, alternating sharply and  rapidly. Many seers and artists pay in this way, by agonizing periods  of impotence and depression, for each violent outburst of creative  energy.

[iv.ix-p14]Rapid oscillations between a joyous and a painful  consciousness seem to occur most often at the beginning of a new  period of the Mystic Way: between Purgation and Illumination, and  again between Illumination and the Dark Night: for these mental states  are, as a rule, gradually not abruptly established. Mystics call such  oscillations the "Game of Love" in which God plays, as it  were, "hide and seek" with the questing soul. I have  already quoted a characteristic instance from the life of Rulman  Merswin,   [*787]    who passed the whole intervening period between his conversion and  entrance on the Dark Night, or "school of suffering love"  in such a state of disequilibrium. Thus too Madame Guyon, who has  described with much elaboration of detail her symptoms and sufferings  during the oncoming and duration of the Night--or, as she calls  its intensest period the Mystic Death--traces its beginning in  short recurrent states of privation, or dullness of feeling, such as  ascetic writers call "aridity": in which the self loses  all interest in and affection for those divine realities which had  [p. 384] [iv.ix-Page_384] previously filled its life. This privation followed  upon, or was the reaction from, an "illuminated" period of  extreme joy and security, in which, as she says, "the presence  of God never left me for an instant. But how dear I paid for this time  of happiness! For this possession, which seemed to me entire and  perfect--and the more perfect the more it was secret, and foreign  to the senses, steadfast and exempt from change--was but the  preparation for a total deprivation, lasting many years, without any  support or hope of its return."   [*788]    As Madame Guyon never attempted to control her states, but made a  point of conforming to her own description of the "resigned  soul" as "God's weathercock," we have in her  an unequalled opportunity of study.

[iv.ix-p17]"I endured," she says, "long periods  of privation, towards the end almost continual: but still I had from  time to time inflowings of Thy Divinity so deep and intimate, so vivid  and so penetrating, that it was easy for me to judge that Thou wast  but hidden from me and not lost. For although during the times of  privation it seemed to me that I had utterly lost Thee, a certain deep  support remained, though the soul knew it not: and she only became  aware of that support by her subsequent total deprivation thereof.  Every time that Thou didst return with more goodness and strength,  Thou didst return also with greater splendour; so that in a few hours  Thou didst rebuild all the ruins of my unfaithfulness and didst make  good to me with profusion all my loss."   [*789] 

[iv.ix-p19]Here we have, from the psychological point of view, a  perfect example of the oscillations of consciousness on the threshold  of a new state. The old equilibrium, the old grouping round a centre  characterized by pleasure-affirmation, has been lost; the new grouping  round a centre characterized by pain-negation is not yet established.  Madame Guyon is standing, or rather swinging, between two worlds, the  helpless prey of her own shifting and uncontrollable psychic and  spiritual states. But slowly the pendulum approaches its limit: the  states of privation, "become almost continual," the  reactions to illumination, become less. At last they cease entirely,  the new state is established, and the Dark Night has really set  in.

[iv.ix-p20]The theory here advanced that the "Dark  Night" is, on its psychic side, partly a condition of fatigue,  partly a state of transition, is borne out by the mental and moral  disorder which seems, in many subjects, to be its dominant character.  When they are in it everything seems to "go wrong" with  them. They are tormented by evil thoughts and abrupt temptations, lose  grasp not only of their spiritual but also of their worldly affairs.  Thus Lucie-Christine says: "Often during my great temptations to  [p. 385] [iv.ix-Page_385] sadness I am plunged in such spiritual darkness  that I think myself utterly lost in falsehood and illusion; deceiving  both myself and others. This temptation is the most terrible of  all."   [*790]    The health of those passing through this phase often suffers, they  become "odd" and their friends forsake them; their  intellectual life is at a low ebb. In their own words "trials of  every kind," "exterior and interior crosses,"  abound.

[iv.ix-p22]Now "trials," taken[iv.ix-p22.1]  en bloc     ,    mean a disharmony between the self and the world with which it has to  deal. Nothing is a trial when we are able to cope with it efficiently.  Things try us when we are not adequate to them: when they are  abnormally hard or we abnormally weak. This aspect of the matter  becomes prominent when we look further into the history of Madame  Guyon's experiences. Thanks to the unctuous and detailed manner  in which she has analysed her spiritual griefs, this part of her  autobiography is a psychological document of unique importance for the  study of the "Dark Night" as it appears in a devout but  somewhat self-occupied soul.

[iv.ix-p23]As her consciousness of God was gradually  extinguished, a mental and moral chaos seems to have invaded Madame  Guyon and accompanied the more spiritual miseries of her state.  "So soon as I perceived the happiness of any state, or its  beauty, or the necessity of a virtue, it seemed to me that I fell  incessantly into the contrary vice: as if this perception, which  though very rapid was always accompanied by love, were only given to  me that I might experience its opposite. I was given an intense  perception of the purity of God; and so far as my feelings went, I  myself became more and more impure: for in reality this state is very  purifying, but I was far from understanding this. . . . My imagination  was in a state of appalling confusion, and gave me no rest. I could  not speak of Thee, oh my God, for I became utterly stupid; nor could I  even grasp what was said when I heard Thee spoken of. . . . I found  myself hard towards God, insensible to His mercies; I could not  perceive any good thing that I had done in my whole life. The good  appeared to me evil; and--that which is terrible--it seemed  to me that this state must last for ever."   [*791] 

[iv.ix-p25]This world as well as the next seemed leagued against  her. Loss of health and friendship, domestic vexations, increased and  kept pace with her interior griefs. Self-control and power of  attention were diminished. She seemed stupefied and impotent, unable  to follow or understand even the services of the Church, incapable of  all prayer and all good works; perpetually attracted by those worldly  things which she had renounced, yet quickly wearied by them. The neat  edifice of her first mystic life was in [p. 386] [iv.ix-Page_386] ruins, the  state of consciousness which accompanied it was disintegrated, but  nothing arose to take its place.

[iv.ix-p26]"It is an amazing thing," says Madame  Guyon naively, "for a soul that believed herself to be advanced  in the way of perfection, when she sees herself thus go to pieces all  at once."   [*792] 

[iv.ix-p28]So, too, Suso, when he had entered the "upper  school" of the spiritual life, was tormented not only by  temptations and desolations, but by outward trials and disabilities of  every kind: calumnies, misunderstandings, difficulties, pains.  "It seemed at this time as if God had given permission both to  men and demons to torment the Servitor," he says.   [*793]    This sense of a generally inimical atmosphere, and of the dimness and  helplessness of the Ego oppressed by circumstances, is like the vague  distress and nervous sensibility of adolescence, and comes in part  from the same cause: the intervening period of chaos between the  break-up of an old state of equilibrium and the establishment of the  new. The self, in its necessary movement towards higher levels of  reality, loses and leaves behind certain elements of its world, long  loved but now outgrown: as children must make the hard transition from  nursery to school. Destruction and construction here go together: the  exhaustion and ruin of the illuminated consciousness is the signal for  the onward movement of the self towards other centres: the feeling of  deprivation and inadequacy which comes from the loss of that  consciousness is an indirect stimulus to new growth. The self is being  pushed into a new world where it does not feel at home; has not yet  reached the point at which it enters into conscious possession of its  second or adult life.

[iv.ix-p30]"Thou hast been a child at the breast, a spoiled  child," said the Eternal Wisdom to Suso. "Now I will  withdraw all this." In the resulting darkness and confusion,  when the old and known supports are thus withdrawn, the self can do  little but surrender itself to the inevitable process of things: to  the operation of that unresting Spirit of Life which is pressing it on  towards a new and higher state, in which it shall not only see Reality  but   be    real.

[iv.ix-p31]Psychologically, then, the "Dark Night of the  Soul" is due to the double fact of the exhaustion of an old  state, and the growth towards a new state of consciousness. It is a  "growing pain" in the organic process of the self's  attainment of the Absolute. The great mystics, creative geniuses in  the realm of character, have known instinctively how to turn these  psychic disturbances to spiritual profit. Parallel with the mental  oscillations, upheavals and readjustments, through which an unstable  psycho-physical type moves to new centres of consciousness, run the  spiritual oscillations of a striving and ascending spiritual type.  [iv.ix-p31.1]   Gyrans    [p. 387] [iv.ix-Page_387]   gyrando vadit spiritus     .    The machinery of consciousness, over-stretched, breaks up, and seems  to toss the self back to an old and lower level, where it loses its  apprehensions of the transcendental world; as the child, when first it  is forced to stand alone, feels weaker than it did in its  mother's arms.

[iv.ix-p32]"For first He not only withdraws all comfortable  observable infusions of light and grace, but also deprives her of a  power to exercise any perceptible operations of her superior spirit,  and of all comfortable reflections upon His love, plunging her into  the depth of her inferior powers," says Augustine Baker, the  skilled director of souls, here anticipating the modern psychologist.  "Here consequently," he continues, "her former  calmness of passions is quite lost, neither can she introvert herself;  sinful motions and suggestions do violently assault her, and she finds  as great difficulty (if not greater) to surmount them as at the  beginning of a spiritual course. . . . If she would elevate her  spirit, she sees nothing but clouds and darkness. She seeks God, and  cannot find the least marks or footsteps of His Presence; something  there is that hinders her from executing the sinful suggestions within  her but what that is she knows not, for to her thinking she has no  spirit at all, and, indeed, she is now in a region of all other most  distant from spirit and spiritual operations--I mean, such as are  perceptible."   [*794] 

[iv.ix-p34]Such an interval of chaos and misery may last for  months, or even for years, before the consciousness again unifies  itself and a new centre is formed. Moreover, the negative side of this  new centre, this new consciousness of the Absolute, often discloses  itself first. The self realizes, that is to say, the inadequacy of its  old state, long before it grasps the possibility of a new and higher  state. This realization will take two forms; (  a   ) Objective: the distance or absence of the Absolute which the self  seeks, (  b   ) Subjective: the self's weakness and imperfection. Both  apprehensions constitute a direct incentive to action. They present,  as it were, a Divine Negation which the self must probe, combat,  resolve. The Dark Night, therefore, largely the product of natural  causes, is the producer in its turn of mystical energy; and hence of  supernatural effects.

[iv.ix-p35](2) So much for psychology. We have next to consider  the mystical or transcendental aspects of the Dark Night: see what it  has meant for those mystics who have endured it and for those  spiritual specialists who have studied it in the interests of other  men.

[iv.ix-p36]As in other phases of the Mystic Way, so here, we must  beware of any generalization which reduces the "Dark  Night" to a uniform [p. 388] [iv.ix-Page_388] experience; a neatly  defined state which appears under the same conditions, and attended by  the same symptoms, in all the selves who have passed through its  pains. It is a name for the painful and negative state which normally  intervenes between the Illuminative and the Unitive Life--no  more. Different types of contemplatives have interpreted it to  themselves and to us in different ways; each type of illumination  being in fact balanced by its own appropriate type of  "dark."

[iv.ix-p37]In some temperaments it is the emotional  aspect--the anguish of the lover who has suddenly lost the  Beloved--which predominates: in others, the intellectual darkness  and confusion overwhelms everything else. Some have felt it, with St.  John of the Cross, as a "passive purification," a state of  helpless misery, in which the self does nothing, but lets Life have  its way with her. Others, with Suso and the virile mysticism of the  German school, have experienced it rather as a period of strenuous  activity and moral conflict directed to that "total  self-abandonment" which is the essential preparation of the  unitive life. Those elements of character which were unaffected by the  first purification of the self--left as it were in a corner when  the consciousness moved to the level of the illuminated life--are  here roused from their sleep, purged of illusion, and forced to join  the grooving stream.

[iv.ix-p38]The Dark Night, then, is really a deeply human  process, in which the self which thought itself so spiritual, so  firmly established upon the supersensual plane, is forced to turn  back, to leave the Light, and pick up those qualities which it had  left behind. Only thus, by the transmutation of the   whole man,    not by a careful and departmental cultivation of that which we like  to call his "spiritual" side, can Divine Humanity be  formed: and the formation of Divine Humanity--the remaking of man  "according to the pattern showed him in the  mount"--is the mystic's only certain ladder to the  Real. "My humanity," said the Eternal Wisdom to Suso,  "is the road which all must tread who would come to that which  thou seekest."   [*795]    This "hard saying" might almost be used as a test by  which to distinguish the genuine mystic life from its many and  specious imitations. The self in its first purgation has cleansed the  mirror of perception; hence, in its illuminated life, has seen  Reality. In so doing it has transcended the normal perceptive powers  of "natural" man, immersed in the illusions of sense. Now,  it has got to   be    reality: a very different thing. For this a new and more drastic  purgation is needed--not of the organs of perception, but of the  very shrine of self: that "heart" which is the seat of  personality, the source of its love and will. In the stress and  anguish of the Night, when it turns back from the vision [p. 389] [iv.ix-Page_389] of the Infinite to feel again the limitations of the  finite the self loses the power to Do; and learns to surrender its  will to the operation of a larger Life, that it may Be. "At the  end of such a long and cruel transition," says Lucie Christine,  "how much more supple the soul feels itself to be in the Hand of  God, how much more detached from all that is not God! She sees clearly  in herself the fruits of humility and patience, and feels her love  ascending more purely and directly to God in proportion as she has  realized the Nothingness of herself and all things."   [*796] 

[iv.ix-p41]We must remember in the midst of our analysis, that  the mystic life is a life of love: that the Object of the  mystic's final quest and of his constant intuition is an object  of adoration and supreme desire. "With Thee, a prison would be a  rose garden, oh Thou ravisher of hearts: with Thee, Hell would be  Paradise, oh Thou cheerer of souls," said Jalalu 'd Din.   [*797]    Hence for the mystic who has once known the Beatific Vision there can  be no greater grief than the withdrawal of this Object from his field  of consciousness; the loss of this companionship, the extinction of  this Light. Therefore, whatever form the "Dark Night"  assumes, it must entail bitter suffering: far worse than that endured  in the Purgative Way. Then the self was forcibly detached from the  imperfect. Now the Perfect is withdrawn, leaving behind an  overwhelming yet impotent conviction of something supremely wrong,  some final Treasure lost. We will now look at a few of the  characteristic forms under which this conviction is translated to the  surface-consciousness.

[iv.ix-p43]A. To those temperaments in which consciousness of the  Absolute took the form of a sense of divine companionship, and for  whom the objective idea "God" had become the central fact  of life, it seems as though that God, having shown Himself, has now  deliberately withdrawn His Presence, never perhaps to manifest Himself  again. "He acts," says Eckhart, "as if there were a  wall erected between Him and us."   [*798]    The "eye which looked upon Eternity" has closed, the old  dear sense of intimacy and mutual love has given place to a terrible  blank.

[iv.ix-p45]"That which this anguished soul feels most  deeply," says St. John of the Cross, "is the conviction  that God has abandoned it,   of      which it has no doubt;    that He has cast it away into darkness as an abominable thing . . .  the shadow of death and the pains and torments of hell are most  acutely felt, and this comes from the sense of being abandoned by God,  being chastised and cast [p. 390] [iv.ix-Page_390] out by His wrath and heavy  displeasure. All this and even more the soul feels now, for a terrible  apprehension has come upon it that thus it will be with it for ever.  It has also the same sense of abandonment with respect to all  creatures, and that it is an object of contempt to all, especially to  its friends."   [*799] 

[iv.ix-p47]So, too, Madame Guyon felt this loss of her intuitive  apprehension of God as one of the most terrible characteristics of the  "night." "After Thou hadst wounded me so deeply as I  have described, Thou didst begin, oh my God, to withdraw Thyself from  me: and the pain of Thy absence was the more bitter to me, because Thy  presence had been so sweet to me, Thy love so strong in me. . . . Thy  way, oh my God, before Thou didst make me enter into the state of  death, was the way of the dying life: sometimes to hide Thyself and  leave me to myself in a hundred weaknesses, sometimes to show Thyself  with more sweetness and love. The nearer the soul drew to the state of  death, the more her desolations were long and weary, her weaknesses  increased, and also her joys became shorter, but purer and more  intimate, until the time in which she fell into total  privation."   [*800] 

[iv.ix-p49]When this total privation or "mystic  death" is fully established, it involves not only the personal  "Absence of God," but the apparent withdrawal or loss of  that impersonal support, that transcendent Ground or Spark of the  soul, on which the self has long felt its whole real life to be based.  Hence, its very means of contact with the spiritual world vanishes;  and as regards all that matters, it does indeed seem to be  "dead." "When we have reached this total  deprivation," says De Caussade, "what shall we do? Abide  in simplicity and peace, as Job on his ash heap, repeating,  'Blessed are the poor in spirit; those who have nothing have  all, since they have God.' 'Quit all, strip yourself of  all,' says the great Gerson, 'and you will have all in  God.' 'God felt, God tasted and enjoyed,' says  Fenelon, 'is indeed God, but God with those gifts which  flatter the soul. God in darkness, in privation, in forsakenness, in  insensibility, is so much God, that He is so to speak God bare and  alone. . . .' Shall we fear this death, which is to produce in  us the true divine life of grace?"   [*801] 

[iv.ix-p51]B. In those selves for whom the subjective idea  "Sanctity"--the need of conformity between the  individual character and the Transcendent--has been central, the  pain of the Night is less a deprivation than a new and dreadful kind  of lucidity. The vision of the Good brings to the self an abrupt sense  of her own hopeless and helpless imperfection: a black  "conviction of sin," far more bitter than that endured in  the Way of Purgation, which swamps [p. 391] [iv.ix-Page_391] everything else.  "That which makes her pain so terrible is that she is, as it  were, overwhelmed by the purity of God, and this purity makes her see  the least atoms of her imperfections as if they were enormous sins,  because of the infinite distance there is between the purity of God  and the creature."   [*802] 

[iv.ix-p53]"This," says St. John of the Cross again,  "is one of the most bitter sufferings of this purgation. The  soul is conscious of a profound emptiness in itself, a cruel  destitution of the three kinds of goods, natural, temporal, and  spiritual, which are ordained for its comfort. It sees itself in the  midst of the opposite evils, miserable imperfections, dryness and  emptiness of the understanding, and abandonment of the spirit in  darkness."   [*803] 

[iv.ix-p55]C. Often combined with the sense of sin and the  "absence of God" is another negation, not the least  distressing part of the sufferings of the self suddenly plunged into  the Night. This is a complete emotional lassitude: the disappearance  of all the old ardours, now replaced by a callousness, a boredom,  which the self detests but cannot overcome. It is the dismal condition  of spiritual   ennui    which ascetic writers know so well under the name of  "aridity," and which psychologists look upon as the result  of emotional fatigue.   [*804]    It seems incredible that the eager love of a Divine Companion, so  long the focus of the self's whole being should have vanished:  that not only the transcendent vision should be withdrawn, but her  very desire for, and interest in, that vision should grow cold. Yet  the mystics are unanimous in declaring that this is a necessary stage  in the growth of the spiritual consciousness.

[iv.ix-p57]"When the sun begins to decline in the  heavens," says Ruysbroeck, "it enters the sign Virgo;  which is so called because this period of the year is sterile as a  virgin." This is the autumn season in the cycle of the soul,  when the summer heat grows less. "It perfects and fulfils the  yearly travail of the Sun. In the same manner, when Christ, that  glorious sun, has risen to His zenith in the heart of man, as I have  taught in the Third degree, and afterwards begins to decline, to hide  the radiance of His divine sunbeams, and to forsake the man; then the  heat and impatience of love grow less. Now that occultation of Christ,  and the withdrawal of His light and heat, are the first work and the  new coming of this degree. Now Christ says inwardly to this man,   Go ye out in the manner which I now show you:    and the man goes out and finds himself to be poor, miserable, and  abandoned. Here all the storm, the fury, the impatience of his love,  grow cool: glowing summer [p. 392] [iv.ix-Page_392] turns to autumn, all its  riches are transformed into a great poverty. And the man begins to  complain because of his wretchedness: for where now are the ardours of  love, the intimacy, the gratitude, the joyful praise, and the interior  consolation, the secret joy, the sensible sweetness? How have all  these things failed him? And the burning violence of his love, and all  the gifts which he felt before. How has all this died in him? And he  feels like some ignorant man who has lost all his learning and his  works . . . and of this misery there is born the fear of being lost,  and as it were a sort of half-doubt: and this is the lowest point at  which a man can hold his ground without falling into despair."   [*805] 

[iv.ix-p59]D. This stagnation of the emotions has its counterpart  in the stagnation of the will and intelligence, which has been  experienced by some contemplatives as a part of their negative state.  As regards the will, there is a sort of moral dereliction: the self  cannot control its inclinations and thoughts. In the general psychic  turmoil, all the unpurified part of man's inheritance, the lower  impulses and unworthy ideas which have long been imprisoned below the  threshold, force their way into the field of consciousness.  "Every vice was re-awakened within me," says Angela of  Foligno, "I would have chosen rather to be roasted than to  endure such pains."   [*806]    Where visual and auditory automatism is established, these irruptions  from the subliminal region often take the form of evil visions, or of  voices making coarse or sinful suggestions to the self. Thus St.  Catherine of Siena, in the interval between her period of joyous  illumination and her "spiritual marriage," was tormented  by visions of fiends, who filled her cell and "with obscene  words and gestures invited her to lust." She fled from her cell  to the church to escape them, but they pursued her there: and she  obtained no relief from this obsession until she ceased to oppose it.  She cried, "I have chosen suffering for my consolation, and will  gladly bear these and all other torments in the name of the Saviour,  for as long as it shall please His Majesty." With this act of  surrender, the evil vision fled: Catherine swung back to a state of  affirmation, and was comforted by a vision of the Cross.   [*807] 

[iv.ix-p62]An analogous psychological state was experienced by  St. Teresa; though she fails to recognize it as an episode in her  normal development, and attributes it, with other spiritual adventures  for which she can find no other explanation, to the action of the  Devil. "The soul," she says, "laid in fetters, loses  all control over itself, and all power of thinking of anything but the  absurdities he puts before it, which, being more or less  unsubstantial, inconsistent, and [p. 393] [iv.ix-Page_393] disconnected,  serve only to stifle the soul, so that it has no power over itself;  and accordingly--so it seems to me--the devils make a  football of it, and the soul is unable to escape out of their hands.  It is impossible to describe the sufferings of the soul in this state.  It goes about in quest of relief, and God suffers it to find none. The  light of reason, in the freedom of its will, remains, but it is not  clear; it seems to me as if its eyes were covered with a veil. . . .  Temptations seem to press it down, and make it dull, so that its  knowledge of God becomes to it as that of something which it hears of  far away." This dullness and dimness extends to ordinary mental  activity, which shares in the lassitude and disorder of the inner  life. "If it seeks relief from the fire by spiritual reading, it  cannot find any, just as if it could not read at all. On one occasion  it occurred to me to read the life of a saint, that I might forget  myself and be refreshed with the recital of what he had suffered. Four  or five times, I read as many lines, and though they were written in  Spanish, I understood them less at the end than I did when I began: so  I gave it up. It so happened to me on more occasions than one."   [*808]    If we are reminded of anything here, it is of the phenomenon of  "dark contemplation." That dimness of mind which we there  studied, is here extended to the normal activities of the surface  intelligence. The Cloud of Unknowing, rolling up, seems to envelop the  whole self. Contemplation, the "way within the way," has  epitomized the greater process of the mystic life. In both, the path  to Light lies through a meek surrender to the confusion and ignorance  of the "Dark." The stress and exasperation felt in this  dark, this state of vague helplessness, by selves of an active and  self-reliant type, is exhibited by Teresa in one of her half-humorous  self-revealing flashes. "The Devil," she says of it,  "then sends so offensive a spirit of bad temper that I think I  could eat people up!"   [*809] 

[iv.ix-p65]All these types of "darkness," with their  accompanying and overwhelming sensations of impotence and distress,  are common in the lives of the mystics. Suso and Rulman Merswin  experienced them: Tauler constantly refers to them: Angela of Foligno  speaks of a "privation worse than hell." It is clear that  even the joyous spirit of Mechthild of Magdeburg knew the sufferings  of the loss and absence of God. "Lord," she says in one  place, "since Thou hast taken from me all that I had of Thee,  yet of Thy grace leave me the gift which every dog has by nature: that  of being true to Thee in my distress; when I am deprived of all  consolation. This I desire more fervently than Thy heavenly  Kingdom!"   [*810]    In such a saying as this, the whole "value for life" of  the Dark Night is [p. 394] [iv.ix-Page_394] revealed to us: as an education  in selfless constancy, a "school of suffering love."

[iv.ix-p67]E. There is, however, another way in which the  self's sense of a continued imperfection in its relation with  the Absolute--of work yet remaining to be done--expresses  itself. In persons of a very highly strung and mobile type, who tend  to rapid oscillations between pain and pleasure states, rather than to  the long, slow movements of an ascending consciousness, attainment of  the Unitive Life is sometimes preceded by the abrupt invasion of a  wild and unendurable desire to "see God," apprehend the  Transcendent in Its fullness: which can only, they think, be satisfied  by death. As they begin to outgrow their illuminated consciousness,  these selves begin also to realize how partial and symbolic that  consciousness--even at its best--has been: and their  movement to union with God is foreshadowed by a passionate and  uncontrollable longing for ultimate Reality. This passion is so  intense, that it causes acute anguish in those who feel it. It brings  with it all the helpless and desolate feelings of the Dark Night; and  sometimes rises to the heights of a negative rapture, an ecstasy of  deprivation. St. Teresa is perhaps the best instance of this rare  method of apprehending the self's essential separation from its  home; which is also the subject of a celebrated chapter in the  [iv.ix-p67.1]"Traite de l'Amour de  Dieu" of St. Francois de Sales.   [*811]    Thanks to her exceptionally mobile temperament, her tendency to rush  up and down the scale of feeling, Teresa's states of joyous  rapture were often paid for by such a "great  desolation"--a dark ecstasy or "pain of God."  "As long as this pain lasts," she says, "we cannot  even remember our own existence; for in an instant all the faculties  of the soul are so fettered as to lie incapable of any action save  that of increasing our torture. Do not think I am exaggerating; on the  contrary, that which I say is less than the truth, for lack of words  in which it may be expressed. This is a trance of the senses and the  faculties, save as regards all which helps to make the agony more  intense. The understanding realizes acutely what cause there is for  grief in separation from God: and our Lord increases this sorrow by a  vivid manifestation of Himself. The pain thus grows to such a degree  that in spite of herself the sufferer gives vent to loud cries, which  she cannot stifle, however patient and accustomed to pain she may be,  because this is not a pain which is felt in the body, but in the  depths of the soul. The person I speak of learned from this how much  more acutely the spirit is capable of suffering than the body.   [*812] 

[iv.ix-p70]The intense and painful concentration upon the Divine  Absence which takes place in this "dark rapture" often  induces all the [p. 395] [iv.ix-Page_395] psycho-physical marks of ecstasy.  "Although this state lasts but a short time, the limbs seem to  be disjointed by it. The pulse is as feeble as if one were at the  point of death; which is indeed the case, for whilst the natural heat  of the body fails, that which is supernatural so burns the frame that  with a few more degrees God would satisfy the soul's desire for  death. . . . You will say perhaps, that there is imperfection in this  desire to see God: and ask why this soul does not conform herself to  His will, since she has so completely surrendered herself to it.  Hitherto she could do this, and consecrated her life to it; but now  she cannot, for her reason is reduced to such a state that she is no  longer mistress of herself and can think of nothing but her  affliction. Far from her Sovereign Good, why should she desire to  live? She feels an extraordinary loneliness, finds no companionship in  any earthly creature; nor could she I believe among those who dwell in  heaven, since they are not her Beloved. Meanwhile all company is  torture to her. She is like a person suspended in mid-air, who can  neither touch the earth, nor mount to heaven. She burns with a  consuming thirst, and cannot reach the water. And this is a thirst  which cannot be borne, but one which nothing will quench: nor would  she have it quenched with any other water than that of which our Lord  spoke to the Samaritan woman; and this water is denied her."   [*813] 

[iv.ix-p72]All these forms of the Dark Night--the  "Absence of God," the sense of sin, the dark ecstasy, the  loss of the self's old passion, peace, and joy, and its apparent  relapse to lower spiritual and mental levels--are considered by  the mystics themselves to constitute aspects or parts of one and the  same process: the final purification of the will or stronghold of  personality, that it may be merged without any reserve "in God  where it was first." The function of this episode of the Mystic  Way is to cure the soul of the innate tendency to seek and rest in  spiritual joys; to confuse Reality with the joy given by the  contemplation of Reality. It is the completion of that ordering of  disordered loves, that trans-valuation of values, which the Way of  Purgation began. The ascending self must leave these childish  satisfactions; make its love absolutely disinterested, strong, and  courageous, abolish all taint of spiritual gluttony. A total  abandonment of the individualistic standpoint, of that trivial and  egotistic quest of personal satisfaction which thwarts the great  movement of the Flowing Light, is the supreme condition of man's  participation in Reality. Thus is true not only of the complete  participation which is possible to the great mystic, but of those  unselfish labours in which the initiates of science or of art become  to the Eternal Goodness [p. 396] [iv.ix-Page_396] "what his own hand is  to a man." "Think not," says Tauler, "that God  will be always caressing His children, or shine upon their head, or  kindle their hearts as He does at the first. He does so only to lure  us to Himself, as the falconer lures the falcon with its gay hood. . .  . We must stir up and rouse ourselves and be content to leave off  learning, and no more enjoy feeling and warmth, and must now serve the  Lord with strenuous industry and at our own cost."   [*814] 

[iv.ix-p74]This manly view of the Dark Night, as a growth in  responsibility--an episode of character-building--in which,  as "The Mirror of Simple Souls" has it, "the soul  leaves that pride and play wherein it was full gladsome and  jolly," is characteristic of the German mystics. We find it  again in Suso, to whom the angel of his tribulation gave no  sentimental consolations; but only the stern command, [iv.ix-p74.1]  "Viriliter agite   "--"Be a man!" "Then  first," says Tauler again, "do we attain to the fullness  of God's love as His children, when it is no longer happiness or  misery, prosperity or adversity, that draws us to Him or keeps us back  from Him. What we should then experience none can utter; but it would  be something far better than when we were burning with the first flame  of love, and had great emotion, but less true submission."   [*815] 

[iv.ix-p76]In Illumination, the soul, basking in the Uncreated  Light, identified the Divine Nature with the divine light and  sweetness which it then enjoyed. Its consciousness of the transcendent  was chiefly felt as an increase of personal vision and personal joy.  Thus, in that apparently selfless state, the "I, the Me, the  Mine," though spiritualized, still remained intact. The  mortification of the senses was more than repaid by the rich and happy  life which this mortification conferred upon the soul. But before real  and permanent union with the Absolute can take place: before the whole  self can learn to live on those high levels where--its being  utterly surrendered to the Infinite Will--it can be wholly  transmuted in God, merged in the great life of the All, this  dependence on personal joys must be done away. The spark of the soul,  the fast-growing germ of divine humanity, must so invade every corner  of character that the self can only say with St. Catherine of Genoa,  "My   me    is God: nor do I know my selfhood except in God."   [*816] 

[iv.ix-p78]The various torments and desolations of the Dark Night  constitute this last and drastic purgation of the spirit; the doing  away of separateness, the annihilation of selfhood, even though all  that self now claims for its own be the Love of God. Such a  claim--which is really a claim to entire felicity, since the soul  which possesses it needs nothing more--is felt by these great  spirits to [p. 397] [iv.ix-Page_397] sully the radiance of their self-giving  love. "All that I would here say of these inward delights and  enjoyments," says William Law, "is only this; they are not  holiness, they are not piety, they are not perfection; but they are  God's gracious allurements and calls to seek after holiness and  spiritual perfection . . . and ought rather to convince us that we are  as yet but   babes,    than that we are ready   men    of God. . . . This alone is the true Kingdom of God opened in the  soul when, stripped of all selfishness, it has only one love and one  will in it; when it has no motion or desire but what branches from the  Love of God, and resigns itself wholly to the Will of God. . . . To  sum up all in a word: Nothing hath separated us from God but our own  will, or rather our own will is our separation from God. All the  disorder and corruption and malady of our nature lies in a certain  fixedness of our own will, imagination, and desire, wherein we live to  ourselves, are our own centre and circumference, act wholly from  ourselves, according to our own will, imagination, and desires. There  is not the smallest degree of evil in us but what arises from this  selfishness because we are thus all in all to ourselves. . . . To be  humble, mortified, devout, patient in a certain degree, and to be  persecuted for our virtues, is no hurt to this selfishness; nay,   spiritual-self    must have all these virtues to subsist upon, and his life consists in  seeing, knowing and feeling the bulk, strength, and reality of them.  But still, in all this show and glitter of virtue, there is an  unpurified bottom on which they stand, there is a selfishness which  can no more enter into the Kingdom of Heaven than the grossness of  flesh and blood can enter into it. What we are to feel and undergo in  these last purifications, when the deepest root of all selfishness, as  well spiritual as natural, is to be plucked up and torn from us, or  how we shall be able to stand in that trial, are both of them equally  impossible to be known by us beforehand."   [*817] 

[iv.ix-p80]The self, then, has got to learn to cease to be its  "own centre and circumference": to make that final  surrender which is the price of final peace. In the Dark Night the  starved and tortured spirit learns through an anguish which is  "itself an orison" to accept lovelessness for the sake of  Love, Nothingness for the sake of the All; dies without any sure  promise of life, loses when it hardly hopes to find. It sees with  amazement the most sure foundations of its transcendental life crumble  beneath it, dwells in a darkness which seems to hold no promise of a  dawn. This is what the German mystics call the "upper school of  true resignation" or of "suffering love"; the last  test of heroic detachment, of manliness, of spiritual courage. Though  such an experience is [p. 398] [iv.ix-Page_398] "passive" in the  sense that the self can neither enter nor leave it at will it is a  direct invitation to active endurance, a condition of stress in which  work is done. Thus, when St. Catherine of Siena was tormented by  hideous visions of sin, she was being led by her deeper self to the  heroic acceptance of this subtle form of torture, almost unendurable  to her chaste and delicate mind. When these trials had brought her to  the point at which she ceased to resist them, but exclaimed, "I  have chosen suffering for my consolation," their business was  done. They ceased. More significant still, when she asked,  "Where wast Thou, Lord, when I was tormented by this  foulness?" the Divine Voice answered, "I was in thy  heart."   [*818] 

[iv.ix-p82]"In order to raise the soul from  imperfection," said the Voice of God to St. Catherine in her  Dialogue, "I withdraw Myself from her sentiment, depriving her  of former consolations . . . which I do in order to humiliate her, and  cause her to seek Me in truth, and to prove her in the light of faith,  so that she come to prudence. Then, if she love Me without thought of  self, and with lively faith and with hatred of her own sensuality, she  rejoices in the time of trouble, deeming herself unworthy of peace and  quietness of mind. Now comes the second of the three things of which I  told thee, that is to say: how the soul arrives at perfection, and  what she does when she is perfect. That is what she does. Though she  perceives that I have withdrawn Myself, she does not, on that account,  look back; but perseveres with humility in her exercises, remaining  barred in the house of self-knowledge, and, continuing to dwell  therein, awaits with lively faith the coming of the Holy Spirit, that  is of Me, who am the Fire of Love. . . . This is what the soul does in  order to rise from imperfection and arrive at perfection, and it is to  this end, namely, that she may arrive at perfection, that I withdraw  from her, not by grace, but by sentiment. Once more do I leave her so  that she may see and know her defects, so that feeling herself  deprived of consolation and afflicted by pain, she may recognize her  own weakness, and learn how incapable she is of stability or  perseverance, thus cutting down to the very root of spiritual  self-love: for this should be the end and purpose of all her  self-knowledge, to rise above herself, mounting the throne of  conscience, and not permitting the sentiment of imperfect love to turn  again in its death-struggle, but with correction and reproof digging  up the root of self-love with the knife of self-hatred and the love of  virtue."   [*819] 

[iv.ix-p84]"Digging up the root of self-love with the knife  of self-hatred"--here we see the mystical reason of that  bitter self-contempt and sense of helplessness which overwhelms the  soul in the Dark Night.

[iv.ix-p85]Such a sense of helplessness is really, the mystics  say, a mark of [p. 399] [iv.ix-Page_399] progress: of deeper initiation into  that sphere of reality to which it is not yet acclimatized, and which  brings with it a growing consciousness of the appalling disparity  between that Reality, that Perfection, and the imperfect soul.

[iv.ix-p86]The self is in the dark because it is blinded by a  Light greater than it can bear--that "Divine Wisdom which  is not only night and darkness to the soul, but pain and torment  too." "The more clear the light, the more does it blind  the eyes of the owl, and the more we try to look at the sun the  feebler grows our sight and the more our weak eyes are darkened. So  the divine light of contemplation, when it beats on the soul not yet  perfectly purified, fills it with spiritual darkness, not only because  of its brilliance, but because it paralyses the natural perception of  the soul. The pain suffered by the soul is like that endured by weak  or diseased eyes when suddenly struck by a strong light. Such  suffering is intense when the yet unpurified soul finds itself invaded  by this cleansing light. For in this pure light, which attacks its  impurities to expel them, the soul perceives itself to be so unclean  and miserable that it seems as if God had set Himself against it. . .  . Wonderful and piteous sight! so great are the weakness and  imperfection of the soul that the hand of God, so soft and so gentle,  is felt to be so heavy and oppressive, though merely touching it, and  that, too, most mercifully; for He touches the soul, not to chastise  it, but to load it with His graces."   [*820] 

[iv.ix-p88]The Dark Night then, whichever way we look at it, is a  state of disharmony; of imperfect adaptation to environment. The self,  unaccustomed to that direct contact of the Absolute which is destined  to become the Source of its vitality and its joy, feels the  "soft and gentle touch" of the Following Love as  unbearable in its weight. The "self-naughting" or  "purification of the will," which here takes place, is the  struggle to resolve that disharmony; to purge away the somewhat which  still sets itself up in the soul as separate from the Divine, and  makes the clear light of reality a torment instead of a joy. So deeply  has the soul now entered into the great stream of spiritual life, so  dominant has her transcendental faculty become, that this process is  accomplished in her whether she will or no: and in this sense it is,  as ascetic writers sometimes call it, a "passive  purgation." So long as the subject still feels himself to be   somewhat,    he has not yet annihilated selfhood and come to that ground where his  being can be united with the Being of God.

[iv.ix-p89]Only when he learns to cease thinking of himself at  all, in however depreciatory a sense; when he abolishes even such  selfhood as lies in a desire for the sensible presence of God, will  that [p. 400] [iv.ix-Page_400] harmony be attained. This is the  "naughting of the soul," the utter surrender to the great  movement of the Absolute Life, which is insisted upon at such length  by all writers upon mysticism. Here, as in purgation, the condition of  access to higher levels of vitality is a death: a deprivation, a  detachment, a clearing of the ground. Poverty leaps to the Cross: and  finds there an utter desolation, without promise of spiritual reward.  The satisfactions of the spirit must now go the same way as the  satisfactions of the senses. Even the power of voluntary sacrifice and  self-discipline is taken away. A dreadful   ennui,    a dull helplessness, takes its place. The mystic motto,   I am nothing, I have nothing, I desire nothing,    must now express not only the detachment of the senses, but the whole  being's surrender to the All.

[iv.ix-p90]The moral condition towards which the interior travail  is directed is that of an utter humility. "Everything  depends," says Tauler, on "a fathomless sinking in a  fathomless nothingness." He continues, "If a man were to  say, 'Lord, who art Thou, that I must follow Thee through such  deep, gloomy, miserable paths?' the Lord would reply, 'I  am God and Man, and far more God.' If a man could answer then,  really and consciously from the bottom of his heart. 'Then I am  nothing and less than nothing'; all would be accomplished, for  the Godhead has really no place to work in, but ground where all has  been annihilated.   [*821]    As the schoolmen say, when a new form is to come into existence, the  old must of necessity be destroyed. . . . And so I say: 'If a  man is to be thus clothed upon with this Being, all the forms must of  necessity be done away that were ever received by him in all his  powers--of perception, knowledge, will, work, of subjection,  sensibility and self-seeking.' When St. Paul saw nothing, he saw  God. So also when Elias wrapped his face in his mantle, God came. All  strong rocks are broken here, all on which the spirit can rest must be  done away. Then, when all forms have ceased to exist, in the twinkling  of an eye the man is transformed. Therefore thou must make an  entrance. Thereupon speaks the Heavenly Father to him: "Thou  shalt call Me Father, and shalt never cease to enter in; entering ever  further in, ever nearer, so as to sink the deeper in an unknown and  unnamed abyss; and, above all ways, images and forms, and above all  powers, to lose thyself, deny thyself, and even unform thyself.'  In this lost condition nothing is to be seen but a ground which rests  upon itself, everywhere one Being, one Life. It is thus, man may say,  that he becomes unknowing, unloving, and senseless."   [*822] 

[iv.ix-p93]It is clear that so drastic a process of unselfing is  not likely [p. 401] [iv.ix-Page_401] to take place without stress. It is the  negative aspect of "deification": in which the self,  deprived of "perception, knowledge, will, work,  self-seeking"--the I, the Me, the Mine--loses itself,  denies itself, unforms itself, drawing "ever nearer" to  the One, till "nothing is to be seen but a ground which rests  upon itself"--the ground of the soul, in which it has union  with God.

[iv.ix-p94]"Everywhere one Being, one  Life"--this is the goal of mystical activity; the final  state of equilibrium towards which the self is moving, or rather  struggling, in the dimness and anguish of the Dark Night. "The  soul," says Madame Guyon in a passage of unusual beauty,  "after many a redoubled death, expires at last in the arms of  Love; but she is unable to perceive these arms. . . . Then, reduced to  Nought, there is found in her ashes a seed of immortality, which is  preserved in these ashes and will germinate in its season. But she  knows not this; and does not expect ever to see herself living  again." Moreover, "the soul which is reduced to the  Nothing, ought to dwell therein; without wishing, since she is now but  dust, to issue from this state, nor, as before, desiring to live  again. She must remain as something which no longer exists: and this,  in order that the Torrent may drown itself and lose itself in the Sea,  never to find itself in its selfhood again: that it may become one and  the same thing with the Sea."   [*823] 

[iv.ix-p96]So Hilton says of the "naughted soul,"  "the less it thinketh that it loveth or seeth God, the nearer it  nigheth for to perceive the gift of the blessed love. For then is love  master, and worketh in the soul, and maketh it for to forget itself,  and for to see and behold only how love doth. And then is the soul  more suffering than doing, and that is clean love."   [*824] 

[iv.ix-p98]The "mystic death" or Dark Night is  therefore an aspect or incident of the transition from multiplicity to  Unity, of that mergence and union of the soul with the Absolute which  is the whole object of the mystical evolution of man. It is the last  painful break with the life of illusion, the tearing away of the self  from that World of Becoming in which all its natural affections and  desires are rooted, to which its intellect and senses correspond; and  the thrusting of it into that World of Being where at first, weak and  blinded, it can but find a wilderness, a "dark." No  transmutation without fire, say the alchemists: No cross, no crown,  says the Christian. All the great experts of the spiritual life  agree--whatever their creeds, their symbols, their  explanations--in describing this stress, tribulation, and  loneliness, as an essential part of the way from the Many to the One;  bringing the self to the threshold of that completed life which is to  be lived in intimate union with [p. 402] [iv.ix-Page_402] Reality. It is the  Entombment which precedes the Resurrection, say the Christian mystics;  ever ready to describe their life-process in the language of their  faith. Here as elsewhere--but nowhere else in so drastic a  sense--the self must "lose to find and die to  live."

[iv.ix-p99]The Dark Night, as we have seen, tends to establish  itself gradually; the powers and intuitions of the self being  withdrawn one after another, the intervals of lucidity becoming rarer,  until the "mystic death" or state of total deprivation is  reached. So, too, when the night begins to break down before the  advance of the new or Unitive Life, the process is generally slow,  though it may be marked--as for instance in Rulman  Merswin's case--by visions and ecstasies.   [*825]    One after another, the miseries and disharmonies of the Dark Night  give way: affirmation takes the place of negation: the Cloud of  Unknowing is pierced by rays of light.

[iv.ix-p101]The act of complete surrender then, which is the term  of the Dark Night, has given the self its footing in Eternity: its  abandonment of the old centres of consciousness has permitted movement  towards the new. In each such forward movement, the Transcendental  Self, that spark of the soul which is united to the Absolute Life, has  invaded more and more the seat of personality; stage by stage the  remaking of the self in conformity with the Eternal World has gone on.  In the misery and apparent stagnation of the Dark Night--that  dimness of the spiritual consciousness, that dullness of its will and  love--work has been done, and the last great phase of the inward  transmutation accomplished. The self which comes forth from the night  is no separated self, conscious of the illumination of the Uncreated  Light, but the New Man, the transmuted humanity, whose life is   one    with the Absolute Life of God. "As soon as the two houses of  the soul [the sensual and the spiritual]," says St. John of the  Cross, "are tranquil and confirmed and merged in one by this  peace, and their servants the powers, appetites and passions are sunk  in deep tranquillity, neither troubled by things above nor things  below, the Divine Wisdom immediately unites itself to the soul in a  new bond of loving possession, and that is fulfilled which is written  in the Book of Wisdom: 'While all things were immersed in quiet  silence, and the night was in the midway of her course, Thy omnipotent  Word sallied out of heaven from the royal seats' ([iv.ix-p101.1][iv.ix-p101.1]). The same truth is set before us in the Canticle, where the Bride,  after passing by those who took her veil away and wounded her, saith,  'When I had a little passed by them I found Him Whom my soul  loveth' ([iv.ix-p101.2][iv.ix-p101.2])."   [*826] 

[iv.ix-p103]* * * * *

[iv.ix-p104][p. 403] [iv.ix-Page_403] So far, we have considered the Dark  Night of the Soul from a somewhat academic point of view. We have  tried to dissect and describe it: have seen it through the medium of  literature rather than life. Such a method has obvious disadvantages  when dealing with any organic process: and when it is applied to the  spiritual life of man, these disadvantages are increased. Moreover,  our chief example, "from the life," Madame Guyon, valuable  as her passion for self analysis makes her to the student of mystic  states cannot be looked upon as a satisfactory witness. Her morbid  sentimentalism, her absurd "spiritual self-importance"  have to be taken into account and constantly remembered in estimating  the value of her psychological descriptions. If we want to get a true  idea of the Dark Night, as an episode in the history of a living soul,  we must see it in its context, as part of that soul's total  experience. We must study the reactions of a self which is passing  through this stage of development upon its normal environment the  content of its diurnal existence; not only on its intuition of the  Divine.

[iv.ix-p105]As a pendant to this chapter, then, we will look at  this "state of pain" as it expressed itself in the life of  a mystic whose ardent, impressionable, and poetic nature reacted to  every aspect of the contemplative experience, every mood and  fluctuation of the soul. I choose this particular case--the case  of Suso--(1) because it contains many interesting and  unconventional elements; showing us the Dark Night not as a series of  specific moods and events, but as a phase of growth largely  conditioned by individual temperament: (2) because, being told at  first hand, in the pages of his singularly ingenuous autobiography,  the record is comparatively free from the reverent and corrupting  emendations of the hagiographer.

[iv.ix-p106]From the 22nd chapter onwards, Suso's  "Life" is one of the most valuable documents we possess  for the study of this period of the Mystic Way. We see in  it--more clearly perhaps than its author can have done--the  remaking of his consciousness, his temperamental reactions to the  ceaseless travail of his deeper self: so different in type from those  of St. Teresa and Madame Guyon. There is a note of virile activity  about these trials and purifications, an insistence upon the heroic  aspect of the spiritual life, far more attractive than Madame  Guyon's elaborate discourses on resignation and holy passivity,  or even St. Teresa's "dark ecstasies" of insatiable  desire.

[iv.ix-p107]The chapter in which Suso's entrance into this  "Second Mystic Life" of deprivation is described is called  "How the Servitor was led into the School of True  Resignation." Characteristically, this inward experience  expressed itself in a series of dramatic visions; [p. 404] [iv.ix-Page_404]  visions of that "dynamic" kind which we have noticed as a  frequent accompaniment of the crisis in which the mystic self moves to  a new level of consciousness.   [*827]    It followed the long period of constant mortification and  intermittent illumination which lasted, as he tells us, from his  eighteenth to his fortieth year: and constituted the first cycle of  his spiritual life. At the end of that time, "God showed him  that all this severity and these penances were but a good beginning,  that by these he had triumphed over the unruly sensual man: but that  now he must exert himself in another manner if he desired to advance  in the Way."   [*828]    In two of these visions--these vivid interior dramas--we  seem to see Suso's developed mystical consciousness running  ahead of its experience, reading the hidden book of its own future,  probing its own spiritual necessities; and presenting the results to  the backward and unwilling surface-mind. This growing mystic  consciousness is already aware of fetters which the normal Suso does  not feel. Its eyes open upon the soul's true country, it sees  the path which it must tread to perfect freedom; the difference  between the quality of that freedom, and the spirituality which Suso  thinks that he has attained. The first of these visions is that of the  Upper School; the second is that in which he is called to put upon him  the armour of a knight.

[iv.ix-p110]"One night after matins, the Servitor being  seated in his chair, and plunged in deep thought, he was rapt from his  senses. And it seemed to him that he saw in a vision a magnificent  young man descend from Heaven before him, and say, "thou hast  been long enough in the Lower School, and hast there sufficiently  applied thyself. Come, then, with me; and I will introduce thee into  the highest school that exists in this world.   [*829]    There, thou shalt apply thyself to the study of that science which  will procure thee the veritable peace of God; and which will bring thy  holy beginning to a happy end.' Then the Servitor rose, full of  joy; and it seemed to him that the young man took him by the hand and  led him into a spiritual country, wherein there was a fair house  inhabited by spiritual men: for here lived those who applied  themselves to the study of this science. As soon as he entered it,  these received him kindly, and amiably saluted him. And at once they  went to the supreme Master, and told him that a man was come, who  desired to be his disciple and to learn his science. And he said,  'Let him [p. 405] [iv.ix-Page_405] come before me, that I may see  whether he please me.' And when the supreme Master saw the  Servitor, he smiled on him very kindly, and said, 'Know that  this guest is able to become a good disciple of our high science, if  he will bear with patience the hard probation: for it is necessary  that he be tried inwardly.'

[iv.ix-p112]"The Servitor did not then understand these  enigmatic words. He turned toward the young man who had brought him  and asked, 'Well, my dear comrade, what then is this Upper  School and this science of which you have spoken to me?' The  young man replied thus: 'In this Upper School they teach the  science of Perfect Self-abandonment; that is to say, that a man is  here taught to renounce himself so utterly that, in all those  circumstances in which God is manifested, either by Himself or in His  creatures, the man applies himself only to remaining calm and unmoved  renouncing so far as is possible all human frailty.' And shortly  after this discourse, the Servitor came to himself . . . and, talking  to himself, he said, 'Examine thyself inwardly and thou wilt see  that thou hast still much self-will: thou wilt observe, that with all  thy mortifications which thou hast inflicted on thyself, thou canst  not yet endure external vexations. Thou art like a hare hiding in a  bush, who is frightened by the whispering of the leaves. Thou also art  frightened every day by the griefs that come to thee: thou dost turn  pale at the sight of those who speak against thee: when thou doest  fear to succumb, thou takest flight; when thou oughtest to present  thyself with simplicity, thou dost hide thyself. When they praise  thee, thou art happy: when they blame thee, thou art sad. Truly is it  very needful for thee that thou shouldst go to an Upper School."   [*830] 

[iv.ix-p114]Some weeks later, when he had been rejoicing in the  new bodily comfort which resulted from his relinquishment of all  outward mortifications, Suso received a still more pointed lesson on  his need of moral courage. He was sitting on his bed and meditating on  the words of Job [iv.ix-p114.1]  "Militia est."   "The life of man upon the earth is like unto  that of a knight":   [*831]    "and during this meditation, he was once more rapt from his  senses, and it seemed to him that he saw coming towards him a fair  youth of manly bearing, who held in his hands the spurs and the other  apparel which knights are accustomed to wear. And he drew near to the  Servitor, and clothed him in a coat of mail, and said to him,  'Oh, knight! hitherto thou hast been but a squire, but now it is  God's will that thou be raised to knighthood.' And the  Servitor gazed at his spurs, and said with much amazement in his  heart, 'Alas, my God! what has befallen me? what have I become?  must I indeed be a knight? I had far rather remain in peace.'  Then he [p. 406] [iv.ix-Page_406] said to the young man, 'Since it is  God's will that I should be a knight I had rather have won my  spurs in battle; for this would have been more glorious.' The  young man turned away and began to laugh: and said to him, 'Have  no fear! thou shalt have battles enough. He who would play a valiant  part in the spiritual chivalry of God must endure more numerous and  more dreadful combats than any which were encountered by the proud  heroes of ancient days, of whom the world tells and sings the knightly  deeds. It is not that God desires to free thee from thy burdens; He  would only change them and make them far heavier than they have ever  been.' Then the Servitor said, 'Oh, Lord, show me my pains  in advance, in order that I may know them.' The Lord replied,  'No, it is better that thou know nothing, lest thou shouldst  hesitate. But amongst the innumerable pains which thou wilt have to  support, I will tell thee three. The first is this. Hitherto it is  thou who hast scourged thyself, with thine own hands: thou didst cease  when it seemed good to thee, and thou hadst compassion on thyself.  Now, I would take thee from thyself, and cast thee without defence  into the hands of strangers who shall scourge thee. Thou shalt see the  ruin of thy reputation. Thou shalt be an object of contempt to blinded  men; and thou shalt suffer more from this than from the wounds made by  the points of thy cross.   [*832]    When thou didst give thyself up to thy penances thou wert exalted and  admired. Now thou shalt be abased and annihilated. The second pain is  this: Although thou didst inflict on thyself many cruel tortures,  still by God's grace there remained to thee a tender and loving  disposition. It shall befall thee, that there where thou hadst thought  to find a special and a faithful love, thou shalt find nought but  unfaithfulness, great sufferings, and great griefs. Thy trials shall  be so many that those men who have any love for thee shall suffer with  thee by compassion. The third pain is this: hitherto thou hast been  but a child at the breast, a spoiled child. Thou hast been immersed in  the divine sweetness like a fish in the sea. Now I will withdraw all  this. It is my will that thou shouldst be deprived of it, and that  thou suffer from this privation, that thou shouldst be abandoned of  God and of man, that thou shouldst be publicly persecuted by the  friends of thine enemies. I will tell it thee in a word: all thou  shalt undertake, that might bring thee joy and consolation, shall come  to nothing, and all that might make thee suffer and be vexatious to  thee shall succeed.'"   [*833] 

[iv.ix-p118]Observe here, under a highly poetic and visionary  method of presentation, the characteristic pains of the Dark Night as  [p. 407] [iv.ix-Page_407] described by St. John of the Cross, Madame Guyon,  De Caussade and almost every expert who has written upon this state of  consciousness. Desolation and loneliness, abandonment by God and by  man, a tendency of everything to "go wrong," a profusion  of unsought trials and griefs--all are here. Suso, naturally  highly strung, sensitive and poetic, suffered acutely in this mental  chaos and multiplication of woes. He was tormented by a deep  depression so that "it seemed as though a mountain weighed on  his heart" by doubts against faith: by temptations to despair.   [*834]    These miseries lasted for about ten years. They were diversified and  intensified by external trials, such as illnesses and false  accusations; and relieved, as the years of purgation had been, by  occasional visions and revelations.

[iv.ix-p120]Suso's natural tendency was to an enclosed life:  to secret asceticism, reverie, outbursts of fervent devotion, long  hours of rapt communion with the Eternal Wisdom whom he loved. At once  artist and recluse, utterly unpractical, he had all the  dreamer's dread of the world of men. His deeper self now ran  counter to all these preferences. Like the angel which said to him in  the hour of his utmost prostration and misery, [iv.ix-p120.1]"  Viriliter agite!"      [*835]   it pressed him inexorably towards the more manly part; pushing him to  action, sending him out from his peaceful if uncomfortable cell to the  rough-and-tumble of the world. Poor Suso was little fitted by nature  for that rough-and-tumble: and a large part of his autobiography is  concerned with the description of all that he endured therein. The  Dark Night for him was emphatically an "active night"; and  the more active he was forced to be, the darker and more painful it  became. Chapter after chapter is filled with the troubles of the  unhappy Servitor; who, once he began to meddle with practical life,  soon disclosed his native simplicity and lost the reputation for  wisdom and piety which he had gained during his years of  seclusion.

[iv.ix-p122]There was not in Suso that high-hearted gaiety, that  child-like courage, which made the early Franciscans delight to call  themselves God's fools. The bewildered lover of the Eternal  Wisdom suffered acutely from his loss of dignity; from the  unfriendliness and contempt of other men. He gives a long and dismal  catalogue of the enemies that he made, the slanders which he endured,  in the slow acquirement of that disinterested and knightly valour  which had been revealed to him as the essential virtue of the squire  who would "ride with the Eternal Wisdom in the lists."   [*836] 

[iv.ix-p124]Suso was a born romantic. This dream of a spiritual  chivalry [p. 408] [iv.ix-Page_408] haunts him: again and again he uses the  language of the tournament in his description of the mystic life. Yet  perhaps few ideals seem less appropriate to this timid, highly-strung,  unpractical Dominican friar: this ecstatic "minnesinger of the  Holy Ghost," half-poet, half-metaphysician, racked by  ill-health, exalted by mystical ardours, instinctively fearing the  harsh contact of his fellow-men.

[iv.ix-p125]There is no grim endurance about Suso: he feels every  hard knock, and all the instincts of his nature are in favour of  telling his griefs. A more human transcendentalist has never lived.  Thanks to the candour and completeness with which he takes his readers  into his confidence, we know him far more intimately than we do any of  the other great contemplatives. There is one chapter in his life in  which he describes with the utmost ingenuousness how he met a  magnificent knight whilst crossing the Lake of Constance; and was  deeply impressed by his enthusiastic descriptions of the glories and  dangers of the lists. The conversation between the tough man at arms  and the hypersensitive mystic is full of revealing touches. Suso is  exalted and amazed by the stories of hard combats, the courage of the  knights, and the ring for which they contend: but most astounded by  the fortitude which pays no attention to its wounds.

[iv.ix-p126]"And may not one weep, and show that one is  hurt, when one is hit very hard?" he says.

[iv.ix-p127]The knight replies, "No, even though one's  heart fails, as happens to many, one must never show that one is  distressed. One must appear gay and happy; otherwise one is  dishonoured, and loses at the same time one's reputation and the  Ring."

[iv.ix-p128]"These words made the Servitor thoughtful; and  he was greatly moved, and inwardly sighing he said, 'Oh Lord, if  the knights of this world must suffer so much to obtain so small a  prize, how just it is that we should suffer far more if we are to  obtain an eternal recompense! Oh, my sweet Lord, if only I were worthy  of being Thy spiritual knight!"

[iv.ix-p129]Arrived at his destination, however, Suso was visited  by fresh trials: and soon forgetting his valiant declarations, he  began as usual to complain of his griefs. The result was a visionary  ecstasy, in which he heard the voice of that deeper self to which he  always attributed a divine validity, inquiring with ill-concealed  irony, "Well, what has become of that noble chivalry? Who is  this knight of straw, this rag-made man? It is not by making rash  promises and drawing back when suffering comes, that men win the Ring  of Eternity which you desire."

[iv.ix-p130]"Alas! Lord," said Suso plaintively,  "the tournaments in which one must suffer for Thee last such a  very long time!" [p. 409] [iv.ix-Page_409]

[iv.ix-p131]The voice replied, "But the reward, the honour,  and the Ring which I give to My knights endure for ever."   [*837] 

[iv.ix-p140]As his mystic consciousness grew, the instinct  pressing him towards action and endurance grew with it. The inner  voice and its visionary expression urged him on remorselessly. It  mocked his weakness, encouraged him to more active suffering, more  complete self-renunciation: more contact with the unfriendly world.   Viriliter agile!    He must be a complete personality; a whole man. Instead of the quiet  cell, the secret mortifications, his selfhood was to be stripped from  him, and the reality of his renunciation tested, under the  unsympathetic and often inimical gaze of other men. The case of Suso  is one that may well give pause to those who regard the mystic life as  a progress in passivity, withdrawal from the actual world: and the  "Dark Night" as one of its most morbid manifestations.

[iv.ix-p141]It is interesting to observe how completely human and  apparently "unmystical" was the culminating trial by which  Suso was "perfected in the school of true resignation."  "None can come to the sublime heights of the divinity,"  said the Eternal Wisdom to him in one of his visions, "or taste  its ineffable sweetness, if first they have not experienced the  bitterness and lowliness of My humanity. The higher they climb without  passing by My humanity, the lower afterward shall be their fall. My  humanity is the road which all must tread who would come to that which  thou seekest: My sufferings are the door by which all must come  in."   [*838]    It was by the path of humanity; by some of the darkest and most  bitter trials of human experience, the hardest tests of its patience  and love, that Suso "came in" to that sustained peace of  heart and union with the divine will which marked his last state. The  whole tendency of these trials in the "path of humanity"  seems, as we look at them, to be directed towards the awakening of  those elements of character left dormant by the rather specialized  disciplines and purifications of his cloistered life. We seem to see  the "new man" invading all the resistant or inactive  corners of personality: the Servitor of Wisdom being pressed against  his will to a deeply and widely human life in the interests of Eternal  [p. 410] [iv.ix-Page_410] Love. The absence of God whom he loved, the enmity  of man whom he feared, were the chief forces brought to play upon him:  and we watch his slow growth, under their tonic influence, in courage,  humility, and fraternal love.

[iv.ix-p143]Few chapters in the history of the mystics are more  touching than that passage in Suso's Life.   [*839]    "Where we speak of an extraordinary Trial which the Servitor  had to bear." It tells how a malicious woman accused him of  being the father of her child, and succeeded for the time in entirely  destroying his reputation. "And the scandal was all the  greater," says the Servitor with his customary simplicity  "because the rumour of that brother's sanctity had spread  so far." Poor Suso was utterly crushed by this calumny,  "wounded to the depths of his heart." "Lord,  Lord!" he cried, "every day of my life I have worshipped  Thy holy Name in many places, and have helped to cause it to be loved  and honoured by many men: and now Thou wouldst drag my name through  the mud!" When the scandal was at its height, a woman of the  neighbourhood came to him in secret; and offered to destroy the child  which was the cause of this gossip, in order that the tale might be  more quickly forgotten and his reputation restored. She said further  that unless the baby were somehow disposed of, he would certainly be  forced by public opinion to accept it, and provide for its upbringing.  Suso, writhing as he was under the contempt of the whole  neighbourhood, the apparent ruin of his career--knowing, too,  that this slander of one of their leaders must gravely injure the  reputation of the Friends of God--was able to meet the temptation  with a noble expression of trust. "I have confidence in the God  of Heaven, Who is rich, and Who has given me until now all that which  was needful unto me. He will help me to keep, if need be, another  beside myself." And then he said to his temptress, "Go,  fetch the little child that I may see it."

[iv.ix-p145]"And when he had the baby, he put it on his  knees and looked at it: and the baby began to smile at him. And  sighing deeply, he said, 'Could I kill a pretty baby that smiled  at me? No, no, I had rather suffer every trial that could come upon  me!" And turning his face to the unfortunate little creature, he  said to it, 'Oh my poor, poor little one! Thou art but an  unhappy orphan, for thy unnatural father hath denied thee, thy wicked  mother would cast thee off, as one casts off a little dog that has  ceased to please! The providence of God hath given thee to me, in  order that I may be thy father. I wilt accept thee, then, from Him and  from none else. Ah, dear child of my heart, thou liest on my knees;  thou dost gaze at me, thou canst not yet speak! As for me, I  contemplate [p. 411] [iv.ix-Page_411] thee with a broken heart; with weeping  eyes, and lips that kiss, I bedew thy little face with my burning  tears! . . . Thou shalt be my son, and the child of the good God; and  as long as heaven gives me a mouthful, I shall share it with thee, for  the greater glory of God; and will patiently support all the trials  that may come to me, my darling son!'" How different is  this from the early Suso; interested in little but his own safe  spirituality, and with more than a touch of the religious  aesthete!

[iv.ix-p146]The story goes on: "And when the hard-hearted  woman who had wished to kill the little one saw these tears, when she  heard these tender words, she was greatly moved: and her heart was  filled with pity, and she too began to weep and cry aloud. The  Servitor was obliged to calm her, for fear that, attracted by the  noise, some one should come and see what was going on. And when she  had finished weeping the Brother gave her back the baby and blessed  it, and said to it, 'Now may God in His goodness bless thee, and  may the saints protect thee against all evil that may be!' And  he enjoined the woman to care for it well at his expense."

[iv.ix-p147]Small wonder that after this heroic act of charity  Suso's reputation went from bad to worse; that even his dearest  friends forsook him, and he narrowly escaped expulsion from the  religious life. His torments and miseries, his fears for the future,  continued to grow until they at last came to their term in a sort of  mental crisis. "His feeble nature broken by the pains which he  had to endure, he went forth raving like one who has lost his sense  and hid himself in a place far from men, where none could see or hear  him . . . and whilst he suffered thus, several times something which  came from God said within his soul, 'Where then is your  resignation? Where is that equal humour in joy and in tribulation  which you have so lightly taught other men to love? In what manner is  it, then, that one should rest in God and have confidence only in  Him?' He replied weeping, 'You ask where is my  resignation? But tell me first, where is the infinite pity of God for  His friends? . . . Oh Fathomless Abyss! come to my help, for without  Thee I am lost. Thou knowest that Thou art my only consolation, that  all my trust is only in Thee. Oh hear me, for the love of God, all you  whose hearts are wounded! Behold! let none be scandalized by my insane  behaviour. So long as it was only a question of preaching resignation,  that was easy: but now that my heart is pierced, now that I am wounded  to the marrow . . . how can I be resigned?' And after thus  suffering half a day, his brain was exhausted, and at last he became  calmer, and sitting down he came to himself: and turning to God, and  abandoning himself to His Will, he said, 'If it cannot be  otherwise, [iv.ix-p147.1]   fiat    [p. 412] [iv.ix-Page_412]   voluntas tua     .'"      [iv.ix-p147.3]         [iv.ix-p147.4]             [iv.ix-p147.5]                 [iv.ix-p147.6][840]                                      The act of submission was at once followed by an ecstasy and vision,  in which the approaching end of his troubles was announced to him.  "And in the event, God came to the help of the Servitor, and  little by little that terrible tempest died away."

[iv.ix-p148]Thus with Suso, as with St. Catherine of Siena and  other mystics whom we have considered, the travail of the Dark Night  is all directed towards the essential mystic act of utter  self-surrender; that [iv.ix-p148.1]   fiat voluntas tua     which marks the death of selfhood in the interests  of a new and deeper life. He has learned the lesson of "the  school of true resignation": has moved to a new stage of  reality: a complete self-naughting, an utter acquiescence in the large  and hidden purposes of the Divine Will.

   [iv.ix-p148.2] "Anzi e formale ad esto beato   esse  
   tenersi dentro alla divina voglia
   per ch' una fansi nostre voglie stesse,"   [*840]  
  [iv.ix-p150]says Piccarda, announcing the primary law of  Paradise. Suso has passed through the fire to the state in which he  too can say,  "La sua voluntate e nostre pace."  The old grouping of his consciousness round  "spiritual self" has come to its head and at last broken  down. In the midst of a psychic storm parallel to the upheavals of  conversion, "mercenary love" is for ever disestablished,  the new state of Pure Love is abruptly established in its place. Human  pain is the price: the infinite joy peculiar to "free  souls" is the reward. We may study the pain, but the nature of  the joy is beyond us: as, in the Absolute Type of all mystic  achievement, we see the cross clearly but can hardly guess at the true  nature of the resurrection life.

[iv.ix-p151]Hence Suso's description of his establishment in  the Unitive Way seems meagre, an anti-climax, after all that went  before. "And later," he says simply, "when God  judged that it was time, He rewarded the poor martyr for all his  suffering. And he enjoyed peace of heart, and received in tranquillity  and quietness many precious graces. And he praised the Lord from the  very depths of his soul, and thanked Him for those same sufferings:  which, for all the world, he would not now have been spared. And God  caused him to understand that by this complete abasement he had gained  more, and was made the more worthy to be raised up to God, than by all  the pains which he had suffered from his youth up to that time."   [*841] 

[iv.ix-p153][p. 413] [iv.ix-Page_413]

Footnotes

^381:783 [iv.ix-p2.1][iv.ix-p3]              Vide supra     , pp. 187     seq     ., the cases of Suso and Pascal.

^381:784 [iv.ix-p5.1][iv.ix-p6]          Pt. ii. cap. i.

^382:785 [iv.ix-p9.1][iv.ix-p10]          "Psychology of Religion," p. 24.

^383:786 [iv.ix-p11.1][iv.ix-p12]          An example of this occurred in the later life of Ste. Jeanne    Francoise de Chantal. See "The Nuns of Port Royal,"    by M. E. Lowndes, p. 284. Much valuable material bearing on the    trials of the Dark Night as they appear in the experience of    ordinary contemplatives will be found in the letters of direction of    De Caussade. See his "L'Abandon a la Providence    Divine," vol. ii.

^383:787 [iv.ix-p14.1][iv.ix-p15]              Vide supra     , p. 228.

^384:788 [iv.ix-p15.1][iv.ix-p16]          Vie, pt. I. cap. xx.

^384:789 [iv.ix-p17.1][iv.ix-p18]              Op. cit.,      cap. xxi.

^385:790 [iv.ix-p20.1][iv.ix-p21]          "Journal Spirituel," p. 233.

^385:791 [iv.ix-p23.1][iv.ix-p24]          Vie, cap. xxiii.

^386:792 [iv.ix-p26.1][iv.ix-p27]          "Les Torrents," pt. i. cap. vii.  section 2.

^386:793 [iv.ix-p28.1][iv.ix-p29]          Leben, cap. xxii.

^387:794 [iv.ix-p32.1][iv.ix-p33]          "Holy Wisdom," Treatise iii.  section iv. cap. v.

^388:795 [iv.ix-p38.1][iv.ix-p39]          "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. ii.

^389:796 [iv.ix-p39.1][iv.ix-p40]          "Journal Spirituel," p. 368.

^389:797 [iv.ix-p41.1][iv.ix-p42]          From the "Mesnevi." Quoted in the Appendix to    'The Flowers or Rose Garden of Sadi."

^389:798 [iv.ix-p43.1][iv.ix-p44]          Meister Eckhart, Pred. lvii. So too St. Gertrude in one of her    symbolic visions saw a thick hedge erected between herself and    Christ.

^390:799 [iv.ix-p45.1][iv.ix-p46]          "Noche Escura del Alma,"' I. ii. cap. vi.

^390:800 [iv.ix-p47.1][iv.ix-p48]          Vie, pt. i. cap. xxiii.

^390:801 [iv.ix-p49.1][iv.ix-p50]          De Caussade, "L'Abandon a la Providence    Divine." vol. ii., p. 269.

^391:802 [iv.ix-p51.1][iv.ix-p52]          Madame Guyon    ,      "Les Torrents," pt. i. cap, vii.

^391:803 [iv.ix-p53.1][iv.ix-p54]          "Noche Escura del Alma,"     loc. cit. 

^391:804 [iv.ix-p55.1][iv.ix-p56]          Instructive examples in De Caussade,     op. cit.,      vol. ii., pp. 1-82.

^392:805 [iv.ix-p57.1][iv.ix-p58]          Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. ii.    cap. xxviii.

^392:806 [iv.ix-p59.1][iv.ix-p60]          St. Angele de Foligno,     op. cit     ., p. 197 (English translation, p. 15).

^392:807 [iv.ix-p60.1][iv.ix-p61]          J. E. Gardner, "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 20.

^393:808 [iv.ix-p62.1][iv.ix-p63]          Vida, cap. xxx.  section section 12 and 14.

^393:809 [iv.ix-p63.1][iv.ix-p64]              Op. cit., loc. cit. 

^393:810 [iv.ix-p65.1][iv.ix-p66]          "Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit," pt. ii. cap.    25.

^394:811 [iv.ix-p67.2][iv.ix-p68]          L. vi. cap. xiii.

^394:812 [iv.ix-p68.1][iv.ix-p69]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Sextas, cap. xi.

^395:813 [iv.ix-p70.1][iv.ix-p71]          St. Teresa,     op. cit., loc. cit.      Compare the Vida, cap. xx.  section section 11 to 14.

^396:814 [iv.ix-p72.1][iv.ix-p73]          Sermon for the 4th Sunday in Lent (Winkworth's translation,    p. 280).

^396:815 [iv.ix-p74.2][iv.ix-p75]              Op. cit., loc. cit     .

^396:816 [iv.ix-p76.1][iv.ix-p77]          "Vita e Dottrina," cap. xiv.

^397:817 [iv.ix-p78.1][iv.ix-p79]          "Christian Regeneration" (The Liberal and Mystical    Writings of William Law, pp. 158-60).

^398:818 [iv.ix-p80.1][iv.ix-p81]              Vide supra     , p. 392.

^398:819 [iv.ix-p82.1][iv.ix-p83]          Dialogo, cap. lxiii.

^399:820 [iv.ix-p86.1][iv.ix-p87]          St. John of the Cross, "Noche Escura del Alma," I. ii    cap. v.

^400:821 [iv.ix-p90.1][iv.ix-p91]              I.e.     , the pure essence of the soul, purged of selfhood and illusion.

^400:822 [iv.ix-p91.1][iv.ix-p92]          Sermon on St. Matthew ("The Inner Way." pp. 204,    205).

^401:823 [iv.ix-p94.1][iv.ix-p95]          "Les Torrents" pt. i. cap, viii.

^401:824 [iv.ix-p96.1][iv.ix-p97]          "The Scale of Perfection," bk. ii. cap. xxxv.

^402:825 [iv.ix-p99.1][iv.ix-p100]          Jundt, "Rulman Merswin" p. 22.

^402:826 [iv.ix-p101.3][iv.ix-p102]          "Noche Escura del Alma," I. ii, cap. xxiv.

^404:827 [iv.ix-p107.1][iv.ix-p108]              Vide supra     , p. 290.

^404:828 [iv.ix-p108.1][iv.ix-p109]          Leben, cap. xx.

^404:829 [iv.ix-p110.1][iv.ix-p111]          These expressions, the Upper and Lower School of the Holy Spirit,    as applied to the first and second mystic life, were common to the    whole group of "Friends of God," and appear frequently    in their works.     Vide supra     , p.441, Rulman Merswin's "Vision of Nine Rocks,"    where the man who has "gazed upon his Origin" is said to    have been in the Upper School of the Holy Spirit;     i.e     ., to have been united to God.

^405:830 [iv.ix-p112.1][iv.ix-p113]          Leben, cap. xxi.

^405:831 [iv.ix-p114.2][iv.ix-p115]          [iv.ix-p115.1][iv.ix-p115.1] (Vulgate).

^406:832 [iv.ix-p115.2][iv.ix-p116]          During the years of purgation Suso had constantly worn a sharp    cross, the points of which pierced his flesh.

^406:833 [iv.ix-p116.1][iv.ix-p117]         Leben, cap. xxii.

^407:834 [iv.ix-p118.1][iv.ix-p119]         Leben, cap. xxiii.

^407:835 [iv.ix-p120.2][iv.ix-p121]              Ibid.     , cap. xxv.

^407:836 [iv.ix-p122.1][iv.ix-p123]          "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. ii.

^409:837 [iv.ix-p131.1][iv.ix-p132]          Leben, cap. xlvii. So Ruysbroeck, "The gold Ring of our    Covenant is greater than Heaven or Earth" ("De    Contemplatione"). Compare Vaughan the Silurist ("The    World").

[iv.ix-p133]"I saw Eternity the other    night,

[iv.ix-p134]Like a great Ring of pure and endless    light,

[iv.ix-p135]All calm as it was bright;

[iv.ix-p136]. . . .

[iv.ix-p137]One whispered thus:

[iv.ix-p138]'This Ring the Bridegroom did for    none provide

[iv.ix-p139]But for His Bride.'"

^409:838 [iv.ix-p141.1][iv.ix-p142]          "Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit," cap. ii.

^410:839 [iv.ix-p143.1][iv.ix-p144]          Cap. xl.

^412:840 [iv.ix-p148.6][iv.ix-p149]          "Nay, it is essential to this blessed being, to hold    ourselves within the Will Divine; that therewith our own wills be    themselves made one."

^412:841 [iv.ix-p151.1][iv.ix-p152]              Loc. cit     .

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

X. The Unitive Life

 [iv.x][iv.x-p1]What[iv.x-p1.1] is the Unitive Life? We have referred to it often enough in the  course of this inquiry. At last we are face to face with the necessity  of defining its nature if we can. Since the normal man knows little  about his own true personality and nothing at all about that of Deity,  the orthodox description of it as "the life in which man's  will is united with God," does but echo the question in an  ampler form, and conveys no real meaning to the student's  mind.

[iv.x-p2]That we should know, by instinct, its character from  within--as we know, if we cannot express, the character of our  own normal human lives--is of course impossible. We deal here  with the final triumph of the spirit, the flower of mysticism,  humanity's top note: the consummation towards which the  contemplative life, with its long slow growth and costly training, has  moved from the first. We look at a small but ever-growing group of  heroic figures, living at transcendent levels of reality which we  immersed in the poor life of illusion, cannot attain: breathing an  atmosphere whose true quality we cannot even conceive. Here, then, as  at so many other points in our study of the spiritual consciousness,  we must rely for the greater part of our knowledge upon the direct  testimony of the mystics; who alone can tell the character of that  "more abundant life" which they enjoy. [p. 414] [iv.x-Page_414]

[iv.x-p3]Yet we are not wholly dependent on this source of  information. It is the peculiarity of the Unitive Life that it is  often lived, in its highest and most perfect forms, in the world; and  exhibits its works before the eyes of men. As the law of our bodies is  "earth to earth" so, strangely enough, is the law of our  souls. The spirit of man having at last come to full consciousness of  reality, completes the circle of Being; and returns to fertilize those  levels of existence from which it sprang. Hence, the enemies of  mysticism, who have easily drawn a congenial moral from the  "morbid and solitary" lives of contemplatives in the  earlier and educative stages of the Mystic Way, are here confronted  very often by the disagreeable spectacle of the mystic as a pioneer of  humanity, a sharply intuitive and painfully practical person: an  artist, a discoverer, a religious or social reformer, a national hero,  a "great active" amongst the saints. By the superhuman  nature of that which these persons accomplish, we can gauge something  of the super-normal vitality of which they partake. The things done,  the victories gained over circumstances by St. Bernard or St. Joan of  Arc, by St. Catherine of Siena, St. Ignatius Loyola, St. Teresa,  George Fox, are hardly to be explained unless these great spirits had  indeed a closer, more intimate, more bracing contact than their  fellows with that Life "which is the light of men."

[iv.x-p4]Use have, then, these two lines of investigation open  to us: first, the comparison and elucidation of that which the mystics  tell us concerning their transcendent experience, secondly, the  testimony which is borne by their lives to the existence within them  of supernal springs of action, contact set up with deep levels of  vital power. In the third place, we have such critical machinery as  psychology has placed at our disposal; but this, in dealing with these  giants of the spirit, must be used with peculiar caution and  humility.

[iv.x-p5]The Unitive Life, though so often lived in the world,  is never of it. It belongs to another plane of being, moves securely  upon levels unrelated to our speech; and hence eludes the measuring  powers of humanity. We, from the valley, can only catch a glimpse of  the true life of these elect spirits, transfigured upon the mountain.  They are far away, breathing another air: we cannot reach them. Yet it  is impossible to over-estimate their importance for the race. They are  our ambassadors to the Absolute. They vindicate humanity's claim  to the possible and permanent attainment of Reality; bear witness to  the practical qualities of the transcendental life. In Eucken's  words, they testify to "the advent of a triumphing Spiritual  Power, as distinguished from a spirituality which merely lays the  foundations of life or struggles to maintain [p. 415] [iv.x-Page_415]  them":   [*842]    to the actually life-enhancing power of the Love of God, once the  human soul is freely opened to receive it.

[iv.x-p7]Coming first to the evidence of the mystics  themselves, we find that in their attempts towards describing the  Unitive Life they have recourse to two main forms of symbolic  expression, both very dangerous, and liable to be misunderstood, both  offering ample opportunity for harsh criticism to hostile  investigators of the mystic type. We find also, as we might expect  from our previous encounters with the symbols used by contemplatives  and ecstatics, that these two forms of expression belong respectively  to mystics of the transcendent-metaphysical and of the  intimate-personal type: and that their formulae if taken alone, appear  to contradict one another.

[iv.x-p8](1) The metaphysical mystic, for whom the Absolute is  impersonal and transcendent, describes his final attainment of that  Absolute as   deification,    or the utter transmutation of the self in God. (2) The mystic for  whom intimate and personal communion has been the mode under which he  best apprehended Reality speaks of the consummation of this communion,  its perfect and permanent form, as the   Spiritual Marriage    of his soul with God. Obviously, both these terms are but the  self's guesses concerning the intrinsic character of a state  which it has felt in its wholeness rather than analysed: and bear the  same relation to the ineffable realities of that state, as our clever  theories concerning the nature and meaning of life bear to the vital  processes of men. It is worth while to examine them but we shall not  understand them till we have also examined the life which they profess  to explain.

[iv.x-p9]The language of "deification" and of  "spiritual marriage," then, is temperamental language: and  is related to subjective experience rather than to objective fact. It  describes on the one hand the mystic's astonished recognition of  a profound change effected in his own personality   [*843]   --the transmutation of his salt, sulphur, and mercury into  Spiritual Gold--on the other, the rapturous consummation of his  love. Hence by a comparison of these symbolic reconstructions, by the  discovery and isolation of the common factor latent in each, we may  perhaps learn something of the fundamental fact which each is trying  to portray.

[iv.x-p15]Again, the mystics describe certain symptoms either as  the [p. 416] [iv.x-Page_416] necessary preliminaries or as the marks and  fruits of the Unitive State: and these too may help us to fix its  character.

[iv.x-p16]The chief, in fact the one essential, preliminary is  that pure surrender of selfhood, or "self-naughting,"  which the trials of the Dark Night tended to produce.  "This," says Julian of Norwich, "is the cause why  that no soul is rested till it is naughted of all things that are  made. When it is willingly made naught for love to have Him that is  all, then is it able to receive spiritual rest."   [*844]    Only the thoroughly detached, "naughted soul" is  "free," says "The Mirror of Simple Souls," and  the Unitive State is essentially a state of free and filial  participation in Eternal Life. The capital marks of the state itself  are (1) a complete absorption in the interests of the Infinite, under  whatever mode It is apprehended by the self; (2) a consciousness of  sharing Its strength, acting by Its authority, which results in a  complete sense of freedom, an invulnerable serenity, and usually urges  the self to some form of heroic effort or creative activity; (3) the  establishment of the self as a "power for life," a centre  of energy, an actual parent of spiritual vitality in other men. By  assembling these symptoms and examining them, and the lives of those  who exhibit them, in the light of psychology, we can surely get some  news--however fragmentary--concerning the transcendent  condition of being which involves these characteristic states and  acts. Beyond this even Dante himself could not go:

   [iv.x-p17.1] 'Transumanar significar   per verba  
   non si poria."   [*845]  
  [iv.x-p19]We will then consider the Unitive Life (1) As it  appears from the standpoint of the psychologist. (2) As it is  described to us by those mystics who use (a) the language of  Deification, (b) that of Spiritual Marriage. (3) Finally, we will turn  to those who have lived it; and try, if we can, to realize it as an  organic whole.

[iv.x-p20](1) From the point of view of the pure psychologist,  what do the varied phenomena of the Unitive Life, taken together, seem  to represent? He would probably say that they indicate the final and  successful establishment of that higher form of consciousness which  has been struggling for supremacy during the whole of the Mystic Way.  The deepest, richest levels of human personality have now attained to  light and freedom. The self is remade, transformed, has at last  unified itself; and with the cessation of stress, power has been  liberated for new purposes.

[iv.x-p21]"The beginning of the mystic life," says  Delacroix, "introduced into the personal life of the subject a  group of states which are distinguished by certain characteristics,  and which form, so to [p. 417] [iv.x-Page_417] speak, a special  psychological system. At its term, it has, as it were, suppressed the  ordinary self, and by the development of this system has established a  new personality with a new method of feeling and of action. Its growth  results in the transformation of personality: it abolishes the  primitive consciousness of selfhood, and substitutes for it a wider  consciousness, the total disappearance of selfhood in the divine, the  substitution of a Divine Self for the primitive self."   [*846]    We give a philosophic content to this conception if we say further  that man, in this Unitive State, by this substitution of the divine  for the "primitive" self, has at last risen to true  freedom; "entered on the fruition of reality."   [*847]    Hence he has opened up new paths for the inflow of that Triumphing  Power which is the very substance of the Real; has remade his  consciousness, and in virtue of this total regeneration is  "transplanted into that Universal Life, which is yet not alien  but our own."   [*848]    From contact set up with this Universal Life, this "Energetic  Word of God, which nothing can contain"--from those deep  levels of Being to which his shifting, growing personality is fully  adapted at last--he draws that amazing strength, that immovable  peace, that power of dealing with circumstance, which is one of the  most marked characteristics of the Unitive Life. "That secret  and permanent personality of a superior type"   [*849]    which gave to the surface-self constant and ever more insistent  intimations of its existence at every stage of the mystic's  growth--his real, eternal self--has now consciously realized  its destiny: and begins at last fully to   be.    In the travail of the Dark Night it has conquered and invaded the  last recalcitrant elements of character. It is no more limited to acts  of profound perception, overpowering intuitions of the Absolute: no  more dependent for its emergence on the psychic states of  contemplation and ecstasy.   Anima    and   Animus    are united. The mystic has at last resolved the Stevensonian paradox;  and is not truly two, but truly   one. 

[iv.x-p26](2) The mystic, I think, would acquiesce in these  descriptions, so far as they go: but he would probably translate them  into his own words and gloss them with an explanation which is beyond  the power and province of psychology. He would say that his  long-sought correspondence with Transcendental Reality, his union with  God, has now been finally established: that his self, though intact,  is wholly penetrated--as a sponge by the sea--by the Ocean  of Life and Love to which he has attained. "I live, yet not I  but God in me." He is conscious that he is now at length  cleansed [p. 418] [iv.x-Page_418] of the last stains of separation, and has  become, in a mysterious manner, "that which he  beholds."

[iv.x-p27]In the words of the Sufi poet, the mystic's  journey is now prosecuted not only   to    God but   in    God. He has entered the Eternal Order, attained here and now the  state to which the Magnet of the Universe draws every living thing.  Moving through periods of alternate joy and anguish, as his spiritual  self woke, stretched, and was tested in the complementary fires of  love and pain, he was inwardly conscious that he moved towards a  definite objective. In so far as he was a great mystic, he was also  conscious that this objective was no mere act of knowing, however  intense, exultant, and sublime, but a condition of being, fulfilment  of that love which impelled him, steadily and inexorably, to his own  place. In the image of the alchemists, the Fire of Love has done its  work: the mystic Mercury of the Wise--that little hidden  treasure, that scrap of Reality within him--has utterly  transmuted the salt and sulphur of his mind and his sense. Even the  white stone of illumination, once so dearly cherished, he has resigned  to the crucible. Now, the great work is accomplished, the last  imperfection is gone, and he finds within himself the "Noble  Tincture"--the gold of spiritual humanity.

[iv.x-p28](A) We have said that the mystic of the impersonal  type--the seeker of a Transcendent Absolute--tends to  describe the consummation of his quest in the language of   deification.    The Unitive Life necessarily means for him, as for all who attain it,  something which infinitely transcends the sum total of its symptoms:  something which normal men cannot hope to understand. In it he  declares that he "partakes directly of the Divine Nature,"  enjoys the fruition of reality. Since we "only behold that which  we are," the doctrine of deification results naturally and  logically from this claim.

[iv.x-p29]"Some may ask," says the author of the  "Theologia Germanica" "what is it to be a partaker  of the Divine Nature, or a Godlike [[iv.x-p29.1]   vergottet     ,    literally deified] man? Answer: he who is imbued with or illuminated  by the Eternal or Divine Light and inflamed or consumed with Eternal  or Divine Love, he is a deified man and a partaker of the Divine  Nature."   [*850] 

[iv.x-p31]Such a word as "deification" is not, of  course, a scientific term. It is a metaphor, an artistic expression  which tries to hint at a transcendent fact utterly beyond the powers  of human understanding, and therefore without equivalent in human  speech: that fact of which Dante perceived the "shadowy  preface" when he saw the saints as petals of the Sempiternal  Rose.   [*851]    Since we know not [p. 419] [iv.x-Page_419] the Being of God, the mere  statement that a soul is transformed in Him may convey to us an  ecstatic suggestion, but will never give exact information: except of  course to those rare selves who have experienced these supernal  states. Such selves, however--or a large proportion of  them--accept this statement as approximately true. Whilst the  more clear-sighted are careful to qualify it in a sense which excludes  pantheistic interpretations, and rebuts the accusation that extreme  mystics preach the annihilation of the self and regard themselves as  co-equal with the Deity, they leave us in no doubt that it answers to  a definite and normal experience of many souls who attain high levels  of spiritual vitality. Its terms are chiefly used by those mystics by  whom Reality is apprehended as a state or place rather than a Person:   [*852]    and who have adopted, in describing the earlier stages of their  journey to God, such symbols as those of rebirth or transmutation.

[iv.x-p34]The blunt and positive language of these  contemplatives concerning deification has aroused more enmity amongst  the unmystical than any other of their doctrines or practices. It is  of course easy, by confining oneself to its surface sense, to call  such language blasphemous: and the temptation to do so has seldom been  resisted. Yet, rightly understood, this doctrine lies at the heart,  not only of all mysticism, but also of much philosophy and most  religion. It pushes their first principles to a logical end. Christian  mysticism, says Delacroix with justice, springs from "that  spontaneous and half-savage longing for deification which all religion  contains."   [*853]    Eastern Christianity has always accepted it and expressed it in her  rites. "The Body of God deifies me and feeds me," says  Simeon Metaphrastes, "it deifies my spirit and it feeds my soul  in an incomprehensible manner."   [*854] 

[iv.x-p37]The Christian mystics justify this dogma of the  deifying of man, by exhibiting it as the necessary corollary of the  Incarnation--the humanizing of God. They can quote the authority  of the Fathers in support of this argument. "He became man that  we might be made God," says St. Athanasius.   [*855]    "I heard," says St. Augustine, speaking of his  pre-converted period, "Thy voice from on high crying unto me,  'I am the Food of the fullgrown: grow, and then thou shalt feed  on Me. Nor shalt thou change Me into thy substance as thou changest  the food of thy flesh, but thou shalt be changed into  Mine.'"   [*856]    Eckhart therefore did no more than expand the patristic view when he  wrote, "Our Lord says to every living [p. 420] [iv.x-Page_420] soul,  'I became man for you. If you do not become God for me, you do  me wrong.'"   [*857] 

[iv.x-p41]If we are to allow that the mystics have ever attained  the object of their quest, I think we must also allow that such  attainment involves the transmutation of the self to that state which  they call, for want of exact language, "deified." The  necessity of such transmutation is an implicit of their first  position: the law that "we behold that which we are, and are  that which we behold." Eckhart, in whom the language of  deification assumes its most extreme form, justifies it upon this  necessity. "If," he says, "I am to know God  directly, I must become completely He and He I: so that this He and  this I become and are one I."   [*858] 

[iv.x-p43]God, said St. Augustine, is the Country of the soul:  its Home, says Ruysbroeck. The mystic in the unitive state is living  in and of his native land; no exploring alien, but a returned exile,  now wholly identified with it, part of it, yet retaining his  personality intact. As none know the spirit of England but the  English; and they know it by intuitive participation, by mergence, not  by thought; so none but the "deified" know the secret life  of God. This, too, is a knowledge conferred only by participation: by  living a life, breathing an atmosphere, "union with that same  Light by which they see, and which they see."   [*859]    It is one of those rights of citizenship which cannot be artificially  conferred. Thus it becomes important to ask the mystics what they have  to tell us of their life lived upon the bosom of Reality: and to  receive their reports without prejudice, however hard the sayings they  contain.

[iv.x-p45]The first thing which emerges from these reports, and  from the choice of symbols which we find in them, is that the great  mystics are anxious above all things to establish and force on us the  truth that by   deification    they intend no arrogant claim to identification with God, but as it  were a transfusion of their selves by His Self: an entrance upon a new  order of life, so high and so harmonious with Reality that it can only  be called divine. Over and over again they assure us that personality  is not lost, but made more real. "When," says St.  Augustine, "I shall cleave to Thee with all my being, then shall  I in nothing have pain and labour; and my   life shall be a real life,    being wholly full of Thee."   [*860]    "My life shall be a real life" because it is "full  of Thee." The achievement of reality, and deification, are then  one and the same thing: necessarily so, since we know that only the  divine is the real.   [*861] 

[iv.x-p48]Mechthild of Magdeburg, and after her Dante, saw Deity  as a [p. 421] [iv.x-Page_421] flame or river of fire that filled the  Universe, and the "deified" souls of the saints as ardent  sparks therein, ablaze with that fire, one thing with it, yet  distinct.   [*862]    Ruysbroeck, too, saw "Every soul like a live coal, burned up by  God on the heart of His Infinite Love."   [*863]    Such fire imagery has seemed to many of the mystics a peculiarly  exact and suggestive symbol of the transcendent state which they are  struggling to describe. No longer confused by the dim Cloud of  Unknowing, they have pierced to its heart, and there found their goal:  that uncreated and energizing Fire which guided the children of Israel  through the night. By a deliberate appeal to the parallel of such  great impersonal forces--to Fire and Heat, Light, Water,  Air--mystic writers seem able to bring out a perceived aspect of  the Godhead, and of the transfigured soul's participation  therein, which no merely personal language, taken alone, can touch.  Thus Boehme, trying to describe the union between the Word and the  soul, says, "I give you an earthly similitude of this. Behold a  bright flaming piece of iron, which of itself is dark and black, and  the fire so penetrateth and shineth through the iron, that it giveth  light. Now, the iron doth not   cease to be,    it is iron still: and the source (or property) of the fire retaineth  its own propriety: it doth not take the iron into it, but it  penetrateth (and shineth) through the iron; and it is iron then as  well as before,   free    in itself: and so also is the source or property of the   fire.    In such a manner is the soul set in the Deity; the Deity penetrateth  through the soul, and dwelleth in the soul, yet the soul doth not  comprehend the Deity, but the Deity comprehendeth the soul, but doth  not alter it (from being a soul) but only giveth it the divine source  (or property) of the Majesty."   [*864] 

[iv.x-p52]Almost exactly the same image of deification was used,  five hundred years before Boehme's day, by Richard of St.  Victor; a mystic whom he is hardly likely to have read. "When  the soul is plunged in the fire of divine love," he says,  "like iron, it first loses its blackness, and then growing to  white heat, it becomes like unto the fire itself. And lastly, it grows  liquid, and losing its nature is transmuted into an utterly different  quality of being." "As the difference between iron that is  cold and iron that is hot," he says again, "so is the  difference between soul and soul: between the tepid soul and the soul  made incandescent by divine love."   [*865]   Other contemplatives say that the deified soul is transfigured by the  inundations of the Uncreated Light: that it is like a brand blazing in  the furnace, transformed to the likeness of the fire. "These  souls," says the Divine voice to St. Catherine of Siena, [p. 422] [iv.x-Page_422] "thrown into the furnace of My charity, no part of  their will remaining outside but the whole of them being inflamed in  Me, are like a brand, wholly consumed in the furnace, so that no one  can take hold of it to extinguish it, because it has become fire. In  the same way no one can seize these souls, or draw them outside of Me,  because they are made   one thing    with Me through grace, and I never withdraw Myself from them by  sentiment, as in the case of those whom I am leading on to  perfection."   [*866] 

[iv.x-p55]For the most subtle and delicate descriptions of the  Unitive or Deified State, understood as self-loss in the "Ocean  Pacific" of God, we must go to the great genius of Ruysbroeck.  He alone, whilst avoiding all its pitfalls, has conveyed the  suggestion of its ineffable joys in a measure which seems, as we read,  to be beyond all that we had supposed possible to human utterance. Awe  and rapture, theological profundity, keen psychological insight, are  here tempered by a touching simplicity. We listen to the report of one  who has indeed heard "the invitation of love" which  "draws interior souls towards the One" and says  "Come home." A humble receptivity, a meek self-naughting  is with Ruysbroeck, as with all great mystics, the gate of the City of  God. "Because they have abandoned themselves to God in doing, in  leaving undone, and in suffering," he says of the deified souls,  "they have steadfast peace and inward joy, consolation and  savour, of which the world cannot partake; neither any dissembler, nor  the man who seeks and means himself more than the glory of God.  Moreover, those same inward and enlightened men have before them in  their inward seeing, whenever they will, the Love of God as something  drawing or urging them into the Unity; for they see and feel that the  Father with the Son through the Holy Ghost, embrace Each Other and all  the chosen, and draw themselves back with eternal love into the unity  of Their Nature. Thus the Unity is ever drawing to itself and inviting  to itself everything that has been born of It, either by nature or by  grace. And therefore, too, such enlightened men are, with a free  spirit, lifted up above reason into a bare and imageless vision,  wherein lives the eternal indrawing summons of the Divine Unity; and,  with an imageless and bare understanding, they pass through all works,  and all exercises, and all things, until they reach the summit of  their spirits. There, their bare understanding is drenched through by  the Eternal Brightness, even as the air is drenched through by the  sunshine. And the bare, uplifted will is transformed and drenched  through by abysmal love, even as iron is by fire. And the bare,  uplifted memory feels itself enwrapped and established in an abysmal  Absence of Image. And thereby the created image [p. 423] [iv.x-Page_423] is  united above reason in a threefold way with its Eternal Image, which  is the origin of its being and its life. . . . Yet the creature does  not become God, for the union takes place in God through grace and our  homeward-turning love: and therefore the creature in its inward  contemplation feels a distinction and an otherness between itself and  God. And though the union is without means, yet the manifold works  which God works in heaven and on earth are nevertheless hidden from  the spirit. For though God gives Himself as He is, with clear  discernment, He gives Himself in the essence of the soul, where the  powers of the soul are simplified above reason, and where, in  simplicity, they suffer the transformation of God. There all is full  and overflowing, for the spirit feels itself to be one truth and one  richness and one unity with God. Yet even here there is an essential  tending forward, and therein is an essential distinction between the  being of the soul and the Being of God; and this is the highest and  finest distinction which we are able to feel."   [*867] 

[iv.x-p57]"When love has carried us above and beyond all  things," he says in another place, "above the light, into  the Divine Dark, there we are wrought and transformed by the Eternal  Word Who is the image of the Father; and as the air is penetrated by  the sun, thus we receive in idleness of spirit the Incomprehensible  Light, enfolding us and penetrating us. And this flight is nothing  else but an infinite gazing and seeing. We behold that which we are,  and we are that which be behold; because our thought, life and being  are uplifted in simplicity and made one with the Truth which is  God."   [*868] 

[iv.x-p59]Here the personal aspect of the Absolute seems to be  reduced to a minimum: yet all that we value in personality--love,  action, will--remains unimpaired. We seem caught up to a plane of  vision beyond the categories of the human mind: to the contemplation  of a Something Other--our home, our hope, and our passion, the  completion of our personality, and the Substance of all that Is. Such  an endless contemplation, such a dwelling within the substance of  Goodness, Truth and, Beauty, is the essence of that Beatific Vision,  that participation of Eternity, "of all things most delightful  and desired, of all things most loved by them who have it,"   [*869]    which theology presents to us as the objective of the soul.

[iv.x-p61]Those mystics of the metaphysical type who tend to use  these impersonal symbols of Place and Thing often see in the Unitive  Life a foretaste of the Beatific Vision: an entrance here and now  [p. 424] [iv.x-Page_424] into that absolute life within the Divine Being,  which shall be lived by all perfect spirits when they have cast off  the limitations of the flesh and re-entered the eternal order for  which they were made. For them, in fact, the "deified  man," in virtue of his genius for transcendental reality, has  run ahead of human history: and attained a form of consciousness which  other men will only know when earthly life is past.

[iv.x-p62]In the "Book of Truth" Suso has a  beautiful and poetic comparison between the life of the blessed  spirits dwelling within the Ocean of Divine Love, and that approximate  life which is lived on earth by the mystic who has renounced all  selfhood and merged his will in that of the Eternal Truth. Here we  find one of the best of many answers to the ancient but apparently  immortal accusation that the mystics teach the total annihilation of  personality as the end and object of their quest. "Lord, tell  me," says the Servitor, "what remains to a blessed soul  which has wholly renounced itself." Truth says, "When the  good and faithful servant enters into the joy of his Lord, he is  inebriated by the riches of the house of God; for he feels, in an  ineffable degree, that which is felt by an inebriated man. He forgets  himself, he is no longer conscious of his selfhood; he disappears and  loses himself in God, and becomes one spirit with Him, as a drop of  water which is drowned in a great quantity of wine. For even as such a  drop disappears, taking the colour and the taste of wine, so it is  with those who are in full possession of blessedness. All human  desires are taken from them in an indescribable manner, they are rapt  from themselves, and are immersed in the Divine Will. If it were  otherwise, if there remained in the man some human thing that was not  absorbed, those words of Scripture which say that God must be all in  all would be false.   His being remains, but in another form, in another glory, and in  another power.    And all this is the result of entire and complete renunciation. . . .  Herein thou shalt find an answer to thy question; for the true  renunciation and veritable abandonment of a man to the Divine Will in  the temporal world is an imitation and reduction of that  self-abandonment of the blessed, of which Scripture speaks: and this  imitation approaches its model more or less, according as men are more  or less united with God and become more or less one with God. Remark  well that which is said of the blessed: they are stripped of their  personal initiative, and changed into another form, another glory,  another power. What then is this other form, if it be not the Divine  Nature and the Divine Being whereinto they pour themselves, and which  pours Itself into them, and becomes one thing with them? And what is  that other glory, if it be not to be illuminated and made shining in  the Inaccessible Light? What is [p. 425] [iv.x-Page_425] that other power,  if it be not that by means of his union with the Divine Personality,  there is given to man a divine strength and a divine power, that he  may accomplish all which pertains to his blessedness and omit all  which is contrary thereto? And thus it is that, as has been said, a  man comes forth from his selfhood."   [*870] 

[iv.x-p64]All the mystics agree that the stripping off of the I,  the Me, the Mine, utter renouncement, or  "self-naughting"--self-abandonment to the direction  of a larger Will--is an imperative condition of the attainment of  the unitive life. The temporary denudation of the mind, whereby the  contemplative made space for the vision of God, must now be applied to  the whole life. Here, they say, there is a final swallowing up of that  wilful I-hood, that surface individuality which we ordinarily  recognize as ourselves. It goes for ever, and something new is  established in its room. The self is made part of the mystical Body of  God; and, humbly taking its place in the corporate life of Reality,  would "fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own hand is to a  man."   [*871]    That strange "hunger and thirst of God for the soul,"  "at once avid and generous," of which they speak in their  profoundest passages, here makes its final demand and receives its  satisfaction. "All that He has, all that He is He gives: all  that we have, all that we are, He takes."   [*872]    The self, they declare, is devoured, immersed in the Abyss;  "sinks into God, Who is the deep of deeps." In their  efforts towards describing to us this, the supreme mystic act, and the  new life to which it gives birth, they are often driven to the use of  images which must seem to us grotesque, were it not for the flame  which burns behind: as when Ruysbroeck cries, "To eat and be  eaten! this is Union! . . . Since His desire is without measure, to be  devour of of Him does not greatly amaze me."   [*873] 

[iv.x-p68](B) At this point we begin to see that the language of  deification, taken alone, will not suffice to describe the  soul's final experience of Reality. The personal and emotional  aspect of man's relation with his Source is also needed if that  which he means by "union with God" is to be even partially  expressed. Hence, even the most "transcendental" mystic is  constantly compelled to fall back on the language of love in the  endeavour to express the content of his metaphysical raptures: and  forced in the end to acknowledge that the perfect union of Lover and  Beloved cannot be suggested in the precise and arid terms of religious  philosophy. Such arid language eludes the most dangerous aspects of  "divine union," the pantheistic on one hand, the  "amoristic" on the other; but it also fails to express the  most splendid side of that amazing [p. 426] [iv.x-Page_426] experience. It  needs some other, more personal and intimate vision to complete it:  and this we shall find in the reports of those mystics of the  "intimate" type to whom the Unitive Life has meant not  self-loss in an Essence, but self-fulfilment in the union of heart and  will.

[iv.x-p69]The extreme form of this kind of apprehension of  course finds expression in the well-known and heartily abused  symbolism of the Spiritual Marriage between God and the Soul: a  symbolism which goes back to the Orphic Mysteries, and thence  descended via the Neoplatonists into the stream of Christian  tradition. But there are other and less concrete embodiments of it,  wholly free from the dangers which are supposed to lurk in  "erotic" imagery of this kind. Thus Jalalu 'd Din,  by the use of metaphors which are hardly human yet charged with  passionate feeling, tells, no less successfully than the writer of the  Song of Songs, the secret of "his union in which "heart  speaks to heart."

   [iv.x-p69.1] With Thy Sweet Soul, this soul of mine
   Hath mixed as Water doth with Wine.
   Who can the Wine and Water part,
   Or me and Thee when we combine?
   Thou art become my greater self;
   Small bounds no more can me confine.
   Thou hast my being taken on,
   And shall not I now take on Thine?
   Me Thou for ever hast affirmed
   That I may ever know Thee mine
   Thy Love has pierced me through and through,
   Its thrill with Bone and Nerve entwine.
   I rest a Flute laid on Thy lips;
   A lute, I on Thy breast recline.
   Breathe deep in me that I may sigh;
   Yet strike my strings, and tears shall shine."   [*874]  
  [iv.x-p71]What the mystic here desires to tell us is, that his  new life is not only a free and conscious participation in the life of  Eternity--a fully-established existence on real and  transcendental levels--but also the conscious sharing of an  inflowing   personal life    greater than his own; a tightening of the bonds of that companionship  which has been growing in intimacy and splendour during the course of  the Mystic Way. This companionship, at once the most actual and most  elusive fact of human experience, is utterly beyond the resources of  speech. So too are those mysteries of the communion of love, whereby  the soul's humble, active and ever-renewed self-donation becomes  the occasion of her glory: and "by her love she is made the  equal of Love"--the beggar maid sharing Cophetua's  throne.

[iv.x-p72]Thus the anonymous author of the "Mirror"  writes, in one of [p. 427] [iv.x-Page_427] his most daring passages,  "'I am God,' says Love, 'for Love is God, and  God is Love. And this soul is God by condition of love: but I am God  by Nature Divine. And this [state] is hers by righteousness of love,  so that this precious beloved of me is learned, and led of Me without  her [working]. . . . This [soul] is the eagle that flies high, so  right high and yet more high than doth any other bird; for she is  feathered with fine love.'"   [*875] 

[iv.x-p74]The simplest expression of the Unitive Life, the  simplest interpretation which we can put on its declarations, is that  it is the complete and conscious fulfilment here and now of this  Perfect Love. In it certain elect spirits, still in the flesh,  "fly high and yet more high," till "taught and led  out of themselves," they become, in the exaggerated language of  the "Mirror," "God by condition of love."  Home-grown English mysticism tried as a rule to express the  inexpressible in homelier, more temperate terms than this. "I  would that thou knew," says the unknown author of the  "Epistle of Prayer," "what manner of working it is  that knitteth man's soul to God, and that maketh it one with Him  in love and accordance of will after the word of St. Paul, saying  thus: [iv.x-p74.1]'  Qui      adhaeret Deo, unus spiritus est cum illo   '  ;    that is to say: 'Whoso draweth near to God as it is by such a  reverent affection touched before, he is one spirit with God.'  That is, though all that God and he be two and sere in kind,  nevertheless yet in grace they are so knit together that they are but  one in spirit; and all this is one for onehead of love and accordance  of will; and in this onehead is the marriage made between God and the  soul the which shall never be broken, though all that the heat and the  fervour of this work cease for a time, but by a deadly sin. In the  ghostly feeling of this onehead may a loving soul both say and sing  (if it list) this holy word that is written in the Book of Songs in  the Bible, [iv.x-p74.2]  'Dilectus meus mihi et ego illi,     '    that is, My loved unto me, and I unto Him; understanding that God  shall be knitted with the ghostly glue of grace on His party, and the  lovely consent in gladness of spirit on thy party."   [*876] 

[iv.x-p76]I think no one can deny that the comparison of the  bond between the soul and the Absolute to "ghostly glue,"  though crude, is wholly innocent. Its appearance in this passage as an  alternative to the symbol of wedlock may well check the uncritical  enthusiasm of those who hurry to condemn at sight all  "sexual" imagery. That it has seemed to the mystics  appropriate and exact is proved by its reappearance in the next  century in the work of a greater contemplative. "Thou givest  me," says Petersen, [p. 428] [iv.x-Page_428] "Thy whole Self to  be mine whole and undivided, if at least I shall be Thine whole and  undivided. And when I shall be thus all Thine, even as from  everlasting Thou hast loved Thyself, so from everlasting Thou hast  loved me: for this means nothing more than that Thou enjoyest Thyself  in me, and that I by Thy grace enjoy Thee in myself and myself in  Thee. And when in Thee I shall love myself, nothing else but Thee do I  love, because   Thou art in me and I in Thee, glued together as one and the  selfsame thing,    which henceforth and forever cannot be divided."   [*877] 

[iv.x-p78]From this kind of language to that of the Spiritual  Marriage, as understood by the pure minds of the mystics, is but a  step.   [*878]    They mean by it no rapturous satisfactions, no dubious spiritualizing  of earthly ecstasies, but a life-long bond "that shall never be  lost or broken," a close personal union of will and of heart  between the free self and that "Fairest in Beauty" Whom it  has known in the act of contemplation.

[iv.x-p80]The Mystic Way has been a progress, a growth in love:  a deliberate fostering of the inward tendency of the soul towards its  source, an eradication of its disorderly tendencies to "temporal  goods." But the only proper end of love is union: "a  perfect uniting and coupling together of the lover and the loved into  one."   [*879]    It is "a unifying principle," the philosophers say:   [*880]    life's mightiest agent upon every plane. Moreover, just as  earthly marriage is understood by the moral sense less as a  satisfaction of personal desire, than as a part of the great process  of life--the fusion of two selves for new purposes--so such  spiritual marriage brings with it duties and obligations. With the  attainment of a new order, the new infusion of vitality, comes a new  responsibility, the call to effort and endurance on a new and mighty  scale. It is not an act but a state. Fresh life is imparted, by which  our lives are made complete: new creative powers are conferred. The  self, lifted to the divine order, is to be an agent of the divine  fecundity: an energizing centre, a parent of transcendental life.  "The last perfection," says Aquinas, "to supervene  upon a thing, is its becoming the cause of other things. While then a  creature tends by many ways to the likeness of God, the last way left  open to it is to seek the divine likeness by being the cause of other  things, according to what the Apostle says, [iv.x-p82.1]    Dei enim sumus adjutores     ."    [*881]    [p. 429] [iv.x-Page_429]

[iv.x-p84]We find as a matter of fact, when we come to study the  history of the mystics, that the permanent Unitive State, or spiritual  marriage, does mean for those who attain to it, above all else such an  access of creative vitality. It means man's small derivative  life invaded and enhanced by the Absolute Life: the appearance in  human history of personalities and careers which seem superhuman when  judged by the surface mind. Such activity, such a bringing forth of  "the fruits of the Spirit," may take many forms: but where  it is absent, where we meet with personal satisfactions, personal  visions or raptures--however sublime and  spiritualized--presented as marks of the Unitive Way, ends or  objects of the quest of Reality, we may be sure that we have wandered  from the "strait and narrow road" which leads, not to  eternal rest, but to Eternal Life. "The fourth degree of love is  spiritually fruitful,"   [*882]    said Richard of St. Victor. Wherever we find a sterile love, a  "holy passivity," we are in the presence of quietistic  heresy; not of the Unitive Life. "I hold it for a certain  truth," says St. Teresa, "that in giving these graces our  Lord intends, as I have often told you, to strengthen our weakness so  that we may imitate Him by suffering much. . . . Whence did St. Paul  draw strength to support his immense labours? We see clearly in him  the effects of visions and contemplations which come indeed from our  Lord, and not from our own imagination or the devil's fraud. Do  you suppose St. Paul hid himself in order to enjoy in peace these  spiritual consolations, and did nothing else? You know that on the  contrary he never took a day's rest so far as we can learn, and  worked at night in order to earn his bread. . . . Oh my sisters! how  forgetful of her own ease, how careless of honours, should she be  whose soul God thus chooses for His special dwelling place! For if her  mind is fixed on Him, as it ought to be, she must needs forget  herself; all her thoughts are bent on how to please Him better, and  when and how she may show Him her love.   This    is the end and aim of prayer, my daughters;   this    is the object of that spiritual marriage whose children are always  good works.   Works    are the best proof that the favours which we receive have come from  God."   [*883]    "To give our Lord a perfect hospitality" she says in the  same chapter, "Mary and Martha must combine."

[iv.x-p87]When we look at the lives of the great theopathetic  mystics, the true initiates of Eternity--inarticulate as these  mystics often are--we find ourselves in the presence of an  amazing, a superabundant vitality: of a "triumphing force"  over which circumstance has no power. The incessant production of good  works seems indeed [p. 430] [iv.x-Page_430] to be the object of that Spirit,  by Whose presence their interior castle is now filled.

[iv.x-p88]We see St. Paul, abruptly enslaved by the First and  Only Fair, not hiding himself to enjoy the vision of Reality, but  going out single-handed to organize the Catholic Church. We ask how it  was possible for an obscure Roman citizen, without money, influence,  or good health, to lay these colossal foundations: and he answers  "Not I, but Christ in me."

[iv.x-p89]We see St. Joan of Arc, a child of the peasant class,  leaving the sheepfold to lead the armies of France. We ask how this  incredible thing can be: and are told "Her Voices bade  her." A message, an overpowering impulse, came from the  supra-sensible: vitality flowed in on her, she knew not how or why.  She was united with the Infinite Life, and became Its agent, the  medium of Its strength, "what his own hand is to a  man."

[iv.x-p90]We see St. Francis, "God's  troubadour," marked with His wounds, inflamed with His  joy--obverse and reverse of the earnest-money of  eternity--or St. Ignatius Loyola, our Lady's knight, a  figure at once militant and romantic, go out to change the spiritual  history of Europe. Where did they find--born and bred to the most  ordinary of careers, in the least spiritual of atmospheres--that  superabundant energy, that genius for success which triumphed best in  the most hopeless situations? Francis found it before the crucifix in  St. Damiano, and renewed it in the ineffable experience of La Verna;  when "by mental possession and rapture he was transfigured of  God." Ignatius found it in the long contemplations and hard  discipline of the cave of Manresa, after the act of surrender in which  he dedicated his knighthood to the service of the Mother of God.

[iv.x-p91]We see St. Teresa, another born romantic, pass to the  Unitive State after long and bitter struggles between her lower and  higher personality. A chronic invalid over fifty years of age,  weakened by long ill-health and the mortifications of the Purgative  Way she deliberately breaks with her old career in obedience to the  inward Voice, leaves her convent, and starts a new life: coursing  through Spain, and reforming a great religious order in the teeth of  the ecclesiastical world. Yet more amazing, St. Catherine of Siena, an  illiterate daughter of the people, after a three years' retreat  consummates the mystic marriage, and emerges from the cell of  self-knowledge to dominate the politics of Italy. How came it that  these apparently unsuitable men and women, checked on every side by  inimical environment, ill-health, custom, or poverty achieved these  stupendous destinies? The explanation can only lie in the fact that  all these persons were great mystics, living upon high levels the  theopathetic life. In each a character of the [p. 431] [iv.x-Page_431]  heroic type, of great vitality, deep enthusiasms, unconquerable will,  was raised to the spiritual plane, remade on higher levels of  consciousness. Each by surrender of selfhood, by acquiescence in the  large destinies of life, had so furthered that self's natural  genius for the Infinite that their human limitations were overpassed.  Hence they rose to freedom and attained to the one ambition of the  "naughted soul," "I would fain be to the Eternal  Goodness what his own hand is to a man."

[iv.x-p92]Even Madame Guyon's natural tendency to passive  states breaks down with her entrance on the Unitive Way. Though she  cannot be classed amongst the greatest of its initiates, she too felt  its fertilizing power, was stung from her "holy  indifference" to become, as it were, involuntarily true to  type.

[iv.x-p93]"The soul," she says of the self entering  upon Union--and we cannot doubt that as usual she is describing  her own carefully docketed "states"--"feels a  secret vigour taking more and more strongly possession of all her  being: and little by little she receives a new life, never again to be  lost, at least so far as one can be assured of anything in this life.  . . . This new life is not like that which she had before. It is a  life in God. It is a perfect life. She no longer lives or works of  herself: but God lives, acts and works in her, and this grows little  by little till she becomes perfect with God's perfection, is  rich with His riches, and loves with His love." . . .   [*884] 

[iv.x-p95]This new, intense, and veritable life has other and  even more vital characteristics than those which lead to "the  performance of acts" or "the incessant production of good  works." It is, in an actual sense, as Richard of St. Victor  reminded us, fertile, creative, as well as merely active. In the  fourth degree of love, the soul brings forth its children. It is the  agent of a fresh outbirth of spiritual vitality into the world; the  helpmate of the Transcendent Order, the mother of a spiritual progeny.  The great unitive mystics are each of them the founders of spiritual  families, centres wherefrom radiates new transcendental life. The  "flowing light of the Godhead" is focussed in them, as in  a lens, only that it may pass through them to spread out on every  side. So, too, the great creative seers and artists are the parents,  not merely of their own immediate works, but also of whole schools of  art, whole groups of persons who acquire or inherit their vision of  beauty or truth. Thus within the area of influence of a Paul, a  Francis, an Ignatius, a Teresa, an atmosphere of reality is created;  and new and vital spiritual personalities gradually appear, meet for  the work which these great founders set in hand. The real witness to  St. Paul's ecstatic life in God, is the train of Christian  churches by which his journeyings are marked. Wherever Francis passed,  he left [p. 432] [iv.x-Page_432] Franciscans, "fragrant with a  wondrous aspect," where none had been before.   [*885]    The Friends of God spring up, individual mystics, here and there  through the Rhineland and Bavaria. Each becomes the centre of an ever  widening circle of transcendent life, the parent of a spiritual  family. They are come like their Master, that men may have life more  abundantly: from them new mystic energy is actually born into the  world. Again, Ignatius leaves Manresa a solitary: maimed, ignorant,  and poor. He comes to Rome with his company already formed, and ablaze  with his spirit; veritably his children, begotten of him, part and  parcel of his life.

[iv.x-p97]Teresa finds the order of Mount Carmel hopelessly  corrupt: its friars and nuns blind to reality, indifferent to the  obligations of the cloistered life. She is moved by the Spirit to  leave her convent and begin, in abject poverty, the foundation of new  houses, where the most austere and exalted life of contemplation shall  be led. She enters upon this task to the accompaniment of an almost  universal mockery. Mysteriously, as she proceeds, novices of the  spiritual life appear and cluster around her. They come into  existence, one knows not how, in the least favourable of atmospheres:  but one and all are salted with the Teresian salt. They receive the  infection of her abundant vitality: embrace eagerly and joyously the  heroic life of the Reform. In the end, every city in Spain has within  it Teresa's spiritual children: a whole order of contemplatives,  as truly born of her as if they were indeed her sons and daughters in  the flesh. Well might the Spiritual Alchemists say that the true  [iv.x-p97.1]"Lapis  Philosophorum" is a   tinging stone:    which imparts its goldness to the base metals brought within its  sphere of influence.

[iv.x-p98]This reproductive power is one of the greatest marks  of the theopathetic life: the true "mystic marriage" of  the individual soul with its Source. Those rare personalities in whom  it is found are the   media    through which that Triumphing Spiritual Life which is the essence of  reality forces an entrance into the temporal order and begets  children; heirs of the superabundant vitality of the transcendental  universe.

[iv.x-p99]But the Unitive Life is more than the sum total of its  symptoms: more than the heroic and apostolic life of the "great  active": more than the divine motherhood of new "sons and  daughters of the Absolute." These are only its outward signs,  its expression in time and space. I have first laid stress upon that  expression, because it is the side which all critics and some friends  of the mystics persistently ignore. The contemplative's power of  living this intense and creative life within the temporal order,  however, is tightly bound up with that other life in which he attains  to [p. 433] [iv.x-Page_433] complete communion with the Absolute Order, and  submits to the inflow of its supernal vitality. In discussing the  relation of the mystical experience to philosophy,   [*886]    we saw that the complete mystic consciousness, and therefore, of  course, the complete mystic world, had a twofold character which could  hardly be reconciled with the requirements of monism. It embraced a  Reality which seems from the human standpoint at once static and  dynamic, transcendent and immanent, eternal and temporal: accepted  both the absolute World of Pure Being and the unresting World of  Becoming as integral parts of its vision of Truth, demanding on its  side a dual response. All through the Mystic Way we caught glimpses of  the growth and exercise of this dual intuition of the Real. Now, the  mature mystic, having come to his full stature, passed through the  purifications of sense and of spirit and entered on his heritage, must  and does take up as a part of that heritage not merely (  a   ) a fruition of the Divine Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, his place  within the Sempiternal Rose, nor (  b   ) the creative activity of an agent of the Eternal Wisdom, still  immersed in the River of Life: but both together--the twofold  destiny of the spiritual man, called to "incarnate the Eternal  in time." To use the old scholastic language, he is at once  patient and agent: patient as regards God, agent as regards the  world.

[iv.x-p101]In a deep sense it may be said of him that he now  participates according to his measure in that divine-human life which  mediates between man and the Eternal, and constitutes the  "salvation of the world." Therefore, though his outward  heroic life of action, his divine fecundity, may seem to us the best  evidence of his state, it is the inner knowledge of his mystical  sonship whereby "we feel eternal life in us above all other  thing,"   [*887]    which is for him the guarantee of absolute life. He has many ways of  describing this central fact; this peculiar consciousness of his own  transcendence, which coexists with, and depends on, a complete  humility. Sometimes he says that whereas in the best moments of his  natural life he was but the "faithful servant" of the  eternal order, and in the illuminated way became its "secret  friend," he is now advanced to the final, most mysterious state  of "hidden child." "How great," says  Ruysbroeck, "is the difference between the secret friend and the  hidden child! For the friend makes only loving, living, but measured  ascents towards God. But the child presses on to lose his own life  upon the summits, in that simplicity which knoweth not itself. . . .  When we transcend ourselves and become in our ascent towards God so  simple that the bare supreme Love can lay hold of us, then we cease,  and we and all our selfhood [p. 434] [iv.x-Page_434] die in God. And in this  death we become the hidden children of God, and find a new life within  us."   [*888] 

[iv.x-p104]Though the outer career of the great mystic, then, be  one of superhuman industry, a long fight with evil and adversity, his  real and inner life dwells securely upon the heights; in the perfect  fruition which he can only suggest to us by the paradoxical symbols of  ignorance and emptiness. He dominates existence because he thus  transcends it: is a son of God, a member of the eternal order, shares  its substantial life. "Tranquillity according to His essence,  activity according to His Nature: absolute repose, absolute  fecundity": this, says Ruysbroeck again, is the twofold property  of Godhead: and the secret child of the Absolute participates in this  dual character of Reality--"for this dignity has man been  made."   [*889] 

[iv.x-p106]Those two aspects of truth which he has so clumsily  classified as static and dynamic, as Being and Becoming, now find  their final reconciliation within his own nature: for that nature has  become conscious in all its parts, has unified itself about its  highest elements. That strange, tormenting vision of a perfect peace,  a joyous self-loss, annihilation in some mighty Life that overpassed  his own, which haunts man throughout the whole course of his history,  and finds a more or less distorted expression in all his creeds, a  justification in all his ecstasies, is now traced to its source: and  found to be the inevitable expression of an instinct by which he  recognized, though he could not attain, the noblest part of his  inheritance. This recognition of his has of necessity been imperfect  and oblique. It has taken in many temperaments an exaggerated form,  and has been further disguised by the symbolic language used to  describe it. The tendency of Indian mysticism to regard the Unitive  Life wholly in its passive aspect, as a total self-annihilation, a  disappearance into the substance of the Godhead, results, I believe,  from such a distortion of truth. The Oriental mystic "presses on  to lose his life upon the heights"; but he does not come back  and bring to his fellow-men the life-giving news that he has  transcended mortality in the interests of the race. The temperamental  bias of Western mystics towards activity has saved them as a rule from  such one-sided achievement as this; and hence it is in them that the  Unitive Life, with its "dual character of activity and  rest," has assumed its richest and noblest forms.

[iv.x-p107]Of these Western mystics none has expressed more  lucidly or splendidly than Ruysbroeck the double nature of man's  reaction to Reality. It is the heart of his vision of truth. In all  his books he returns to it again and again: speaking, as none familiar  with his [p. 435] [iv.x-Page_435] writings can doubt, the ardent, joyous,  vital language of firsthand experience, not the platitudes of  philosophy. He might say with Dante, his forerunner into the  Empyrean:--

   [iv.x-p107.1] "La forma universal di questo nodo
   credo ch' io vidi, perche piu di  largo
   dicendo questo, mi sento ch' io godo."   [*890]  
  [iv.x-p109]It is then from Ruysbroeck that I shall make my  quotations: and if they be found somewhat long and difficult of  comprehension, their unique importance for the study of man's  spiritual abilities must be my excuse.

[iv.x-p110]First, his vision of God:--

[iv.x-p111]"The Divine Persons," he says, "Who  form one sole God, are in the fecundity of their nature ever active:  and in the simplicity of their essence they form the Godhead and  eternal blessedness. Thus God according to the Persons is Eternal  Work: but according to the essence and Its perpetual stillness, He is  Eternal Rest. Now love and fruition live between this activity and  this rest. Love would ever be active: for its nature is eternal  working with God. Fruition is ever at rest, for it consists above all  will and all desire, in the embrace of the well-beloved by the  well-beloved in a simple and imageless love; wherein the Father,  together with the Son, enfolds His beloved ones in the fruitive unity  of His Spirit, above the fecundity of nature. And that same Father  says to each soul in His infinite loving kindness, 'Thou art  Mine and I am thine: I am thine and thou art Mine, for I have chosen  thee from all eternity.'"   [*891] 

[iv.x-p113]Next the vision of the self's destiny:  "Our activity consists in loving God and our fruition in  enduring God and being penetrated by His love. There is a distinction  between love and fruition, as there is between God and His Grace. When  we unite ourselves to God by love, then we are spirit: but when we are  caught up and transformed by His Spirit, then we are led into  fruition. And the spirit of God Himself breathes us out from Himself  that we may love, and may do good works; and again He draws us into  Himself, that we may rest in fruition. And this is Eternal Life; even  as our mortal life subsists in the indrawing and outgoing of our  breath."   [*892] 

[iv.x-p115]"Understand," he says again, "God  comes to us incessantly, both with means and without means; and He  demands of us both action and fruition, in such away that the action  never hinders the fruition, nor the fruition the action, but they  strengthen one [p. 436] [iv.x-Page_436] another. And this is why the  interior man [  i.e.,    the contemplative] lives his life according to these two ways; that  is to say, in rest and in work. And in each of them he is wholly and  undividedly; for he dwells wholly in God in virtue of his restful  fruition and wholly in himself in virtue of his active love. And God,  in His communications, perpetually calls and urges him to renew both  this rest and this work. And because the soul is just, it desires to  pay at every instant that which God demands of it; and this is why  each time it is irradiated of Him, the soul turns inward in a manner  that is both active and fruitive, and thus it is renewed in all  virtues and ever more profoundly immersed in fruitive rest. . . . It  is active in all loving work, for it sees its rest. It is a pilgrim,  for it sees its country. For love's sake it strives for victory,  for it sees its crown. Consolation, peace, joy, beauty and riches, all  that can give delight, all this is shown to the mind illuminated in  God, in spiritual similitudes and without measure. And through this  vision and touch of God, love continues active. For such a just man  has built up in his own soul, in rest and in work, a veritable life  which shall endure for ever, but which shall be transformed after this  present life to a state still more sublime. Thus this man is just, and  he goes   towards    God by inward love, in eternal work, and he goes in God by his  fruitive inclination in eternal rest. And he dwells in God; and yet he  goes out towards all creatures, in a spirit of love towards all  things, in virtue and in works of righteousness.   And this is she supreme summit of the inner life   ."   [*893] 

[iv.x-p117]Compare this description with the careers of the  theopathetic mystics, in whom, indeed, "action has not injured  fruition, nor fruition action," who have by some secret  adjustment contrived to "possess their lives in rest and in  work" without detriment to inward joy or outward industry. Bear  in mind as you read these words--Ruysbroeck's supreme  effort to tell the true relation between man's created spirit  and his God--the great public ministry of St. Catherine of Siena,  which ranged from the tending of the plague-stricken to the reforming  of the Papacy; and was accompanied by the inward fruitive  consciousness of the companionship of Christ. Remember the humbler but  not less beautiful and significant achievement of her Genoese  namesake: the strenuous lives of St. Francis of Assisi, St. Ignatius,  St. Teresa, outwardly cumbered with much serving, observant of an  infinitude of tiresome details, composing rules, setting up  foundations, neglecting no aspect of their business which could  conduce to its practical success, yet "altogether dwelling in  God in restful fruition." Are not all these supreme examples of  the state in which the self, at last fully conscious, knowing Reality  because she is wholly real, [p. 437] [iv.x-Page_437] pays her debt? Unable  to rest entirely either in work or in fruition, she seizes on this  twofold expression of the superabundant life by which she is  possessed: and, on the double wings of eagerness and effort, takes  flight towards her Home.

[iv.x-p118]In dwelling, as we have done, on the ways in which the  great mystic makes actual to himself the circumstances of the Unitive  State, we must not forget that this state is, in essence, a fulfilment  of love; the attainment of a "heart's desire." By  this attainment, this lifting of the self to free union with the  Real--as by the earthly marriage which dimly prefigures  it--a new life is entered upon, new powers, new responsibilities  are conferred. But this is not all. The three prime activities of the  normal self, feeling, intellect, and will, though they seem to be  fused, are really carried up to a higher term. They are unified, it is  true, but still present in their integrity; and each demands and  receives full satisfaction in the attainment of this fillal  "honour for which man has been made." The intellect is  immersed in that mighty vision of truth, known now not as a vision but  as a home; where St. Paul saw things which might not be uttered, St.  Teresa found the "perpetual companionship of the Blessed  Trinity," and Dante, caught to its heart for one brief moment,  his mind smitten by the blinding flash of the Uncreated light, knew  that he had resolved Reality's last paradox: the unity of  [iv.x-p118.1]  "cerchio"   and [iv.x-p118.2]  "imago"     --   the infinite and personal aspects of God.   [*894]    The enhanced will, made over to the interests of the Transcendent,  receives new worlds to conquer, new strength to match its exalted  destiny. But the heart too here enters on a new order, begins to live  upon high levels of joy. "This soul, says Love, swims in the sea  of joy: that is, in the sea of delight, the stream of divine  influences."   [*895] 

[iv.x-p121][iv.x-p121.1]  "Amans volat, currit et laetatur: liber est et non  tenetur   ,"   [*896]   said a Kempis: classic words, which put before us once and for  ever the inward joyousness and liberty of the saints. They "fly,  run, and rejoice"--those great, laborious souls, often  spent with amazing mortifications, vowed to hard and never-ending  tasks. They are "free, and nothing can hold them," though  they seem to the world fenced in by absurd renunciations and  restrictions, deprived of that cheap licence which it knows as  liberty.

[iv.x-p123]That fruition of joy of which Ruysbroeck speaks in  majestic phrases, as constituting the interior life of mystic souls  immersed in the Absolute--the translation of the Beatific Vision  into the terms of a supernal feeling-state--is often realized in  the secret experience of those same mystics, as the perennial  possession of a childlike gaiety, an inextinguishable gladness of  heart. The [p. 438] [iv.x-Page_438] transfigured souls move to the measures  of a "love dance" which persists in mirth without  comparison, through every outward hardship and tribulation. They enjoy  the high spirits peculiar to high spirituality: and shock the world by  a delicate playfulness, instead of exhibiting the morose resignation  which it feels to be proper to the "spiritual life." Thus  St. Catherine of Siena, though constantly suffering, "was always  jocund and of a happy spirit." When prostrate with illness she  overflowed with gaiety and gladness, and "was full of laughter  in the Lord, exultant and rejoicing. "   [*897] 

[iv.x-p125]Moreover, the most clear-sighted amongst the mystics  declare such joy to be an implicit of Reality. Thus Dante, initiated  into Paradise, sees the whole Universe laugh with delight as it  glorifies God:   [*898]    and the awful countenance of Perfect Love adorned with smiles.   [*899]    Thus the souls of the great theologians dance to music and laughter  in the Heaven of the Sun;   [*900]    the loving seraphs, in their ecstatic joy, whirl about the Being of  God.   [*901]    [iv.x-p129.1]"O   luce sterna che . . . ami ed arridi,   " exclaims the pilgrim, as the Divine Essence is  at last revealed to him,   [*902]    and he perceives love and joy as the final attributes of the Triune  God. Thus Beatrice with   "suoi occhi ridenti"--  so different from the world's idea of a suitable demeanour for  the soul's supreme instructress--laughs as she mounts with  him the ladder to the stars. So, if the deified soul has indeed run  ahead of humanity and "according to his fruition dwells in  heaven," he too, like Francis, will run, rejoice and make merry:  join the eager dance of the Universe about the One. "If,"  says Patmore, "we may credit certain hints contained in the  lives of the saints, love raises the spirit above the sphere of  reverence and worship into one of laughter and dalliance: a sphere in  which the soul says:--

   [iv.x-p130.1] "'Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy  ray,
     Dare    to be reverent?'"   [*903]  
  [iv.x-p132]Richard Rolle has expressed this exultant  "spirit of dalliance" with peculiar insight and delicacy.  "Among the delights which he tastes in so sweet love  burning," he says of the true lover who "in the bond of  the lovers' will stably is confirmed," "a heavenly  privity inshed he feels, that no man can know but he that has received  it, and in himself bears the electuary that anoints and makes happy  all joyful lovers in Jesu; so that they cease not to hie in heavenly  seats to sit, endlessly their Maker to enjoy. Hereto truly they yearn  in heavenly sights abiding; and inwardly set [p. 439] [iv.x-Page_439] afire,  all their inward parts are glad with pleasant shining in light. And  themselves they feel gladdened with merriest love, and in joyful song  wonderfully melted. . . . But this grace generally and to all is not  given, but to the holy soul imbued with the holiest is taught; in whom  the excellence of love shines, and songs of lovely loving, Christ  inspiring, commonly burst up, and being made as it were a pipe of  love, in sight of God more goodly than can be said, joying sounds. The  which (soul) the mystery of love knowing, with great cry to its Love  ascends, in wit sharpest, and in knowledge and in feeling subtle; not  spread in things of this world but into God all gathered and set, that  in cleanness of conscience and shining of soul to Him it may serve  Whom it has purposed to love, and itself to Him to give. Surely the  clearer the love of the lover is, the nearer to him and the more  present God is. And thereby more clearly in God he joys, and of the  sweet Goodness the more he feels, that to lovers is wont Itself to  inshed, and to mirth without comparison the hearts of the meek to  turn."   [*904] 

[iv.x-p134]The state of burning love, said Rolle, than which he  could conceive no closer reaction to Reality, was the state of  Sweetness and Song: the welling up of glad music in the simple soul,  man's natural expression of a joy which overpasses the  descriptive powers of our untuneful speech. In the gay rhythms of that  primordial art he may say something of the secret which the more  decorous periods of religion and philosophy will never let him tell:  something, too, which in its very childishness, its freedom from the  taint of solemnity and self-importance, expresses the quality of that  inward life, that perpetual youth, which the "secret  child" of the Transcendent Order enjoys. "As it were a  pipe of love" in the sight of God he "joying  sounds." The music of the spheres is all about him: he is a part  of the great melody of the Divine. "Sweetest forsooth,"  says Rolle again, "is the rest which the spirit takes whilst  sweet goodly sound comes down, in which it is delighted: and in most  sweet song and playful the mind is ravished to sing likings of love  everlasting."   [*905] 

[iv.x-p136]When we come to look at the lives of the mystics, we  find it literally true that such "songs of lovely loving  commonly burst up" whenever we can catch them unawares; see  behind the formidable and heroic activities of reformer, teacher, or  leader of men the [iv.x-p136.1]  vie intime    which is lived at the hearth of Love. "What are  the servants of the Lord but His minstrels?" said St. Francis,   [*906]    who saw nothing inconsistent between the Celestial Melodies and the  Stigmata of Christ. Moreover the songs of such troubadours, as [p. 440] [iv.x-Page_440] the hermit of Hampole learned in his wilderness, are not  only sweet but playful. Dwelling always in a light of which we hardly  dare to think, save in the extreme terms of reverence and awe, they  are not afraid with any amazement: they are at home.

[iv.x-p138]The whole life of St. Francis of Assisi, that spirit  transfigured in God, who "loved above all other birds a certain  little bird which is called the lark,"   [*907]    was one long march to music through the world. To sing seemed to him  a primary spiritual function: he taught his friars in their preaching  to urge all men to this.   [*908]    It appeared to him appropriate and just to use the romantic language  of the troubadours in praise of the perfect Love which had marked him  as Its own. "Drunken with the love and compassion of Christ,  blessed Francis on a time did things such as these. For the most sweet  melody of spirit boiling up within him, frequently broke out in French  speech, and the veins of murmuring which he heard secretly with his  ears broke forth into French-like rejoicing. And sometimes he picked  up a branch from the earth, and laying it on his left arm, he drew in  his right hand another stick like a bow over it, as if on a viol or  other instrument, and, making fitting gestures, sang with it in French  unto the Lord Jesus Christ."   [*909] 

[iv.x-p142]Many a time has the romantic quality of the Unitive  Life--its gaiety, freedom, assurance, and joy--broken out in  "French-like rejoicings"; which have a terribly frivolous  sound for worldly ears, and seem the more preposterous as coming from  people whose outward circumstances are of the most uncomfortable kind.  St. John of the Cross wrote love songs to his Love. St. Rose of Lima  sang duets with the birds. St. Teresa, in the austere and  poverty-stricken seclusion of her first foundation, did not disdain to  make rustic hymns and carols for her daughters' use in the  dialect of Old Castile. Like St. Francis, she had a horror of  solemnity. It was only fit for hypocrites, thought these rejuvenators  of the Church. The hard life of prayer and penance on Mount Carmel was  undertaken in a joyous spirit to the sound of many songs. Its great  Reformer was quick to snub the too-spiritual sister who "thought  it better to contemplate than to sing": and was herself heard,  as she swept the convent corridor, to sing a little ditty about the  most exalted of her own mystical experiences: that ineffable  transverberation, in which the fiery arrow of the seraph pierced her  heart.   [*910] 

[iv.x-p144]But the most lovely and real, most human and near to  us, of all these descriptions of the celestial exhilaration which  mystic surrender brings in its train, is the artless, unintentional  self-revelation [p. 441] [iv.x-Page_441] of St. Catherine of Genoa, whose  inner and outer lives in their balanced wholeness provide us with one  of our best standards by which to judge the right proportions of the  Mystic Way. Here the whole essence of the Unitive Life is summed up  and presented to us by one who lived it upon heroic levels: and who  was, in fruition and activity, in rest and in work, not only a great  active and a great ecstatic, but one of the deepest gazers into the  secrets of Eternal Love that the history of Christian mysticism  contains. Yet perhaps there is no passage in the works of these same  mystics which comes to so unexpected, so startling a conclusion as  this; in which St. Catherine, with a fearless simplicity, shows to her  fellow-men the nature of the path that she has trodden and the place  that she has reached.

[iv.x-p145]"When," she says, in one of her reported  dialogues--and though the tone be impersonal it is clearly  personal experience which speaks--"the loving kindness of  God calls a soul from the world, He finds it full of vices and sins;  and first He gives it an instinct for virtue, and then urges it to  perfection, and then by infused grace leads it to true self-naughting,  and at last to true transformation. And this noteworthy order serves  God to lead the soul along the Way: but when the soul is naughted and  transformed, then of herself she neither works nor speaks nor wills,  nor feels nor hears nor understands, neither has she of herself the  feeling of outward or inward, where she may move. And in all things it  is God Who rules and guides her, without the mediation of any  creature. And the state of this soul is then a feeling of such utter  peace and tranquillity that it seems to her that her heart, and her  bodily being, and all both within and without is immersed in an ocean  of utmost peace; from when she shall never come forth for anything  that can befall her in this life. And she stays immovable,  imperturbable, impassible. So much so, that it seems to her in her  human and her spiritual nature, both within and without, she can feel  no other thing than sweetest peace. And she is so full of peace that  though she press her flesh, her nerves, her bones, no other thing  comes forth from them than peace. Then says she all day for joy such  rhymes as these, making them according to her manner:--

   [iv.x-p145.2]  "'Vuoi tu che tu mostr'io
    Presto che cosa e Dio?
    Pace non trova chi da lui si  partio.'" [*911]
       [p. 442] [iv.x-Page_442][iv.x-p151]"Then says she all day for joy such rhymes as  these"--nursery rhymes, one might almost call them: so  infantile, so naive is their rhythm. Who would have suspected this to  be the secret manner of communion between the exalted soul of  Catherine and her Love? How many of those who actually saw that great  and able woman labouring in the administration of her  hospital--who heard that profound and instinctive Christian  Platonist instructing her disciples, and declaring the law of  universal and heroic love--how many of these divined that  "questa santa benedetta" who seemed to them already  something more than earthly, a matter of solemn congratulation and  reverential approach, went about her work with a heart engaged in no  lofty speculations on Eternity; no outpourings of mystic passion for  the Absolute; but "saying all day for joy," in a spirit of  childlike happiness, gay and foolish little songs about her Love?

[iv.x-p152]Standing at the highest point of the mystic ladder  which can be reached by human spirits in this world of time and space,  looking back upon the course of that slow interior alchemy, that  "noteworthy order" of organic transformation, by which her  selfhood had been purged of imperfection, raised to higher levels,  compelled at last to surrender itself to the all-embracing,  all-demanding life of the Real; this is St. Catherine's  deliberate judgment on the relative and absolute aspects of the mystic  life. The "noteworthy order" which we have patiently  followed, the psychic growth and rearrangement of character, the  visions and ecstasies, the joyous illumination and bitter  pain--these but "served to lead the soul along the  way." In the mighty transvaluation of values which takes place  when that way has at last been trod, these "abnormal  events" sink to insignificance. For us, looking out wistfully  along the pathway to reality, they stand out, it is true, as supreme  landmarks, by which we may trace the homeward course of pilgrim man.  Their importance cannot be overrated for those who would study the way  to that world from this. But the mystic, safe in that silence where  lovers lose themselves, "his cheek on Him Who for his coming  came," remembers them no more. In the midst of his active work,  his incessant spiritual creation, joy and peace enfold him. He needs  no stretched and sharpened intuition now: for he dwells in that  "most perfect form of contemplation" which "consists  in simple and perceived contact of the substance of the soul with that  of the divine."   [*912]    [p. 443] [iv.x-Page_443]

[iv.x-p154]The wheel of life has made its circle. Here, at the  last point of its revolution, the extremes of sublimity and simplicity  are seen to meet. It has swept the soul of the mystic through periods  of alternate stress and glory; tending ever to greater transcendence,  greater freedom, closer contact with "the Supplier of true  life." He emerges from that long and wondrous journey to find  himself in rest and in work, a little child upon the bosom of the  Father. In that most dear relation all feeling, will, and thought  attain their end. Here all the teasing complications of our separated  selfhood are transcended. Hence the eager striving, the sharp vision,  are not wanted any more. In that mysterious death of selfhood on the  summits which is the medium of Eternal Life, heights meet the deeps:  supreme achievement and complete humility are one.

[iv.x-p155]In a last brief vision, a glimpse as overpowering to  our common minds as Dante's final intuition of reality to his  exalted and courageous soul, we see the triumphing spirit, sent out  before us the best that earth can offer, stoop and strip herself of  the insignia of wisdom and power. Achieving the highest, she takes the  lowest place. Initiated into the atmosphere of Eternity, united with  the Absolute, possessed at last of the fullness of Its life, the soul,  self-naughted becomes as a little child: for of such is the kingdom of  heaven.

[iv.x-p156][p. 444] [iv.x-Page_444]

Footnotes

^415:842 [iv.x-p5.1][iv.x-p6]         Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 140.

^415:843 [iv.x-p9.1][iv.x-p10]          Compare Dante's sense of a transmuted personality when he    first breathed the air of Paradise:--

[iv.x-p11]"S' io era sol di me quel che    creasti

[iv.x-p12]novellamente, Amor che il ciel    governi

[iv.x-p13]tu il sai, che cot tuo lume mi    levasti" (Par. i. 73).

[iv.x-p14]"If I were only that of me which    thou didst new create, oh Love who rulest heaven, thou knowest who    with thy light didst lift me up."

^416:844 [iv.x-p16.1][iv.x-p17]          "Revelations of Divine Love," cap. v.

^416:845 [iv.x-p17.4][iv.x-p18]          Par. I. 70.

^417:846 [iv.x-p21.1][iv.x-p22]          Delacroix. "Etudes sur le Mysticism," p. 197.

^417:847 [iv.x-p22.1][iv.x-p23]          Eucken, "Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens," p. 12.

^417:848 [iv.x-p23.1][iv.x-p24]              Ibid.     , p. 96.

^417:849 [iv.x-p24.1][iv.x-p25]          Delacroix,     op. cit     ., p. 114 (    vide          supra     , p    .      273).

^418:850 [iv.x-p29.2][iv.x-p30]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. xli.

^418:851 [iv.x-p31.1][iv.x-p32]          Par. xxx. 115-130 and xxxi. 1-12.

^419:852 [iv.x-p32.1][iv.x-p33]          Compare, p. 128.

^419:853 [iv.x-p34.1][iv.x-p35]              Op. cit     ., ix. But it is difficult to see why we need stigmatize as    "half-savage" man's primordial instinct for his    destiny.

^419:854 [iv.x-p35.1][iv.x-p36]          Divine Liturgy of the Orthodox Eastern Church. Prayers before    Communion.

^419:855 [iv.x-p37.1][iv.x-p38]          Athanasius, De Incarn. Verbi, i. 108.

^419:856 [iv.x-p38.1][iv.x-p39]          Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

^420:857 [iv.x-p39.1][iv.x-p40]          Pred. lvii.

^420:858 [iv.x-p41.1][iv.x-p42]          Pred. xcix. ("Mystische Schriften," p. 122).

^420:859 [iv.x-p43.1][iv.x-p44]          Ruysbroeck, "De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum," I. iii.    cap. iii.

^420:860 [iv.x-p45.1][iv.x-p46]          Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxviii.

^420:861 [iv.x-p46.1][iv.x-p47]          Cf. Coventry Patmore, "The Rod, the Root, and the    Flower," "Magna Moralia," xxii.

^421:862 [iv.x-p48.1][iv.x-p49]          Par. xxx. 64.

^421:863 [iv.x-p49.1][iv.x-p50]          "De Septem Gradibus Amoris," cap. xiv.

^421:864 [iv.x-p50.1][iv.x-p51]          "The Threefold Life of Man," cap. vi. 88.

^421:865 [iv.x-p52.1][iv.x-p53]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne,    Patrologia Latina cxcvi.)

^422:866 [iv.x-p53.1][iv.x-p54]          Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.

^423:867 [iv.x-p55.1][iv.x-p56]          Ruysbroeck. "Samuel," cap. xi. (English translation:    "The Book of Truth.")

^423:868 [iv.x-p57.1][iv.x-p58]              Ibid     ., "De Calculo," cap. ix.

^423:869 [iv.x-p59.1][iv.x-p60]          St. Thomas Aquinas, "Summa Contra Gentiles," bk. iii.    cap. lxii.

^425:870 [iv.x-p62.1][iv.x-p63]          Suso, "Buchlein von der Wahrheit," cap. iv.

^425:871 [iv.x-p64.1][iv.x-p65]          "Theologia Germanica," cap. x.

^425:872 [iv.x-p65.1][iv.x-p66]          Ruysbroeck, "Speculum Aeternae e Salutis," cap.    vii.

^425:873 [iv.x-p66.1][iv.x-p67]          "Regnum Deum Amantium," cap xxii.

^426:874 [iv.x-p69.18][iv.x-p70]          Jalalu 'd Din, "The Festival of Spring"    (Hastie's translation p. 10).

^427:875 [iv.x-p72.1][iv.x-p73]          "The Mirror of Simple Souls," Div. iv. cap. i.

^427:876 [iv.x-p74.3][iv.x-p75]          "The Epistle of Prayer." Printed from Pepwell's    edition in "The Cell of Self-knowledge," edited by    Edmund Gardner, p. 88.

^428:877 [iv.x-p76.1][iv.x-p77]          Gerlac Petersen, "Ignitum cum Deo Soliloqium," cap.    xv.

^428:878 [iv.x-p78.1][iv.x-p79]          Compare Pt. i. Cap. vi. It seems needless to repeat here the    examples there given.

^428:879 [iv.x-p80.1][iv.x-p81]          Hilton, "The Treatise written to a Devout Man," cap.    viii.

^428:880 [iv.x-p81.1][iv.x-p82]          Cf. Ormond, "Foundations of Knowledge," p. 442.    "When we love any being, we desire either the unification of    its life with our own or our own unification with its life. Love in    its innermost motive is a unifying principle."

^428:881 [iv.x-p82.2][iv.x-p83]          "Summa Contra Gentiles," bk. ii. cap. xxi.

^429:882 [iv.x-p84.1][iv.x-p85]          "De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae Charitatis" (Migne,    Patrologia Latina cxcvi. col. 1216 D).

^429:883 [iv.x-p85.1][iv.x-p86]          "El Castillo Interior," Moradas Setimas, cap.    iv.

^431:884 [iv.x-p93.1][iv.x-p94]          "Les Torrents," pt. i. cap. ix.

^432:885 [iv.x-p95.1][iv.x-p96]          Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap. xii.

^433:886 [iv.x-p99.1][iv.x-p100]              Supra     , Pt. I. Cap. II.

^433:887 [iv.x-p101.1][iv.x-p102]          Ruysbroeck, "De Calculo," cap. ix.

^434:888 [iv.x-p102.1][iv.x-p103]              Op. cit     ., cap viii. and ix. (condensed).

^434:889 [iv.x-p104.1][iv.x-p105]              Vide supra      p. 35.

^435:890 [iv.x-p107.5][iv.x-p108]          Par. xxxiii. 91. "I believe that I beheld the universal form    of this knot: because in saying this I feel my joy    increased."

^435:891 [iv.x-p111.1][iv.x-p112]          "De Septem Gradibus Amoris," Cap. xiv    . 

^435:892 [iv.x-p113.1][iv.x-p114]              Ibid., loc. cit. 

^436:893 [iv.x-p115.1][iv.x-p116]          Ruysbroeck "Do Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,"" I.    ii cap. lxv.

^437:894 [iv.x-p118.3][iv.x-p119]          Par. xxxiii. 137.

^437:895 [iv.x-p119.1][iv.x-p120]          "The Mirror of Simple Souls." p. 161.

^437:896 [iv.x-p121.2][iv.x-p122]          "De Imitatione Christi," I. iii. cap. v.

^438:897 [iv.x-p123.1][iv.x-p124]          Contestatio Fr. Thomae Caffarina, Processus, col. 1258 (E. Gardner,    "St. Catherine of Siena," p. 48).

^438:898 [iv.x-p125.1][iv.x-p126]          Par. xxvii. 4.

^438:899 [iv.x-p126.1][iv.x-p127]              Ibid     ., xx. 13.

^438:900 [iv.x-p127.1][iv.x-p128]              Ibid     ., x. 76, 118.

^438:901 [iv.x-p128.1][iv.x-p129]              Ibid., xxviii. 100.

^438:902 [iv.x-p129.2][iv.x-p130]              Ibid., xxxiii. 124-26.

^438:903 [iv.x-p130.4][iv.x-p131]          Coventry Patmore, "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,"    "Aurea Dicta."

^439:904 [iv.x-p132.1][iv.x-p133]          Richard Rolle, "The Fire of Love," bk. ii. cap.    vii.

^439:905 [iv.x-p134.1][iv.x-p135]              Op. cit     ., bk. i. cap. xi.

^439:906 [iv.x-p136.2][iv.x-p137]          "Speculum Perfectionis," cap, c. (Steele's    translation).

^440:907 [iv.x-p138.1][iv.x-p139]          "Speculum," cap. cxiii.

^440:908 [iv.x-p139.1][iv.x-p140]              Ibid.     , cap. c.

^440:909 [iv.x-p140.1][iv.x-p141]              Ibid.     , cap. xciii., also Thomas of Celano, Vita Secunda, cap. xc.

^440:910 [iv.x-p142.1][iv.x-p143]              Cf     . G. Cunninghame Graham, "Santa Teresa," vol. i. pp.    180, 300, 304.

^441:911 [iv.x-p145.6][iv.x-p146]     "Dost thou wish that I should show

[iv.x-p147]All God's Being thou mayst    know?

[iv.x-p148]Peace is not found of those who do not    with Him go."

[iv.x-p149](Vita e Dottrina, cap. xviii.)

[iv.x-p150]Here, in spite of the many revisions to    which the Vita has been subjected, I cannot but see an authentic    report of St. Catherine's inner mind; highly characteristic of    the personality which "came joyous and rosy-faced" from    its ecstatic encounters with Love. The very unexpectedness of its    conclusion, so unlike the expressions supposed to be proper to the    saints, is a guarantee of its authenticity. On the text of the    "Vita" see Von Hugel, "The Mystical Element    of Religion," vol. i., Appendix.

^442:912 [iv.x-p152.1][iv.x-p153]          Coventry Patmore, "The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,"    "Magna Moralia," xv.

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Conclusion

 [iv.xi][iv.xi-p1]Far from being academic or unreal, that history, I  think, is vital for the deeper understanding of the history of  humanity. It shows us, upon high levels, the psychological process to  which every self which desires to rise to the perception of Reality  must submit: the formula under which man's spiritual  consciousness, be it strong or weak, must necessarily unfold. In the  great mystics we see the highest and widest development of that  consciousness [p. 445] [iv.xi-Page_445] to which the human race has yet  attained. We see its growth exhibited to us on a grand scale,  perceptible of all men: the stages of its slow transcendence of the  sense-world marked by episodes of splendour and of terror which are  hard for common men to accept or understand as a part of the organic  process of life. But the germ of that same transcendent life, the  spring of the amazing energy which enables the great mystic to rise to  freedom and dominate his world, is latent in all of us, an integral  part of our humanity. Where the mystic has a genius for the Absolute,  we have each a little buried talent, some greater, some less; and the  growth of this talent, this spark of the soul, once we permit its  emergence, will conform in little, and according to its measure, to  those laws of organic growth those inexorable conditions of  transcendence which we found to govern the Mystic Way.

[iv.xi-p2]Every person, then, who awakens to consciousness of a  Reality which transcends the normal world of sense--however  small, weak imperfect that consciousness may be--is put upon a  road which follows at low levels the path which the mystic treads at  high levels. The success with which he follows this way to freedom and  full life will depend on the intensity of his love and will, his  capacity for self-discipline, his steadfastness and courage. It will  depend on the generosity and completeness of his outgoing passion for  absolute beauty, absolute goodness, or absolute truth. But if he move  at all, he will move through a series of states which are, in their  own small way, analogous to those experienced by the greatest  contemplative on his journey towards that union with God which is the  term of the spirit's ascent towards its home.

[iv.xi-p3]As the embryo of physical man, be he saint or savage,  passes through the same stages of initial growth, so too with  spiritual man. When the "new birth" takes place in him,  the new life-process of his deeper self begins, the normal individual,  no less than the mystic, will know that spiral ascent towards higher  levels, those oscillations of consciousness between light and  darkness, those odd mental disturbances, abrupt invasions from the  subliminal region, and disconcerting glimpses of truth, which  accompany the growth of the transcendental powers; though he may well  interpret them in other than the mystic sense. He too will be impelled  to drastic self-discipline, to a deliberate purging of his eyes that  he may see: and receiving a new vision of the world, will be spurred  by it to a total self-dedication, an active surrender of his whole  being, to that aspect of the Infinite which he has perceived. He too  will endure in little the psychic upheavals of the spiritual  adolescence: will be forced to those sacrifices which every form of  [p. 446] [iv.xi-Page_446] genius demands. He will know according to his  measure the dreadful moments of lucid self-knowledge, the  counter-balancing ecstasy of an intuition of the Real. More and more,  as we study and collate all the available evidence, this  fact--this law--is borne in on us: that the general movement  of human consciousness, when it obeys its innate tendency to  transcendence, is always the same. There is only one road from  Appearance to Reality. "Men pass on, but the States are  permanent for ever."

[iv.xi-p4]I do not care whether the consciousness be that of  artist or musician, striving to catch and fix some aspect of the  heavenly light or music, and denying all other aspects of the world in  order to devote themselves to this: or of the humble servant of  Science, purging his intellect that he may look upon her secrets with  innocence of eye: whether the higher reality be perceived in the terms  of religion, beauty, suffering; of human love, of goodness, or of  truth. However widely these forms of transcendence may seem to differ,  the mystic experience is the key to them all. All in their different  ways are exhibitions here and now of the Eternal; extensions of  man's consciousness which involve calls to heroic endeavour,  incentives to the remaking of character about new and higher centres  of life. Through each, man may rise to freedom and take his place in  the great movement of the universe: may "understand by dancing  that which is done." Each brings the self who receives its  revelation in good faith, does not check it by self-regarding  limitations, to a humble acceptance of the universal law of knowledge:  the law that "we behold that which we are," and hence that  "only the Real can know Reality." Awakening, Discipline,  Enlightenment, Self-surrender, and Union, are the essential phases of  life's response to this fundamental fact: the conditions of our  attainment of Being, the necessary formula under which alone our  consciousness of any of these fringes of Eternity--any of these  aspects of the Transcendent--can unfold, develop, attain to  freedom and full life.

[iv.xi-p5]We are, then, one and all the kindred of the mystics;  and it is by dwelling upon this kinship, by interpreting--so far  as we may--their great declarations in the light of our little  experience, that we shall learn to understand them best. Strange and  far away though they seem, they are not cut off from us by some  impassable abyss. They belong to us. They are our brethren; the  giants, the heroes of our race. As the achievement of genius belongs  not to itself only, but also to the society that brought it forth; as  theology declares that the merits of the saints avail for all; so,  because of the solidarity of the human family, the supernal  accomplishment of the mystics is ours also. Their attainment is the  earnest-money of our eternal life. [p. 447] [iv.xi-Page_447]

[iv.xi-p6]To be a mystic is simply to participate here and now  in that real and eternal life; in the fullest, deepest sense which is  possible to man. It is to share, as a free and conscious  agent--not a servant, but a son--in the joyous travail of  the Universe: its mighty onward sweep through pain and glory towards  its home in God. This gift of "sonship," this power of  free co-operation in the world-process, is man's greatest  honour. The ordered sequence of states, the organic development,  whereby his consciousness is detached from illusion and rises to the  mystic freedom which conditions instead of being conditioned by, its  normal world, is the way he must tread if that sonship is to be  realized. Only by this deliberate fostering of his deeper self, this  transmutation of the elements of his character, can he reach those  levels of consciousness upon which he hears, and responds to, the  measure "whereto the worlds keep time" on their great  pilgrimage towards the Father's heart. The mystic act of union,  that joyous loss of the transfigured self in God, which is the crown  of man's conscious ascent towards the Absolute, is the  contribution of the individual to this, the destiny of the Cosmos.

[iv.xi-p7]The mystic knows that destiny. It is laid bare to his  lucid vision, as our puzzling world of form and colour is to normal  sight. He is the "hidden child" of the eternal order, an  initiate of the secret plan. Hence, whilst "all creation  groaneth and travaileth," slowly moving under the spur of blind  desire towards that consummation in which alone it can have rest, he  runs eagerly along the pathway to reality. He is the pioneer of Life  on its age-long voyage to the One: and shows us, in his attainment,  the meaning and value of that life.

[iv.xi-p8]This meaning, this secret plan of Creation, flames  out, had we eyes to see, from every department of existence. Its  exultant declarations come to us in all great music; its magic is the  life of all romance. Its law--the law of love--is the  substance of the beautiful, the energizing cause of the heroic. It  lights the altar of every creed. All man's dreams and diagrams  concerning a transcendent Perfection near him yet intangible, a  transcendent vitality to which he can attain--whether he call  these objects of desire God, grace, being, spirit, beauty, "pure  idea"--are but translations of his deeper self's  intuition of its destiny; clumsy fragmentary hints at the  all-inclusive, living Absolute which that deeper self knows to be  real. This supernal Thing, the adorable Substance of all that  Is--the synthesis of Wisdom, Power, and Love--and  man's apprehension of it, his slow remaking in its interests,  his union with it at last; this is the theme of mysticism. That  twofold extension of consciousness which allows him communion with its  transcendent and immanent aspects is, in all its gradual [p. 448] [iv.xi-Page_448] processes, the Mystic Way. It is also the crown of human  evolution; the fulfilment of life, the liberation of personality from  the world of appearance, its entrance into the free creative life of  the Real.

[iv.xi-p9]Further, Christians may well remark that the  psychology of Christ, as presented to us in the Gospels, is of a piece  with that of the mystics. In its pain and splendour, its dual  character of action and fruition, it reflects their experience upon  the supernal plane of more abundant life. Thanks to this fact, for  them the Ladder of Contemplation--that ladder which mediaeval  thought counted as an instrument of the Passion, discerning it as  essential to the true salvation of man--stretches without a break  from earth to the Empyrean. It leans against the Cross; it leads to  the Secret Rose. By it the ministers of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty go  up and down between the transcendent and the apparent world. Seen,  then, from whatever standpoint we may choose to adopt--whether of  psychology, philosophy, or religion--the adventure of the great  mystics intimately concerns us. It is a master-key to man's  puzzle: by its help he may explain much in his mental makeup, in his  religious constructions, in his experience of life. In all these  departments he perceives himself to be climbing slowly and clumsily  upward toward some attainment yet unseen. The mystics, expert  mountaineers, go before him: and show him, if he cares to learn, the  way to freedom, to reality, to peace. He cannot rise in this, his  earthly existence, to the awful and solitary peak, veiled in the Cloud  of Unknowing, where they meet that "death of the summit,"  which is declared by them to be the gate of Perfect Life: but if he  choose to profit by their explorations, he may find his level, his  place within the Eternal Order. He may achieve freedom, live the  "independent spiritual life."

[iv.xi-p10]Consider once more the Mystic Way as we have traced it  from its beginning. To what does it tend if not to this?

[iv.xi-p11]It began by the awakening within the self of a new and  embryonic consciousness: a consciousness of divine reality, as opposed  to the illusory sense-world in which she was immersed. Humbled, awed  by the august possibilities then revealed to her, that self retreated  into the "cell of self-knowledge" and there laboured to  adjust herself to the Eternal Order which she had perceived, stripped  herself of all that opposed it, disciplined her energies, purified the  organs of sense. Remade in accordance with her intuitions of reality,  the "eternal hearing and seeing were revealed in her." She  opened her eyes upon a world still natural, but no longer illusory;  since it was perceived to be illuminated by the Uncreated Light. She  knew then the beauty, the majesty, the divinity of the living World of  Becoming which holds in its meshes [p. 449] [iv.xi-Page_449] every living  thing. She had transcended the narrow rhythm by which common men  perceive but one of its many aspects, escaped the machine-made  universe presented by the cinematograph of sense, and participated in  the "great life of the All." Reality came forth to her,  since her eyes were cleansed to see It, not from some strange far-off  and spiritual country, but gently, from the very heart of things. Thus  lifted to a new level, she began again her ceaseless work of growth:  and because by the cleansing of the senses she had learned to see the  reality which is shadowed by the sense-world, she now, by the  cleansing of her will, sought to draw nearer to that Eternal Will,  that Being, which life, the World of Becoming, manifests and serves.  Thus, by the surrender of her selfhood in its wholeness, the  perfecting of her love, she slid from Becoming to Being, and found her  true life hidden in God.

[iv.xi-p12]Yet the course of this transcendence, this amazing  inward journey, was closely linked, first and last, with the processes  of human life. It sprang from that life, as man springs from the sod.  We were even able to describe it under those symbolic formulae which  we are accustomed to call the "laws" of the natural world.  By an extension of these formulae, their logical application, we  discovered a path which led us without a break from the sensible to  the supra-sensible; from apparent to absolute life. There is nothing  unnatural about the Absolute of the mystics: He sets the rhythm of His  own universe, and conforms to the harmonies which He has made. We,  deliberately seeking for that which we suppose to be spiritual, too  often overlook that which alone is Real. The true mysteries of life  accomplish themselves so softly, with so easy and assured a grace, so  frank an acceptance of our breeding, striving, dying, and unresting  world, that the unimaginative natural man--all agog for the  marvellous--is hardly startled by their daily and radiant  revelation of infinite wisdom and love. Yet this revelation presses  incessantly upon us. Only the hard crust of surface-consciousness  conceals it from our normal sight. In some least expected moment, the  common activities of life in progress, that Reality in Whom the  mystics dwell slips through our closed doors, and suddenly we see It  at our side.

[iv.xi-p13]It was said of the disciples at Emmaus, [iv.xi-p13.1]"Mensam igitur ponunt panes cibosque offerunt, et  Deum, quem in Scripturae sacrae expositione non cognoverant, in panis  fractione cognoscunt." So too for us the  Transcendent Life for which we crave is revealed and our living within  it, not on some remote and arid plane of being, in the cunning  explanations of philosophy; but in the normal acts of our diurnal  experience, suddenly made significant for us. Not in the backwaters of  existence, not amongst subtle arguments and occult doctrines, but in  all those places where the direct [p. 450] [iv.xi-Page_450] and simple life  of earth goes on. It is found in the soul of man so long as that soul  is alive and growing: it is not found in any sterile place.

[iv.xi-p14]This fact of experience is our link with the mystics,  our guarantee of the truthfulness of their statements, the supreme  importance of their adventure, their closer contact with Reality. The  mystics on their part are our guarantee of the end towards which the  Immanent Love, the hidden steersman which dwells in our midst, is  moving: our "lovely forerunners" on the path towards the  Real. They come back to us from an encounter with life's most  august secret, as Mary came running from the tomb; filled with amazing  tidings which they can hardly tell. We, longing for some assurance,  and seeing their radiant faces, urge them to pass on their revelation  if they can. It is the old demand of the dim-sighted and  incredulous:--

   [iv.xi-p14.1] "Dic nobis Maria
   Quid vidisti in via?"
  [iv.xi-p15]But they cannot say: can only report fragments  of the symbolic vision:--

   [iv.xi-p15.1] [iv.xi-p15.3]"Angelicos testes,  sudarium, et vestes"--
  [iv.xi-p16]not the inner content, the final divine  certainty. We must ourselves follow in their footsteps if we would  have that.

[iv.xi-p17]Like the story of the Cross, so too the story of  man's spirit ends in a garden: in a place of birth and  fruitfulness, of beautiful and natural things. Divine Fecundity is its  secret: existence, not for its own sake, but for the sake of a more  abundant life. It ends with the coming forth of divine humanity, never  again to leave us: living in us, and with us, a pilgrim, a worker, a  guest at our table, a sharer at all hazards in life. The mystics  witness to this story: waking very early they have run on before us,  urged by the greatness of their love. We, incapable as yet of this  sublime encounter, looking in their magic mirror, listening to their  stammered tidings, may see far off the consummation of the race.

[iv.xi-p18]According to the measure of their strength and of  their passion, these, the true lovers of the Absolute, have conformed  here and now to the utmost tests of divine sonship, the final demands  of life. They have not shrunk from the sufferings of the cross. They  have faced the darkness of the tomb. Beauty and agony alike have  called them: alike have awakened a heroic response. For them the  winter is over: the time of the singing of birds is come. From the  deeps [p. 451] [iv.xi-Page_451] of the dewy garden, Life--new,  unquenchable, and ever lovely--comes to meet them with the  dawn.

   [iv.xi-p18.1]   [iv.xi-p18.3]Et hoc intellegere, quis bominum dabit  bomini?  
      [iv.xi-p18.5]Quis angelus angelo?  
      [iv.xi-p18.7]Quis angelus bomini?  
      [iv.xi-p18.9]El te petatur,  
      [iv.xi-p18.11]In te quaeratur,  
      [iv.xi-p18.13]Eld te pulsetur,  
     [iv.xi-p18.15]Sic, sic accipietur invenietur, sic  aperietur.
  [iv.xi-p19][p. 453] [iv.xi-Page_453]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Appendix: Historical Sketch of Mysticism

 [v][v-p1]If[v-p1.1] we try to represent the course of Mysticism in Europe during the  Christian period by the common device of a chronological curve,  showing by its rises and falls as it passes across the centuries the  absence or preponderance in any given epoch of mystics and mystical  thought, we shall find that the great periods of mystical activity  tend to correspond with the great periods of artistic, material, and  intellectual civilization. As a rule, they come immediately after, and  seem to complete such periods: those outbursts of vitality in which  man makes fresh conquests over his universe apparently producing, as  their last stage, a type of heroic character which extends these  victories to the spiritual sphere. When science, politics, literature,  and the arts--the domination of nature and the ordering of  life--have risen to their height and produced their greatest  works, the mystic comes to the front; snatches the torch, and carries  it on. It is almost as if he were humanity's finest flower; the  product at which each great creative period of the race had aimed.

[v-p2]Thus the thirteenth century expressed to perfection  the medieval ideal in religion, art, philosophy, and public life. It  built the Gothic cathedrals, put the finishing touch to the system of  chivalry, and nourished the scholastic philosophers. It has many  saints, but not very many mystics; though they increase in number as  the century draws on. The fourteenth century is filled by great  contemplatives; who lifted this wave of activity to spiritual levels,  and brought the intellectual vigour, the romance and passion of the  mediaeval temperament, to bear upon the deepest mysteries of the  transcendental life. Again, the sixteenth century, that period of  abounding vitality which left no corner of existence unexplored, which  produced the Renaissance and the Humanists and remade the mediaeval  world, had hardly reached its full development before the great  procession of the post-Renaissance mystics, with St. Teresa at their  head, began. If life, then--the great and restless life of the  race--be described under the trite metaphor of a billowy sea,  each great wave as it rises from the deep bears the mystic type upon  its crest.

[v-p3]Our curve will therefore follow close behind that  other curve which represents the intellectual life of humanity. Its  course will be studded and defined for us by the names of the great  mystics; the possessors of spiritual genius, the pathfinders to the  country of the soul. These starry names are significant not only in  themselves but also as links in the chain of manes growing spiritual  history. They are not isolated [p. 454] [v-Page_454] phenomena, but are  related to one another. Each receives something from his predecessors:  each by his personal adventures enriches it, and hands it on to the  future. As we go on, we notice more and more this cumulative power of  the past. Each mystic, original though he be, yet owes much to the  inherited acquirement of his spiritual ancestors. These ancestors form  his tradition, are the classic examples on which his education is  based; and from them he takes the language which they have sought out  and constructed as a means of telling their adventures to the world.  It is by their help too, very often, that he elucidates for himself  the meaning of the dim perceptions of his amazed soul. From his own  experiences he adds to this store; and hands on an enriched tradition  of the transcendental life to the next spiritual genius evolved by the  race. Hence the names of the great mystics are connected by a thread;  and it becomes possible to treat them as subjects of history rather  than of biography.

[v-p4]I have said that this thread forms a curve, following  the fluctuations of the intellectual life of the race. At its highest  points, the names of the mystics are clustered most thickly, at its  descents they become fewer and fewer, at the lowest points they die  away. Between the first century A.D. and the nineteenth, this curve  exhibits three great waves of mystical activity besides many minor  fluctuations. They correspond with the close of the Classical, the  Mediaeval, and the Renaissance periods in history: reaching their  highest points in the third, fourteenth, and seventeenth centuries. In  one respect, however, the mystic curve diverges from the historical  one. It rises to its highest point in the fourteenth century, and does  not again approach the level it there attains; for the mediaeval  period was more favourable to the development of mysticism than any  subsequent epoch has been. The fourteenth century is as much the  classic moment for the spiritual history of our race as the thirteenth  is for the history of Gothic, or the fifteenth for that of Italian  art.

[v-p5]The names upon our curve, especially during the first  ten centuries of the Christian era, are often separated by long  periods of time. This, of course, does not necessarily mean that these  centuries produced few mystics: merely that few documents relating to  them have survived. We have now no means of knowing, for instance, the  amount of true mysticism which may have existed amongst the initiates  of the Greek or Egyptian Mysteries; how many advanced but inarticulate  contemplatives there were amongst the Alexandrian Neo-platonists,  amongst the pre-Christian communities of contemplatives described by   Philo   , the deeply mystical Alexandrian Jew (20 B.C.-A.D. 40), or the  innumerable Gnostic sects which replaced in the early Christian world  the Orphic and Dionysiac mystery-cults of Greece and Italy. Much real  mystical inspiration there must have been, for we know that from these  centres of life came many of the doctrines best loved by later  mystics: that the Neoplatonists gave them the concepts of Pure Being  and the One, that the New Birth and the Spiritual Marriage were  foreshadowed in the Mysteries, that Philo anticipated the theology of  the Fourth Gospel. [p. 455] [v-Page_455]

[v-p6]As we stand at the beginning of the Christian period  we see three great sources whence its mystical tradition might have  been derived. These sources are Greek, Oriental, and Christian--  i.e.   , primitive Apostolic--doctrine or thought. As a matter of fact  all contributed their share: but where Christianity gave the new vital  impulse to transcendence, Greek and Oriental thought provided the  principal forms in which it was expressed. The Christian religion, by  its very nature, had a profoundly mystical side. Putting the  personality of its Founder outside the limits of the present  discussion,   St. Paul    and the author of the Fourth Gospel are obvious instances of mystics  of the first rank amongst its earliest missionaries. Much of the inner  history of primitive Christianity still remains unknown to us, but in  what has been already made out we find numerous, if scattered,  indications that the mystic life was indigenous in the Church and the  natural mystic had little need to look for inspiration outside the  limits of his creed. Not only the epistles of St. Paul and the  Johannine writings, but also the earliest liturgic fragments which we  possess, and such primitive religious poetry as the "Odes of  Solomon" and the "Hymn of Jesus," show how congenial  was mystical expression to the mind of the Church how easily that  Church could absorb and transmute the mystic elements of Essene,  Orphic, and Neoplatonic thought.

[v-p7]Towards the end of the second century this tendency  received brilliant literary expression at the hands of   Clement of Alexandria    (c. 160-220)--who first adapted the language of the pagan  Mysteries to the Christian theory of the spiritual life--and his  great pupil   Origen    (c. 183-253). Nevertheless, the first person after St. Paul of whom  it can now be decisively stated that he was a practical mystic of the  first rank, and in whose writings the central mystic doctrine of union  with God is found, is a pagan. That person is   Plotinus   , the great Neoplatonic philosopher of Alexandria (A.D. 205-c. 270).  His mysticism owes nothing to the Christian religion, which is never  mentioned in his works. Intellectually it is based on the Platonic  philosophy, and also shows the influence of the Mysteries, and perhaps  certain of the Oriental cults and philosophies which ran riot in  Alexandria in the third century. Ostensibly a metaphysician, however,  Plotinus possessed transcendental genius of a high order, and was  consumed by a burning passion for the Absolute: and the importance of  his work lies in the degree in which his intellectual constructions  are made the vehicle of mystical experience. His disciple Porphyry has  left it on record that on four occasions he saw his master rapt to  ecstatic union with "the One."

[v-p8]The Neoplatonism of which Plotinus was the greatest  exponent became the medium in which much of the mysticism--both  Christian and pagan--of the first six centuries was expressed.  But since mysticism is a way of life--an experience of Reality,  not a philosophic account of Reality--Neoplatonism, and the  mysticism which used its language, must not be identified with one  another.   Porphyry    (233-304) the favourite pupil of Plotinus seems to have inherited  something of his master's mysticism, but Neoplatonism as a whole  was a confused, semi-religious philosophy, containing many  inconsistent elements. Appearing [p. 456] [v-Page_456] when the wreck of  paganism was complete, but before Christianity had conquered the  educated world, it made a strong appeal to the spiritually minded; and  also to those who hankered after the mysterious and the occult. It  taught the illusory nature of all temporal things, and in the violence  of its idealism outdid its master Plato. It also taught the existence  of an Absolute God, the "Unconditioned One," who might be  known in ecstasy and contemplation; and here it made a direct appeal  to the mystical instincts of men. Those natural mystics who lived in  the time of its greatest popularity found in it therefore a ready  means of expressing their own intuitions of reality. Hence the early  mysticism of Europe, both Christian and pagan, has come down to us in  a Neoplatonic dress; and speaks the tongue of Alexandria rather than  that of Jerusalem, Athens, or Rome.

[v-p9]The influence of Plotinus upon later Christian  mysticism was enormous though indirect. During the patristic period  all that was best in the spirit of Neoplatonism flowed into the veins  of the Church.   St. Augustine    (A.D. 354-430) and   Dionysius the Areopagite    (writing between 475 and 525) are amongst his spiritual children; and  it is mainly through them that his doctrine reached the mediaeval  world.   Proclus    (412-c. 490), the last of the pagan philosophers, also derives from  his teaching. Through these three there is hardly one in the long tale  of the European contemplatives whom his powerful spirit has failed to  reach.

[v-p10]The mysticism of St. Augustine is partly obscured for  us by the wealth of his intellectual and practical life: yet no one  can read the "Confessions" without being struck by the  intensity and actuality of his spiritual experience, and the  characteristically mystical formula under which he apprehended  Reality. It is clear that when he composed this work he was already an  advanced contemplative. The immense intellectual activities by which  he is best remembered were fed by the solitary adventures of his soul.  No merely literary genius could have produced the wonderful chapters  in the seventh and eighth books, or the innumerable detached passages  in which his passion for the Absolute breaks out. Later mystics,  recognizing this fact, constantly appeal to his authority, and his  influence ranks next to that of the Bible in the formation of the  mediaeval school.

[v-p11]Second only to that of St. Augustine was the influence  exercised by the strange and nameless writer who chose to ascribe his  works to Dionysius the Areopagite, the friend of St. Paul, and to  address his letters upon mysticism to Paul's fellow-worker,  Timothy. The pseudo-Dionysius was probably a Syrian monk. The  patristic quotations detected in his work prove that he cannot have  written before A.D.475; it is most likely that he flourished in the  early part of the sixth century. His chief works are the treatises on  the Angelic Hierarchies and on the Names of God, and a short but  priceless tract on mystical theology. From the ninth century to the  seventeenth these writings nourished the most spiritual intuitions of  men, and possessed an authority which it is now hard to realize.  Medieval mysticism is soaked in Dionysian conceptions. Particularly in  the fourteenth century, the golden [p. 457] [v-Page_457] age of mystical  literature, the phrase "Dionysius saith" is of continual  recurrence: and has for those who use it much the same weight as  quotations from the Bible or the great fathers of the Church.

[v-p12]The importance of Dionysius lies in the fact that he  was the first and for a long time the only, Christian writer who  attempted to describe frankly and accurately the workings of the  mystical consciousness, and the nature of its ecstatic attainment of  God. So well did he do h s work that later contemplatives, reading  him, found their most sublime experiences reflected and partly  explained. Hence in describing those experiences, they adopted his  language and metaphors; which afterwards became the classic terms of  contemplative science. To him Christian literature owes the  paradoxical concept of the Absolute Godhead as the "Divine  Dark," the Unconditioned, "the negation of all that   is   "--  i.e   ., of all that the surface consciousness perceives--and of the  soul's attainment of the Absolute as a "divine  ignorance," a way of negation. This idea is common to Greek and  Indian philosophy. With Dionysius it enters the Catholic fold.

[v-p13]Side by side with the Neoplatonic mysticism of St.  Augustine and Dionysius runs another line of spiritual culture, hardly  less important for the development of the contemplative life. This  takes its rise among the Fathers of the Egyptian desert, whose heroic  spirituality was a contributory factor in St. Augustine's  conversion. It finds beautiful expression in the writings of   St. Marcarius of Egypt    (c. 295-386), the disciple of St. Anthony and friend of St. Basil,  and reaches the West through the "Dialogues" of   John Cassian    (c. 350- ), one of the most important documents for the history of  Christian mysticism. The fruit of a seven-year pilgrimage among the  Egyptian monasteries, and many conversations on spiritual themes with  the monks, we find in these dialogues for the first time a classified  and realistic description of the successive degrees of contemplative  prayer, and their relation to the development of the spiritual life.  Adopted by St. Benedict as part of the regular spiritual food of his  monks, they have had a decisive influence on the cloistered mysticism  of the Middle Ages. Their sober and orderly doctrine, destined to be  characteristic of the Roman Church, received fresh emphasis in the  works of   St. Gregory the Great    (540-604), which also helped to form the souls of succeeding  generations of contemplatives.

[v-p14]We have therefore, at the opening of the Middle Ages,  two great streams of spiritual culture; the Benedictine, moderate and  practical, formed chiefly on Cassian and St. Gregory, and the  Neoplatonic, represented by Dionysius the Areopagite, and in a less  exclusive form by St. Augustine. The works of Dionysius were  translated from Greek into Latin about A.D. 850 by the Irish  philosopher and theologian,   John Scotus Erigena   , one of the scholars assembled at the court of Charlemagne: and this  event marks the beginning of a full tradition of mysticism in Western  Europe. John the Scot, many of whose own writings exhibit a strong  mystical bias, is the only name in this period which the history of  mysticism can claim. We are on the descending [p. 458] [v-Page_458] line  of the "Dark Ages": and here the curve of mysticism runs  parallel with the curves of intellectual and artistic activity.

[v-p15]The great current of medieval mysticism first shows  itself in the eleventh century, and chiefly in connection with the  Benedictine Order for the work of such monastic reformers as   St. Romuald    (c. 950-1027)   St. Peter Damian    (1007-1072), and   St. Bruno    (1032-1101), the founder of the Grande Chartreuse, was really the  effort of contemplative souls to establish an environment in which the  mystical life could be lived. Thus too we must regard at least a large  proportion of the hermits and solitaries who became so marked a  feature in the religion of the West. At this period mysticism was not  sharply distinguished from the rest of the religious complex, but was  rather the realistic experience of the truths on which religion rests.  It spread mainly through personal instruction and discipleship. Its  literary monuments were few among the most important and widely  influential being the "Meditations" of   St. Anselm    (1033-1109), which, disentangled by recent scholarship from the  spurious material passing under his name, are now seen to have been a  chief channel of transmission for the Augustinian mysticism which  dominated the early Middle Ages. The general religious revival of the  twelfth century had its marked mystical aspect, and produced four  personalities of great historical importance: the Benedictines   St. Bernard of Clairvaux    (1091-1153),   St. Hildegarde of Bingen    (1098-1179), and   Joachim of Flora    (1132-1202); and the Scotch or Irish Augustinian   Richard of St. Victor      (ob. c.    1173), whom Dante held to be "in contemplation more than  man." Richard's master and contemporary, the scholastic  philosopher   Hugh    (1097-1141) of the same Abbey of St. Victor at Paris, is also  generally reckoned amongst the mystics of thus period, but with less  reason; since contemplation occupies a small place in his theological  writings. In spite of the deep respect shown towards him by Aquinas  and other theologians, Hugh's influence on later mystical  literature was slight. The spirit of Richard and of St. Bernard, on  the contrary, was destined to dominate it for the next two hundred  years. With them the literature of mediaeval mysticism properly so  called begins.

[v-p16]This literature Falls into two classes: the personal  and the didactic. Sometimes, as in a celebrated sermon of St. Bernard,  the two are combined; the teacher appealing to his own experience in  illustration of his theme. In the works of the Victorines the attitude  is didactic: one might almost say scientific. In them  mysticism--that is to say, the degrees of contemplation, the  training and exercise of the spiritual sense--takes its place as  a recognized department of theology. It is in Richard's  favourite symbolism, "Benjamin," the beloved child of  Rachel, emblem of the Contemplative Life: and in his two chief works,  "Benjamin Major" and "Benjamin Minor," it is  classified and described in all its branches. Though mysticism was for  Richard the "science of the heart" and he had little  respect for secular learning, yet his solid intellectuality did much  to save the medieval school from the perils of religious emotionalism.  In his hands the antique mystical tradition which flowed through  Plotinus and the Areopagite, was codified and [p. 459] [v-Page_459]  transmitted to the mediaeval world. Like his master, Hugh, he had the  mediaeval passion for elaborate allegory, neat arrangement, rigid  classification, and significant numbers in things. As Dante parcelled  out Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell with mathematical precision, and  proved that Beatrice was herself a Nine, so these writers divide and  subdivide the stages of contemplation, the states of the soul, the  degrees of Divine Love: and perform terrible   tours de force    in the course of compelling the ever-variable expressions of  man's spiritual vitality to fall into orderly and parallel  series, conformable to the mystic numbers of Seven, Four, and  Three.

[v-p17]The influence of Richard of St. Victor, great as it  was, is exceeded by that of St. Bernard; the dominant spiritual  personality of the twelfth century. Bernard's career of  ceaseless and varied activity sufficiently disproves the  "idleness" of the contemplative type. He continued and  informed with his own spirit the Benedictine tradition, and his  writings quickly took their place, with those of Richard of St.  Victor, among the living forces which conditioned the development of  later mysticism. Both these mystics exerted a capital influence on the  formation of our national school of mysticism in the fourteenth  century. Translations and paraphrases of the "Benjamin  Major," "Benjamin Minor," and other works of Richard  of St. Victor, and of various tracts and epistles of St. Bernard, are  constantly met with in the MS. collections of mystical and theological  literature written in England in the thirteenth and fourteenth  centuries. An early paraphrase of the "Benjamin Minor,"  sometimes attributed to Richard Rolle, was probably made by the  anonymous author of "The Cloud of Unknowing," who was also  responsible for the first appearance of the Areopagite in English  dress.

[v-p18]If mediaeval mysticism in the West develops mainly  under the sane and enduring influence of the Victorines and St.  Bernard, in Germany and Italy it appeared in a more startling form;  seeking, in the prophetic activities of St. Hildegarde of Bingen and  the Abbot Joachim of Flora, to influence the course of secular  history. In St. Hildegarde and her fellow-Benedictine   St. Elizabeth of Shonau    (1138-1165) we have the first of that long line of women  mystics--visionaries, prophetesses, and political  reformers--combining spiritual transcendence with great practical  ability, of whom St. Catherine of Siena is probably the greatest  example. Exalted by the strength of their spiritual intuitions, they  emerged from an obscure life to impose their wills, and their reading  of events, upon the world. From the point of view of Eternity, in  whose light they lived, they attacked the sins of their generation.  St. Hildegarde, a woman of powerful character, apparently possessed of  abnormal psychic gifts, was driven by that Living Light which was her  inspiration to denounce the corruptions of Church and State. In the  inspired letters which she sent like firebrands over Europe, we see  German idealism and German practicality struggling together; the  unflinching description of abuses, the vast poetic vision by which  they are condemned. These qualities are seen again in the South German  mystics of the next century: the four Benedictine women of genius, who  [p. 460] [v-Page_460] had their home in the convent of Helfde. These are  the   Nun Gertrude    (Abbess 1251-1291) and her sister   St. Mechthild of Hackborn      (ob.    1310), with her sublime symbolic visions: then, the poet of the  group, the exquisite   Mechthild of Magdeburg    (1212-1299), who, first a   beguine    at Magdeburg, where she wrote the greater part of "The Flowing  Light of the Godhead," came to Helfde in 1268; last the  celebrated   St. Gertrude the Great    (1256-1311). In these contemplatives the political spirit is less  marked than in St. Hildegarde: but religious and ethical activity  takes its place. St. Gertrude the Great is a characteristic Catholic  visionary of the feminine type: absorbed in her subjective  experiences, her often beautiful and significant dreams, her loving  conversations with Christ and the Blessed Virgin. Close to her in  temperament is St. Mechthild of Hackborn; but her attitude as a whole  is more impersonal, more truly mystic. The great symbolic visions in  which her most spiritual perceptions are expressed are artistic  creations rather than psycho-sensorial hallucinations, and dwell  little upon the humanity of Christ, with which St. Gertrude is  constantly occupied. The terms in which Mechthild of  Magdeburg--an educated and well-born woman, half poet, half  seer--describes her union with God are intensely individual, and  apparently owe more to the romantic poets of her time than to earlier  religious writers. The works of this Mechthild, early translated into  Latin, were read by Dante. Their influence is traceable in the  "Paradiso"; and by some scholars she is believed to be the  Matilda of his Earthly Paradise, though others give this position to  her sister-mystic, St. Mechthild of Hackborn.

[v-p19]Modern scholarship tends more and more to see in the  strange personality of the Abbot Joachim of Flora, whom Dante placed  among the great contemplatives in the Heaven of the Sun, the chief  influence in the development of Italian mysticism. The true import of  his prophecies, which proclaimed in effect the substitution of  mystical for institutional Christianity, was only appreciated after  his death. But their prestige grew during the course of the thirteenth  century; especially after the appearance of the mendicant friars, who  seemed to fulfil his prediction that the new era of the Holy Spirit  would be brought in about the year 1260 by two new Orders who would  live in poverty the spiritual life. From this time, Joachism found its  chief vehicle of expression through Franciscan mysticism of the more  revolutionary sort. Though there is no evidence that   St. Francis of Assisi    (1182-1226) knew the prophecies of the "Eternal Gospel,"  he can hardly have grown up without some knowledge of them, and also  of the Cathari and other semi-mystical heresies--many of them  stressing the idea of evangelical poverty--which were spreading  through Italy from the north. But the mystical genius which may have  received food from these sources was itself strikingly original; the  spontaneous expression of a rare personality, a great spiritual  realist who admitted no rival to the absolute claims of the mystical  life of poverty and joy. St. Francis was untouched by monastic  discipline, or the writings of Dionysius or St. Bernard. His only  literary influence was the New Testament. With him, mysticism comes  into the open air, seeks to transform the stuff of daily life, [p. 461] [v-Page_461] speaks the vernacular, turns the songs of the troubadours  to the purposes of Divine love; yet remains completely loyal to the  Catholic Church. None who came after him succeeded in recapturing his  secret which was the secret of spiritual genius of the rarest type:  but he left his mark upon the history, art and literature of Western  Europe, and the influence of his spirit still lives.

[v-p20]In a general sense it is true to say that Italian  mysticism descends from St. Francis, and in its first period seems  almost to be the prerogative of his disciples; especially those of the  "Spiritual" party who strove to maintain his ideals in  their purity. It is here that we find Franciscan ardour and  singlemindedness in alliance with apocalyptic notions deriving from  Joachist ideas. In Provence, a widespread mystical movement coloured  by Joachism was led by Hugues de Digne and his sister   St. Douceline    (  n   . 1214); in whom we find a spirit which, like that of Francis, could  find the Divine through flowers and birds and simple natural things.  In Italy, nourished by the influence of such deeply mystical friars as    John of Parma      (ob.    1288  )    and   John of La Verna   , this Franciscan spirituality entered into conflict with the  ecclesiastical politics of the day; taking up that duty of denouncing  the corruptions of the Church, which has so often attracted the  mystics. Here the typical figure is that of   Jacopone da Todi      (   1228-1306), the converted lawyer turned mystical poet. On one hand  deeply influenced by St. Augustine and Dionysius the Areopagite, on  the other the devoted exponent of the Founder's ideals, his  "spiritual songs" lift Franciscan mysticism to the heights  of ecstatic rapture and literary expression; whilst his savage  castigations of the Papacy give him a place among the great mediaeval  satirists. Jacopone's poems have been shown by Von Hugel to  have had a formative influence on St. Catherine of Genoa; and have  probably affected many other mystics, not only in Italy but elsewhere,  for they quickly attained considerable circulation.

[v-p21]In his contemporary the   Blessed Angela of Foligno    (1248-1309) who was converted from a sinful life to become a tertiary  hermit of the Franciscan Order we have a mystic of the first rank  whose visions and revelations place her in the same class as St.  Catherine of Genoa and St. Teresa. Known to her followers as the  Mistress of Theologians, and numbering among her disciples the  brilliant and tempestuous "spiritual" friar Ubertino da  Casale, the lofty metaphysical element in Angela's mysticism  suggests the high level of spiritual culture achieved in Franciscan  circles of her time. By the sixteenth century her works, translated  into the vernacular, had taken their place amongst the classics of  mysticism. In the seventeenth they were largely used by St.  Francois de Sales, Madame Guyon, and other Catholic  contemplatives. Seventeen years older than Dante, whose great genius  properly closes this line of spiritual descent, she is a link between  the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in Italian mysticism.

[v-p22]We now approach the Golden Age of Mysticism: and at  the opening of that epoch, dominating it by their peculiar combination  of intellectual and spiritual power stand the figures of the  "Seraphic and Angelic [p. 462] [v-Page_462] Doctors,"   St. Bonaventura   , the Franciscan (1221-1274), and   St. Thomas Aquinas   , the Dominican (1226-1274). As with St. Augustine, the intellectual  greatness of St. Thomas has obscured his mystical side, whilst St.  Bonaventura, the apostle of a wise moderation, may easily appear to  the hurried reader the least mystical of the Franciscan mystics. Yet  both were contemplatives, and because of this were able to interpret  to the medieval world the great spiritual tradition of the past. Hence  their immense influence on the mystical schools of the fourteenth  century. It is sometimes stated that these schools derive mainly from  St. Bonaventura, and represent an opposition to scholastic theology;  but as a matter of fact their greatest personalities--in  particular Dante and the German Dominicans--are soaked in the  spirit of Aquinas, and quote his authority at every turn.

[v-p23]In Europe the mystic curve is now approaching its  highest point. In the East that point has already been passed. Sufi,  or Mahommedan mysticism, appearing in the eighth century in the  beautiful figure of   Rabi'a   , the "Moslem St. Teresa" (717-801), and continued by the  martyr   Al Hallaj      (ob.    922), attains literary expression in the eleventh in the  "Confessions" of   Al Ghazzali    (1058-1111), and has its classic period in the thirteenth in the  works of the mystic poets   'Attar    (c. 1140-1234),   Sadi    (1184-1263), and the saintly   Jalalu 'd Din    (1207-1273). Its tradition is continued in the fourteenth century by  the rather erotic mysticism of   Hafiz    (c. 1300-1388) and his successors, and in the fifteenth by the poet   Jami    (1414-1492).

[v-p24]Whilst Hafiz already strikes a note of decadence for  the mysticism of Islam, the year 1300 is for Western Europe a vital  year in the history of the spiritual life. Mystics of the first rank  are appearing, or about to appear. The Majorcan scholar-mystic   Ramon Lull      (ob.    1315) is drawing to the end of his long life. In Italy   Dante    (1265-1321) is forcing human language to express one of the most  sublime visions of the Absolute which has ever been crystallized into  speech. He inherits and fuses into one that loving and artistic  reading of reality which was the heart of Franciscan mysticism, and  that other ordered vision of the transcendental world which the  Dominicans through Aquinas poured into the stream of European thought.  For the one the spiritual world was all love: for the other all law.  For Dante it was both. In the "Paradiso" his stupendous  genius apprehends and shows to us a Beatific Vision in which the  symbolic systems of all great mystics and many whom the world does not  call mystics--of Dionysius, Richard, St. Bernard, Mechthild,  Aquinas, and countless others--are included and explained.

[v-p25]The moment in which the "Commedia" was  being written coincides with the awakening of mystical activity in  Germany and Flanders. Between the years 1280 and 1309 was produced,  probably in the Liege district and under Franciscan influence, the  curious anonymous work which isnow only known to us in Latin and  English translations--  "The Mirror of Simple Souls."    This long treatise, clearly influenced by Dionysius, the Victorines,  and the twelfth-century tract known as the "Letter to the  Brethren of Mons Dei," is a piece of mystical literature of an  advanced kind, often fringing the borders of orthodoxy and looking  [p. 463] [v-Page_463] forward to the speculative Flemish mysticism of the  fourteenth century. Its writer was probably contemporary with the  founder of this school; the great Dominican scholar   Meister Eckhart    (1260-1327), who resembled Dante in his combination of mystical  insight with intense intellectual power, and laid the foundations at  once of German philosophy and German mysticism. These two giants stand  side by side at the opening of the century; perfect representatives of  the Teutonic and Latin instinct for transcendental reality.

[v-p26]Eckhart, though only a few years younger than St.  Gertrude the Great, seems to belong to a different world. His  commanding personality, his genius for the supra-sensible nourished by  the works of Dionysius and Erigena, moulded and inspired all whom it  came near. The German and Flemish mystics of the fourteenth and  fifteenth centuries, differing much in temperament from their master  and from each other, have yet something in common: something which is  shared by no other school. This something is derived from Eckhart; for  all have passed under his hand, being either his immediate disciples,  or the friends or pupils of his disciples. Eckhart's doctrine is  chiefly known to us by reports of his vernacular sermons delivered at  Strassburg; then the religious centre of Germany. In these we see him  as a teaching mystic full of pastoral zeal, but demanding a high level  both of intellect and spirituality in those he addressed. Towards the  end of his life he fell into disgrace. A number of propositions  extracted from his writings, and representing his more extreme views,  were condemned by the Church as savouring of pantheism and other  heresies: and certainly the violence and daring of his language laid  him open to misconstruction. In his efforts to speak of the  unspeakable he was constantly betrayed into expressions which were  bound to seem paradoxical and exaggerated to other men.  Eckhart's influence, however, was little hurt by ecclesiastical  condemnation. His pupils, though they remained loyal Catholics,  contrived also to be loyal disciples. To the end of their lives their  teaching was coloured--often inspired--by the doctrines of  the great, if heretical, scholar whose memory they venerated as that  of a saint.

[v-p27]The contrast in type between Eckhart and his two most  famous disciples is an interesting one. All three were Dominican  friars; all were devout followers of St. Augustine, the Areopagite,  St. Bernard, and Aquinas; all had been trained in the schools of  Cologne, where Albert the Great and St. Thomas had taught, and where  their powerful influence still lived. The mysticism of Eckhart, so far  as he allows us to see it in his sermons and fragmentary writings, is  objective--one might almost say dogmatic. He describes with an  air of almost terrible certainty and intimacy, not that which he has  felt, but the place or plane of being he has known--"the  desert of the Godhead were no one is at home." He is a great  scholar, a natural metaphysician passionately condensed with the quest  of Absolute Truth.

[v-p28]Of his two pupils,   John Tauler    (c. 1300-1361), friar-preacher of Strassburg, was a born missionary:  a man who combined with great theological learning and mystical genius  of a high order an overwhelming [p. 464] [v-Page_464] zeal for souls. He  laboured incessantly to awaken men to a sense of their transcendental  heritage. Without the hard intellectualism occasionally noticeable in  Eckhart, or the tendency to introspection and the excessive artistic  sensibility of Suso, Tauler is the most virile of the German mystics.  The breadth of his humanity is only equalled by the depth of his  spirituality. His sermons--his only authentic works--are  trumpet-calls to heroic action upon spiritual levels. They influenced  many later mystics, especially St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross.  Tauler is not a subjective writer: only by implication can we assure  ourselves that he speaks from personal experience. He has sometimes,  though unfairly, been described as a precursor of the Reformation.  Such a claim could only be made by those who look upon all pure  Christianity as a form of Protestant heresy. He attacked, like St.  Hildegarde, St. Catherine of Siena, and many others, the  ecclesiastical corruption of his period: but his writings, if read in  unexpurgated editions, prove him to have been a fervent and orthodox  Catholic.

[v-p29]Tauler was one of the leading spirits in the great  informal society of the   Friends of God   , which sprang into being in Strassburg, spread through the Rhenish  province and beyond to Switzerland and Bavaria, and worked in this  moment of religious decadence for the spiritual regeneration of the  people. In a spirit of fierce enthusiasm and wholehearted devotion,  the Friends of God set themselves to the mystic life as the only life  worthy of the name. A great outburst of transcendental activity took  place: many visions and ecstasies were reported: amazing conversions  occurred. The movement had many features in common with that of the  Quakers; except that it took place within, instead of without, the  official Church, and was partly directed against the doctrines of the  Brethren of the Free Spirit and other heretical sects. With it was  connected the third of the trio of great German Dominican mystics, the    Blessed Henry Suso    (c. 1295-1365), a natural recluse and ascetic, and a visionary of the  most exuberant Catholic type. To Suso, subjective, romantic, deeply  interested in his own soul and his personal relation with God,  mysticism was not so much a doctrine to be imparted to other men as an  intimate personal adventure. Though a trained philosopher and  theologian, and a devoted follower of Eckhart, his  autobiography--a human document far more detailed and ingenuous  than St. Teresa's more celebrated "Life"--is  mainly the record of his griefs and joys, his pains, visions,  ecstasies, and miseries. Even his mystical treatises are in dialogue  form, as if he could hardly get away from the personal and dramatic  aspect of the spiritual life.

[v-p30]Around these three--Eckhart, Tauler,  Suso--are gathered other and more shadowy personalities: members  of this mystical society of the Friends of God, bound to the heroic  attempt to bring life--the terribly corrupt and disordered  religious life of the fourteenth century--back into relation with  spiritual reality, to initiate their neighbours into the atmosphere of  God. From one of these nameless members comes the literary jewel of  the movement: the beautiful little treatise called the   "Theologia Germanica,"    or "Book of the Perfect Life," probably written in  Frankfort about the year 1350 by a priest of the Teutonic Order.  [p. 465] [v-Page_465] One of the most successful of many attempts to make  mystic principles available for common men, this book was greatly  loved by Luther, who published an incomplete edition in 1518. Other  Friends of God are now only known to us as the authors of letters,  descriptions of conversions, visions, and spiritual  adventures--literature which the movement produced in enormous  quantities. No part of the history of mysticism has been more changed  by recent research than that of the Rhenish school: and the work is  still but partly done. At present we can only record the principal  names which we find connected with the mystical propaganda of the  Friends of God. These are first the nuns   Margaret Ebner    (1291-1351) and her sister   Christina   , important personages in the movement upon whose historicity no  doubts have been cast. Margaret appears to have been a psychic as well  as a mystic: and to have possessed, like Madame Guyon, telepathic and  clairvoyant powers. Next the rather shadowy pair of laymen,   Henry of Nordlingen    and   Nicolas of Basle   . Lastly the puzzling figure of   Rulman Merswin    (c. 1310-1382), author of the series of apocalyptic visions called  The Book of the Nine Rocks"; whose story of his conversion and  mystic life, whether it be regarded as fact or "tendency  literature," is a psychological document of the first rank.

[v-p31]In immediate dependence on the German school, and like  it drawing its intellectual vigour from the genius of Eckhart, is the  mysticism of Flanders: best known to us in the work of its most  sublime representative, the   Blessed John Ruysbroeck    (1293-1381), one of the greatest mystics whom the world has yet  known. In Ruysbroeck's works the metaphysical and personal  aspects of mystical truth are fused and attain their highest  expression. Intellectually indebted to St. Augustine, Richard of St.  Victor, and Eckhart, his value lies in the fact that the Eckhartian  philosophy was merely the medium by which he expressed the results of  profound experience. In his early years a priest in Brussels, in old  age a recluse in the forest of Soignes, Ruysbroeck's influence  on his own generation was great. Through his disciple   Gerard Groot    (1340-1384), founder of the Brotherhood of the Common Life, it formed  the inspiration of the religious movement of the New Devotion; which  carried over into the next century the spirit of the great mediaeval  mystics. The mystical writings of   Henry de Mande    (c. 1360-1415), the "Ruysbroeck of the North," the  beautiful and deeply Platonic "Fiery Soliloquy with God"  of   Gerlac Petersen    (1378-1411), and above all the "Imitation of Christ" of  his friend   Thomas a Kempis    (1380-1471), in which some of Gerard Groot's meditations may be  enshrined, are the chief channels through which this mystical current  passed. In the next century the Franciscan   Henry de Herp    or Harphius   (ob.    1477) and two greater personalities--the learned and holy  Platonist, Cardinal   Nicolas of Cusa    (1401-1464), and his friend the theologian and contemplative   Denis the Carthusian    (1402-1471), one of the great religious figures of the fifteenth  century--drew their inspiration from Ruysbroeck. Denis translated  the whole of his works into Latin; and calls him "another  Dionysius" but "clear where the Areopagite is  obscure." It was mainly through the voluminous writings of  Denis, widely read [p. 466] [v-Page_466] during succeeding centuries,  that the doctrine of the mediaeval mystics was carried over to the  Renaissance world. Ruysbroeck's works, with those of Suso,  appear in English MSS. early in the fifteenth century, taking their  place by the side of St. Bernard, St. Bonaventura, and the great  English mystic Richard Rolle. The influence of his genius has also  been detected in the mystical literature of Spain.

[v-p32]English mysticism seems to have its roots in the  religious revival which arose during Stephen's reign. It was  then, and throughout its course, closely linked with the solitary  life. Its earnest literary monument, the "Ancren Riwle,"  was written early in the twelfth century for the use of three  anchoresses. So too the "Meditations" of   St. Aldred    (Abbot of Rievaulx 1146-1166), and the Rule he wrote for his  anchoress sister, presuppose the desire for the mystical life. But the  first English mystic we can name with certainty is   Margery Kempe    (probably writing c. 1290), the anchoress of Lynn. Even so, we know  nothing of this woman's life; and only a fragment of her  "Contemplations" has survived. It is with the next name,   Richard Rolle of Hampole    (c. 1300-1349), that the short but brilliant procession of English  mystics begins. Rolle, educated at Oxford and perhaps at Paris, and  widely read in theology, became a hermit in order to live in  perfection that mystic life of "Heat, Sweetness, and  Song," to which he felt himself to be called. Richard of St.  Victor, St. Bernard, and St. Bonaventura are the authors who have  influenced him most; but he remains, in spite of this, one of the most  individual of all writers on mysticism. A voluminous author, his chief  works are still in MS., and he seems to have combined the careers of  writer and wandering preacher with that of recluse. He laid claim to  direct inspiration, was outspoken in his criticisms of religious and  secular life, and in the next generation the Lollards were found to  appeal to his authority. Rolle already shows the practical temper  characteristic of the English school. His interest was not philosophy,  but spiritual life; and especially his own experience of it. There is  a touch of Franciscan poetry in his descriptions of his communion with  Divine Love, and the "heavenly song" in which it was  expressed, of Franciscan ardour in his zeal for souls. His works  greatly influenced succeeding English mystics.

[v-p33]He was followed in the second half of the fourteenth  century by the unknown author of   "The Cloud of Unknowing"    and its companion treatises, and by the gracious spirit of   Walter Hilton      (ob.    1396). With "The Cloud of Unknowing," the spirit of  Dionysius first appears in English literature. It is the work of an  advanced contemplative, deeply influenced by the Areopagite and the  Victorines, who was also an acute psychologist. From the hand that  wrote it came the first English translation of the "Theologia  Mystica," "Dionise Hid Divinite": a work which says  an old writer, "ran across England at deere rates," so  ready was the religious consciousness of the time for the reception of  mystical truth.

[v-p34]Hilton, though also influenced by Dionysius and  Richard of St. Victor, addresses a wider audience. He is pre-eminently  a spiritual director, the practical teacher of interior ways, not a  metaphysician; and his great work "The Scale of  Perfection" quickly took rank among the [p. 467] [v-Page_467]  classics of the spiritual life. The moment of his death coincides with  the completion of the most beautiful of all English mystical works,  the "Revelations of Love" of the anchoress   Julian of Norwich    (1343-died after 1413), [v-p34.1]"theodidacta, profunda,  ecstatica," whose unique personality closes and  crowns the history of English mediaeval mysticism. In her the best  gifts of Rolle and Hilton are transmuted by a "genius for the  infinite" of a peculiarly beautiful and individual type. She was  a seer, a lover, and a poet. Though considerable theological knowledge  underlies her teaching, it is in essence the result of a direct and  personal vision of singular intensity.

[v-p35]Already before the completion of Julian's  revelations two other women of genius, the royal prophetess and  founder   St. Bridget of Sweden    (1303-1373) and   St. Catherine of Siena    (1347-1380), had lived and died. St. Bridget, or Birgitta, a mystic  and visionary of the Hildegardian type, believed herself called to end  the exile of the Papacy and bring peace to the Church. Four months  after her death, St. Catherine--then aged 26--took up her  unfinished work. The true successor of Dante as a revealer of Reality,  and next to St. Francis the greatest of Italian mystics, Catherine  exhibits the Unitive Life in its richest, most perfect form. She was a  great active and a great ecstatic: at once politician, teacher, and  contemplative, holding a steady balance between the inner and the  outer life. Well named "the mother of thousands of souls,"  with little education she yet contrived, in a short career dogged by  persistent ill-health, to change the course of history, rejuvenate  religion, and compose, in her "Divine Dialogue," one of  the jewels of Italian religious literature.

[v-p36]With the first half of the fifteenth century it is  plain that the mystic curve droops downwards. At its opening we find  the influential figure of the Chancellor   Gerson    (1363-1429) at once a mystic in his own right and a keen and  impartial critic of extravagant mystical teachings and phenomena. But  the great period is over: the new life of the Renaissance, already  striving in other spheres of activity, has hardly touched the  spiritual plane. A transient revival of Franciscan spirituality is  associated with the work of three reforming mystics; the energetic  French visionary   St. Colette of Corbie    (1381-1447), her Italian disciple   St. Bernardino of Siena    (1380-1444), and the ecstatic Clarisse,   St. Catherine of Bologna    (1413-1463). Contemporary with this group are the careers of two  strongly contrasted woman-mystics:   St. Joan of Arc    (1412-1431), and the suffering Flemish visionary   St. Lydwine of Schiedam    (1380-1432).

[v-p37]With the second half of the century the scene shifts  to Italy, where a spiritual genius of the first rank appeared in   St. Catherine of Genoa    (1447-1510). She, like her namesake of Siena, was at once an eager  lover and an indomitable doer. More, she was a constructive mystic, a  profound thinker as well as an ecstatic: an original teacher, a busy  and practical philanthropist. Her influence lived on, and is seen in  the next generation in the fine, well-balanced nature of another  contemplative: the   Venerable Battista Vernazza    (1497-1587), her goddaughter and the child of one of her most loyal  friends. Catherine of Genoa [p. 468] [v-Page_468] stands alone in her day  as an example of the sane and vigorous mystic life. Her contemporaries  were for the most part visionaries of the more ordinary female type,  such as   Osanna Andreasi of Mantua    (1449-1505),   Columba Rieti    (c. 1430-1501) and her disciple   Lucia of Narni   . They seem to represent the slow extinction of the spirit which  burned so bright in St. Catherine of Siena.

[v-p38]That spirit reappears in the sixteenth century in  Flanders in the works of the Benedictine Abbot   Blosius    (1506-1565); and, far more conspicuously, in Spain, a country hardly  touched by the outburst of mystical life which elsewhere closed the  medieval period. Spanish mysticism first appears in close connection  with the religious orders: in the Franciscans   Francisco de Osuna      (ob. c.    1540), whose manual of contemplative prayer influenced the  development of St. Teresa, and   St. Peter of Alcantara    (1499-1562), her friend and adviser; in the Dominican   Luis de Granada    (1504-1588) and the Augustinian   Luis de Leon    (1528-1591). It attains definite and characteristic expression in the  life and personality of   St. Ignatius Loyola    (1491-1556), the great founder of the Society of Jesus. The concrete  nature of St. Ignatius' work, and especially its later  developments, has blinded historians to the fact that he was a true  mystic, own brother to such great actives as St. Teresa and George  Fox, actuated by the same vision of reality, passing through the same  stages of psychological growth. His spiritual sons greatly influenced  the inner life of the great Carmelite,   St. Teresa    (1515-1582).

[v-p39]Like St. Catherine of Siena, these mystics--and  to them we must add St. Teresa's greatest disciple, the poet and  contemplative   St. John of the Cross    (1542-1591)--seem to have arisen in direct response to the need  created by the corrupt or disordered religious life of their time.  They were the "saints of the counter-Reformation"; and, in  a period of ecclesiastical chaos, flung the weight of their genius and  their sanctity into the orthodox Catholic scale. Whilst St. Ignatius  organized a body of spiritual soldiery, who should attack heresy and  defend the Church, St. Teresa, working against heavy odds, infused new  vitality into a great religious order and restored it to its duty of  direct communion with the transcendental world. In this she was helped  by St. John of the Cross; who, a psychologist and philosopher as well  as a great mystic, performed the necessary function of bringing the  personal experience of the Spanish school back again into touch with  the main stream of mystic tradition. All three, practical organizers  and profound contemplatives, exhibit in its splendour the dual  character of the mystic life. They left behind them in their literary  works an abiding influence which has guided the footsteps and  explained the discoveries of succeeding generations of adventurers in  the transcendental world. The true spiritual children of these mystics  are to be found, not in their own country, where the religious life  which they had lifted to transcendent levels degenerated when their  overmastering influence was withdrawn, but amongst the innumerable  contemplative souls of succeeding generations who have fallen under  the spell of the "Spiritual Exercises," the  "Interior Castle," or the "Dark Night of the  Soul." [p. 469] [v-Page_469]

[v-p40]The Divine fire lit by the great Carmelites of Spain  is next seen in Italy, in the lives of the Dominican nun   St. Catherine dei Ricci    (1522-1590) and the Florentine Carmelite   St. Maria Maddelena dei Pazzi    (1566-1607), the author of voluminous literary works. It appears in  the New World in the beautiful figure of   St. Rose of Lima    (1586-1617), the Peruvian nun; and at the same moment, under a very  different aspect, in Protestant Germany, in the person of one of the  giants of mysticism, the "inspired shoemaker"   Jacob Boehme    (1575-1624).

[v-p41]Boehme, one of the most astonishing cases in history  of a natural genius for the transcendent, has left his mark upon  German philosophy as well as upon the history of mysticism. William  Law, Blake, and Saint-Martin are amongst those who have sat at his  feet. The great sweep of Boehme's vision includes both Man and  the Universe: the nature of God and of the Soul. In him we find again  that old doctrine of Rebirth which the earlier German mystics had  loved. Were it not for the difficult symbolism in which his vision is  expressed, his influence would be far greater than it is. He remains  one of those cloud-wrapped immortals who must be rediscovered and  reinterpreted by the adventurers of every age.

[v-p42]The seventeenth century rivals the fourteenth in the  richness and variety of its mystical life. Two main currents are to be  detected in it: dividing between them the two main aspects of  man's communion with the Absolute. One, symbolic, constructive,  activistic, bound up with the ideas of regeneration, and often using  the language of the alchemists sets out from the Teutonic genius of  Boehme. It achieves its successes outside the Catholic Church, and  chiefly in Germany and England, where by 1650 his works were widely  known. In its decadent forms it runs to the occult: to alchemy,  Rosicrucianism, apocalyptic prophecy, and other aberrations of the  spiritual sense. The other current arises within the Catholic Church,  and in close touch with the great tradition of Christian mysticism. It  achieves fullest expansion in France, and tends to emphasize the  personal and intimate side of contemplation: encouraging passive  receptivity and producing in its exaggerated forms the aberrations of  the Quietists.

[v-p43]In the seventeenth century England was peculiarly  rich, if not in great mystics, at any rate in mystically minded men,  seekers after Reality. Mysticism, it seems, was in the air; broke out  under many disguises and affected many forms of life. It produced in   George Fox    (1624-1690), the founder of the Quakers, a "great active"  of the first rank, entirely unaffected by tradition, and in the Quaker  movement itself an outbreak of genuine mysticism which is only  comparable to the fourteenth-century movement of the Friends of  God.

[v-p44]We meet in Fox that overwhelming sense of direct  relationship with God, that consciousness of the transcendent  characteristic of the mystic; and Quaker spirituality, in spite of its  marked aversion to institutional religion, has much in common not only  with those Continental Quietists who are its most obvious spiritual  affinities, but also with the doctrine of the Catholic contemplatives.  Mysticism crops up frequently in the writings of the school; and finds  expression in the first generation in [p. 470] [v-Page_470] the works of   Isaac Penington    (1616-1679) and in the second in the Journal of the heroic American  Friend   John Woolman    (1720-1772).

[v-p45]At the opposite end of the theological scale, the  seventeenth century gives us a group ofEnglish mystics ofthe Catholic  type, closely related to the contemporary French school. Of these, one  of the most individual is the young Benedictine nun   Gertrude More    (1606-1633), who carries on that tradition of the communion oflove  which flows from St. Augustine through St. Bernard and Thomas a  Kempis, and is the very heart of Catholic mysticism. In the writings  of her director, and the preserver of her works, the   Venerable Augustine Baker    (1575-1641)--one of the most lucid and orderly of guides to the  contemplative life--we see what were still the formative  influences in the environment where her mystical powers were trained.  Richard of St. Victor, Hilton, and "The Cloud of  Unknowing"; Angela of Foligno; Tauler, Suso, Ruysbroeck; St.  Teresa and St. John of the Cross; these are the authorities to whom  Augustine Baker most constantly appeals, and through these, as we  know, the family tree of the mystics goes back to the Neoplatonists  and the first founders of the Church.

[v-p46]Outside that Church, the twins   Thomas Vaughan    the spiritual alchemist and   Henry Vaughan   , Silurist, the mystical poet (1622-1695) show the reaction of two  very different temperaments upon the transcendental life. Again, the  group of "Cambridge Platonists,"   Henry More    (1614-1687),   John Smith    (1618-1652),   Benjamin Whichcote    (1609-1683),   Peter Sterry    (c. 1614-1672), and   John Norris    (1657-1711) developed and preached a philosophy deeply tinged with  mysticism; and   Thomas Traherne    (c. 1637-1674) gave poetic expression to the Platonic vision of life.  In   Bishop Hall    (1574-1656) the same spirit takes a devotional form. Finally, the  Rosicrucians, symbolists, and other spiritually minded  occultists--above all the extraordinary sect of Philadelphians,  ruled by   Dr. Pordage    (1608-1698) and the prophetess   Jane Lead    (1623-1704)--exhibit mysticism in its least balanced aspect  mingled with mediumistic phenomena, wild symbolic visions, and  apocalyptic prophecies. The influence of these Philadelphians, who  were themselves strongly affected by Boehme's works, lingered  for a century, appearing again in Saint-Martin the "Unknown  Philosopher."

[v-p47]The Catholic mysticism of this period is best seen in  France, where the intellectual and social expansion of the Grande  Siecle had also its spiritual side. Over against the brilliant  worldly life of seventeenth-century Paris and the slackness and even  corruption of much organized religion there sprang up something like a  cult of the inner life. This mystical renaissance seems to have  originated in the work of an English Capuchin friar, William Fitch, in  religion   Benedict Canfield    (1520-1611), who settled in Paris in old age and there became a  centre of spiritual influence. Among his pupils were   Madame Acarie    (1566-1618) and   Pierre de Berulle    (1575-1629), and through them his teaching on contemplation affected  all the great religious personalities of the period. The house of  Madame Acarie--a woman equally remarkable for spiritual genius  and practical ability--became the gathering-point of a growing  mystical enthusiasm, which also expressed itself in a vigorous [p. 471] [v-Page_471] movement of reform within the Church. Berulle was one  of the founders of the Oratory. Madame Acarie, known as the  "conscience of Paris," visited the relaxed convents and  persuaded them to a more strict and holy life. Largely by her  instrumentality, the first houses of reformed Carmelites were  established in France in 1604, nuns being brought to direct them from  St. Teresa's Spanish convents, and French mysticism owes much to  this direct contact with the Teresian school. Madame Acarie and her  three daughters all became Carmelite nuns; and it was from the Dijon  Carmelites that   St. Jeanne Francoise de Chantal    (1572-1641) received her training in contemplation. Her spiritual  father, and co-founder of the Order of the Visitation,   St. Francois de Sales    (1567-1622), had also been in youth a member of Madame Acarie's  circle. He shows at its best the peculiar talent of the French school  for the detailed and individual direction of souls. Outside this  cultured and aristocratic group two great and pure mystics arise from  humbler social levels. First the intrepid Ursuline nun   Marie de l'Incarnation    (1599-1672), the pioneer of education in the New World, in whom we  find again St. Teresa's twin gifts for high contemplation and  practical initiative. Secondly the Carmelite friar   Brother Lawrence    (1611-1691), who shows the passive tendency of French mysticism in  its most sane, well-balanced form. He was a humble empiricist, laying  claim to no special gifts: a striking contrast to his contemporary,  the brilliant and unhappy genius   Pascal    (1623-1662), who fought his way through many psychic storms to the  vision of the Absolute.

[v-p48]The genuine French and Flemish mysticism of this  period, greatly preoccupied with the doctrines of self-naughting and  passivity, constantly approached the frontiers of Quietism. The three  great Capuchin teachers of contemplation, the Flemings   Constantine Barbancon    (1581-1632) and   John Evangelist of Barluke    (1588-1635), and the English Benedict Canfield, were not entirely  beyond suspicion in this regard; as their careful language, and the  scrutiny to which they were subjected by contemporary authority,  clearly shows. The line between the true and false doctrine was a fine  one, as we see in the historic controversy between Bossuet and  Fenelon; and the perilous absurdities of the Quietist writers often  tempted the orthodox to draw it in the wrong place.

[v-p49]The earliest in date and most exaggerated in type of  these true Quietists is the Franco-Flemish   Antoinette Bourignan    (1616-1680): a strong-willed and wrong-headed woman who, having  renounced the world with Franciscan thoroughness, founded a sect,  endured considerable persecutions, and made a great stir in the  religious life of her time. An even greater uproar resulted from the  doctrinal excesses of the devout Spanish priest   Miguel de Molinos    (1640-1697); whose extreme teachings were condemned by the Church,  and for a time brought the whole principle of passive contemplation  into disrepute. Quietism, at bottom, was the unbalanced expression of  that need which produced the contemporary Quaker movement in England:  a need for personal contact with spiritual realities, evoked by the  formal and unsatisfying quality of the official religion of the time.  Unfortunately the great [p. 472] [v-Page_472] Quietists were not great  mystics. Hence their propaganda, in which the principle of  passivity--divorced from, and opposed to, all spiritual  action--was pressed to its logical conclusion, resulted in a  doctrine fatal not only to all organized religion but to the healthy  development of the inner life.

[v-p50]  Madame Guyon    (1648-1717), the contemporary of Molinos, is usually quoted as a  typical Quietist. She is an example of the unfortunate results of an  alliance of mystical tendencies with a feeble surface intelligence.  Had she possessed the robust common sense so often found in the great  contemplatives, her temperamental inclination to passivity would have  been checked, and she would hardly have made use of the exaggerated  expressions which brought about the official condemnation of her  works. In spite of the brilliant championship of Fenelon, and the fact  that much of her writing merely reproduces orthodox teaching on  contemplative prayer in an inferior form, she was involved in the  general condemnation of "passive orison" which the  aberrations of the extreme Quietists had called forth.

[v-p51]The end of the seventeenth century saw a great  outburst of popular Quietism, some within and some without the  official Church. Well within the frontiers of orthodoxy, and  exhibiting the doctrine of passivity in its noblest form, was the  Jesuit   J. P. de Caussade    (still living 1739). Among those who over-stepped the  boundary--though all the Quietists appealed to the general  tradition of mysticism in support of their one-sided  doctrine--were   Malaval   , whose "Theologie Mystique" contains some beautiful  French translations from St. Teresa, and   Peter Poiret    (1646-1719), once a Protestant pastor, then the devoted disciple of  Antoinette Bourignan. Later generations owe much to the enthusiasm and  industry of Poiret, whose belief in spiritual quiescence was combined  with great literary activity. He rescued and edited all Madame  Guyon's writings; and has left us, in his "Bibliotheca  Mysticorum," the memorial of many lost works on mysticism. From  this unique bibliography we can see how "orthodox" was the  food which nourished even the most extreme of the Quietists: how  thoroughly they believed themselves to represent not a new doctrine,  but the true tradition of Christian mysticism.

[v-p52]With the close of the seventeenth century, the  Quietist movement faded away. The beginning of the eighteenth sees the  triumph of that other stream of spiritual vitality which arose outside  the Catholic Church and flowed from the great personality of Jacob  Boehme. If the idea of surrender be the mainspring of Quietism, the  complementary idea of rebirth is the mainspring of this school. In  Germany, Boehme's works had been collected and published by an  obscure mystic,   John Gichtel    (1638-1710); whose life and letters constantly betray his influence.  In England, where that influence had been a living force from the  middle of the seventeenth century, when Boehme's writings first  became known, the Anglo-German   Dionysius Andreas Freher    was writing between 1699 and 1720. In the early years of the  eighteenth century, Freher was followed by   William Law    (1686-1761), the Nonjuror: a brilliant stylist, and one of the most  profound of English religious writers. [p. 473] [v-Page_473] Law, who was  converted by the reading of Boehme's works from the narrow  Christianity to which he gave classic expression in the "Serious  Call" to a wide and philosophic mysticism, gave, in a series of  writings which burn with mystic passion, a new interpretation and an  abiding place in English literature to the "inspired  shoemaker's" mighty vision of Man and the Universe.

[v-p53]The latter part of a century which clearly represents  the steep downward trend of the mystic curve gives us three strange  personalities; all of whom have passed through Boehme's school,  and have placed themselves in opposition to the ecclesiasticism of  their day. In Germany,   Eckartshausen    (1752-1803), in "The Cloud upon the Sanctuary" and other  works, continued upon individual lines that tradition of esoteric and  mystical Christianity, and of rebirth as the price of man's  entrance into Reality, which found its best and sanest interpreter in  William Law. In France the troubled spirit of the transcendentalist   Saint-Martin    (1743-1803), the "Unknown Philosopher," was deeply  affected in his passage from a merely occult to a mystical philosophy  by the reading of Boehme and Eckartshausen, and also by the works of  the English "Philadelphians," Dr. Pordage and Jane Lead,  who had long sunk to oblivion in their native land. In England,   William Blake   , poet, painter, visionary, and prophet (1757-1827), shines like a  solitary star in the uncongenial atmosphere of the Georgian age.

[v-p54]The career of Blake provides us with a rare instance  of mystical genius, forcing not only rhythm and words, but also colour  and form to express its vision of truth. So individual in his case was  this vision, so strange the elements from which his symbolic  reconstructions were built up, that he failed in the attempt to convey  it to other men. Neither in his prophetic books nor in his beautiful  mystical paintings does he contrive to transmit more than great and  stimulating suggestions of "things seen" in some higher  and more valid state of consciousness. Whilst his visionary symbolism  derives to a large extent from Swedenborg, whose works were the great  influence of his youth, Blake has learned much from Boehme, and  probably from his English interpreters. Almost alone amongst English  Protestant mystics, he has also received and assimilated the Catholic  tradition of the personal and inward communion of love. In his great  vision of "Jerusalem," St. Teresa and Madame Guyon are  amongst the "gentle souls" whom he sees guarding that  Four-fold Gate which opens towards Beulah--the gate of the  contemplative life--and guiding the great "Wine-press of  Love" whence mankind, at the hands of its mystics, has received,  in every age, the Wine of Life.

[v-p55][p. 475] [v-Page_475]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Bibliography

 [vi][vi-p1]I. THE WORKS AND LIVES OF THE MYSTICS.

[vi-p2]II. GENERAL WORKS ON MYSTICISM.

[vi-p3]III. PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY, THEOLOGY.

[vi-p4]IV. ALCHEMY AND MAGIC.

   

[vi-p4.1]PART I

   

[vi-p4.2]   THE WORKS AND LIVES OF THE MYSTICS  

[vi-p5]1. Texts. 2. Translations. 3.  Biographies and Monographs.

[vi-p6]  Note   . For early lives and legends of all canonized and beatified Christian  mystics, see Acta Sanctorum Bollandiana, Jan.-Oct. vi. Brussels  1643-1794; Oct. vii.-Nov., Brussels and Paris, 1845-1910. (In  progress.)  
    See also Dictionnaire de Theologie Catholique for biographies,  with bibliographical notes.

   

[vi-p6.2]ANONYMOUS WORKS.

   

[vi-p6.3]Texts.

[vi-p7]The Cloud of Unknowing. Edited, from B. M. Harl.,  674, by E. Underhill. London, 1912.

[vi-p8]The Cloud of Unknowing, Epistle of Privy Counsel and  Denis Hid Divinity. Edited by Dom Justin McCann, O.S.B. (Orchard  Books.) London, 1924.  
   (Compare Part II., E. Gardner: The Cell of Self Knowledge.)

[vi-p9]The Mirror of Simple Souls. Edited [with some  omissions] by Clare Kirschberger. (Orchard Books.) London, 1928.

   

[vi-p9.1]AL GHAZZALI.

   

[vi-p9.2]Trans.

[vi-p10]The Confessions of Al Ghazzali. Translated by Claud  Field. (Wisdom of the East Series.) London, 1909.

[vi-p11]The Alchemy of Happiness. Translated by Claud Field.  (Wisdom of the East Series.) London, 1910.

[vi-p12](See also in Part II., Schmolders.)

   

[vi-p12.1]AL HALLAJ.

   

[vi-p12.2]Mon.

[vi-p13]  Massignon, L   . La Passion de Al-Halladj. 2 tomes. Paris, 1922. (See also Part II.,  Marechal.)

   

[vi-p13.1]ANGELA OF FOLIGNO, BLESSED.

   

[vi-p13.2]Texts.

[vi-p14]Le livre de la Bienheureuse Angele de Foligno.  Annote par Paul Doncoeur. t. I. Texte latin. Paris, 1925. t. II.  Documents originaux. Paris, 1926.

[vi-p15]Le livre de l'experience des vrais  fideles de Ste Angele de Foligno. Trad. par M. J.  Ferre. Edition critique: texte latin et traduction  francaise. Paris, 1927.

[vi-p16](These two, from the earliest MSS., supersede all  previous editions.)

[vi-p17]Beatae Angela de Fulginio Visionum et  Instructionum Liber (Bibliotheca mystica et ascetica, t. V.) Cologne,  1849. [p. 476] [vi-Page_476]

   

[vi-p17.1]Trans.

[vi-p18]The Book of Divine Consolations of the Blessed  Angela of Foligno. Translated by M. Steegmann. With an Introduction by  Algar Thorold. (New Mediaeval Library.) London, 1908.

[vi-p19]Il Libro delle Mirabili Visioni Consolazioni e  Istruzioni della B. Angela di Foligno. Translated by Luigi Fallacara.  Florence, 1926.

   

[vi-p19.1]Mons.

[vi-p20]  Ferre, M. J.    Oeuvres authentiques d'Angele de Foligno. (Revue  d'histoire francescaine, July, 1927.)

[vi-p21]--Principales dates de la Vie  d'Angele de Foligno, (ibid., Jan., 1925).

[vi-p22]--Les oeuvres d'Angele de Foligno,  (ibid., Oct. 1425).

   

[vi-p22.1]ANSELM, SAINT.

   

[vi-p22.2]Text.

[vi-p23]St. Anselm Opera. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t.  158-59.) Paris, 1844.

   

[vi-p23.1]Trans.

[vi-p24]Meditations et Prieres de S. Anselme.  Traduction par A Wilmart Maredsous, 1923.

   

[vi-p24.1]Mon.

[vi-p25]  Rule, M.    Life and Times of St. Anselm. London, 1883.

   

[vi-p25.1]AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO, SAINT.

   

[vi-p25.2]Texts.

[vi-p26]Opera Omnia. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t. 37-47.)  Paris, 1844,

[vi-p27]Confessionum, libri tredecim. Ex recog. P.  Knoll. Lipsiae, 1898.

[vi-p28]Confessions. Edited by J. Gibb and W. Montgomery.  (Cambridge Patristic Texts.) 1908. [Latin text and English notes.]

   

[vi-p28.1]Trans.

[vi-p29]Works. Edited by Marcus Dods. 15 vols. Edinburgh,  1876.

[vi-p30]Works. Trans. and annotated by J. E. Pilkington and  others. 8 vols. (Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers.) London,  1888-92.

[vi-p31]The Confessions. Translated by Dr. E. B. Pusey.  London,1907.

[vi-p32]The Confessions (first nine books). Trans. by C.  Bigg. London, 1898.

   

[vi-p32.1]Mons.

[vi-p33]  Bertrand, L.    St. Augustin. Paris, 1913.

[vi-p34]English trans., London, 1914.

[vi-p35]  Harnack, A   . Augustins Confessionen. Giessen, 1895.

   

[vi-p35.1]BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX, SAINT.

   

[vi-p35.2]Text.

[vi-p36]Opera Omnia. Notis et observationibus. J. Mabillon.  (Migne, Patrologia Latina, 182-185.) Paris, 1854.

   

[vi-p36.1]Trans.

[vi-p37]Life and Works of St. Bernard. Edited by Dom J.  Mabillon O.S.B. Translated and edited by S. L. Eales, M.A. 4 vols.  London, 1889-96. (Vols. I. and II., Letters; III., Letters and  Sermons; IV., Sermons on the Song of Songs.)

[vi-p38]Cantica Canticorum: Sermons on the Song of Songs.  Translated by S. J. Eales, M.A. London, 1895.

[vi-p39]Sermons on the [vi-p39.1][vi-p39.1] vols. Dublin, 1920.

[vi-p40]St. Bernard on the Love of God. Translated by Edmund  Gardner. London, 1916.

[vi-p41]St. Bernard on Consideration. Translated by G.  Lewis. Oxford, 1908.

[vi-p42]Suggestions on the Method of Meditation, extracted  from St. Bernard's Scala Claustralium by W. B. Trevelyan.  London, 1904.

   

[vi-p42.1]Mons.

[vi-p43]  Morrison, J. Cotter.    Life and Times of St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux. Second edition.  London, 1868.

[vi-p44]  Ratisbonne, M.,    Histoire de Bernard et son siecle. II eme edition. 2  vols. Paris, 1903.

[vi-p45]  Schuck, J.    Das religiose Erlebnis beim H. Bernhard von Clairvaux. Wurzbourg,  1922.

[vi-p46]  Vacandard, E.    Vie de S. Bernard. Paris, 1895.

[vi-p47]  Williams, Watkin.    Studies in St. Bernard of Clairvaux. London, 1927. [p. 477] [vi-Page_477]

   

[vi-p47.1]BLAKE, WILLIAM.

   

[vi-p47.2]Texts.

[vi-p48]The writings of William Blake. Edited by Geoffrey  Keynes. 3 vols. London, 1925.

[vi-p49]Poetry and Prose of William Blake. Edited by  Geoffrey Keynes, complete in one volume. London, 1927.

[vi-p50]Prophetic Writings. Edited with Introduction, etc.,  by D. J. Sloss and A. Wallis. 2 vols. Oxford, 1926.

[vi-p51]Works: Poetic, Symbolic, and Critical. Edited by E.  J. Ellis and W. B. Yeats. 3 vols. London, 1893.

[vi-p52]Poetical Works: new and verbatim text by J. Sampson.  Oxford, 1905.

[vi-p53]Blake's "Jerusalem." Edited by E.  R. D. Maclagen and A. G. B. Russell. London 1904.

[vi-p54]Blake's "Milton." Edited by E. R.  D. Maclagen and A. G. B. Russell. London 1907.

[vi-p55]The Letters of William Blake, and Life by F. Tatham.  Edited by A. G. B. Russell. London, 1906.

   

[vi-p55.1]Mons.

[vi-p56]  Berger, P.    William Blake: Mysticisme et Poesie. Paris, 1907.

[vi-p57]  Damon, S. F.    W  .    Blake, his philosophy and symbols. London, 1924.

[vi-p58]  De Selincourt, Basil.    William Blake. London, 1909.

[vi-p59]  Gardner, C.    William Blake the Man. London, 1919.

[vi-p60]  Gilchrist, Alexander.    Life of William Blake. London, 1880.

[vi-p61]  Plowman, M   . Introduction to the Study of Blake. London, 1927.

[vi-p62]  Saurat, D.    Blake and Modern Thought. London. 1929.

[vi-p63]  Swinburne, A. C.    William Blake. London, 1868.

[vi-p64]  Symons, Arthur.    William Blake. London, 1907.

[vi-p65]  Wicksteed, J.    Blake's Vision of the Book of Job. London, 1910.

[vi-p66]  Wilson, Mona.    Life of William Blake. London, 1927.

[vi-p67]  Wright. Thomas.    Life of William Blake. 2 vols. London, 1929.

   

[vi-p67.1]BLOSIUS (Louis de Blois).

   

[vi-p67.2]Text.

[vi-p68]Opera. Antwerp, 1632.

   

[vi-p68.1]Trans.

[vi-p69]Oeuvres Spirituelles, trad. par les Benedictins de  S. Paul de Wisques. (In progress.) Paris, 1911, etc.

[vi-p70]The Book of Spiritual Instruction. London, 1925.

[vi-p71]A Mirror for Monks. London, 1926.

[vi-p72]The Sanctuary of the Faithful Soul. 2 vols. London,  1920-7.

[vi-p73]The Paradise of the Faithful Soul. 2 vols. London,  1928-30.

   

[vi-p73.1]BOEHME, JACOB.

   

[vi-p73.2]Texts.

[vi-p74]J. Boehme, Sein Leben und seine theosophischen Werke  in geordneten Auszuge mit Einleitungen und Erlauterungen. Allen  Christglaubigen dargeboten durch J. Claassen. 3 Bands Stuttgart,  1885.

[vi-p75]Theosophia revelata. Das ist: Alle gottliche  Schriften. . . . J. Bohmens. 7 vols. Amsterdam, 1730-31.

   

[vi-p75.1]Trans.

[vi-p76]The Works of Jacob Boehme. In 4 vols., with Life of  the Author. English translation. London, 1764-81. (The only collected  English edition, but incomplete. All Boehme's works were  translated by Sparrow and others in the seventeenth century and have  since been re-issued. See below. For full bibliography, see  'William Law and the English Mystics,' by C. Spurgeon, in  'Cambridge History of English Literature.')

[vi-p77]The Threefold Life of Man. With an Introduction by  the Rev. G. W. Allen. London, 1909.

[vi-p78]The Three Principles of the Divine Essence. With an  Introduction by Dr. Paul Deussen. London, 1910. [p. 478] [vi-Page_478]

[vi-p79]The Forty Questions of the Soul and the Clavis.  London, 1911.

[vi-p80]Six Theosophic Points. Translated by J. R. Earle.  London, 1919.

[vi-p81]Mysterium Magnum. Edited by C. J. Barker. London,  1924.

[vi-p82]De Electione Gratiae and Quaestiones Theosophicae.  Translated by J. R. Earle. London, 1930.

[vi-p83]Treatises of Jacob Boehme. London, 1769.

[vi-p84]Dialogues on the Supersensual Life. Edited, with an  Introduction, by Bernard Holland. London, 1901.

[vi-p85]The Signatures of All Things. (Everyman's  Library.) London, 1912.

[vi-p86]The Way to Christ. London, 1912.

[vi-p87]The Epistles of Jacob Boehme, reprinted from the  1689 edition. 1886.

[vi-p88]Confessions. Edited by W. S. Palmer. London,  1920.

   

[vi-p88.1]Mons.

[vi-p89]Memoirs of the life, death, burial, and wonderful  writings of J. Behmen. Now first done at large into English from the  original German. With preface by J. Okeley. Northampton, 1780.

[vi-p90]  Boutroux, E.    Le Philosophe Allemand, Jacob Boehme. Paris, 1888.

[vi-p91]  Hartmann, F.    The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme. London, 1891.

[vi-p92]  Martensen, H. L.    Jakob Bohme. Theosophische Studien. Grafenhainichen, 1882.

[vi-p93]Translation. Jacob Behmen: His life and teaching.  London, 1885.

[vi-p94]  Taylor, Edward.    J. Behmen's theosophick philosophy unfolded. 1691.

[vi-p95]  Whyte, Rev. Alexander.    Jacob Bohme: an Appreciation. Edinburgh, 1894.

   

[vi-p95.1]BONAVENTURA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p95.2]Text.

[vi-p96]Opera Omnia. Editae a P. P. Collegii S.  Bonaventurae. 10 t. Ad Claras Aquas 1882. 1902.

   

[vi-p96.1]Trans.

[vi-p97]Theologie Seraphique, extraite et traduite  par C. et A. Alix. 2 vols. Paris, 1853

[vi-p98]Les six Ailes du Seraphin. Paris, 1860. (There are  no English translations. The 'Soliloquies ' and  'Meditations' attributed to St. Bonaventura are not  authentic. For his life of St. Francis,   vide infra,    Francis of Assisi, St.)

   

[vi-p98.1]Mons.

[vi-p99]  Bollea, B. L. C.    II mysticismo di S. Bonaventura studiato nelle sue antecedenza e  nelle sue esplicazione. Torino, 1901.

[vi-p100]  Gilson, E.    La Philosophie de S. Bonaventure. Paris, 1924.

[vi-p101]  Lutz, E.    Die Psychologie Bonaventuras nach den quellen dargestellt. (Beitrage  zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters.) Munster, 1909.

   

[vi-p101.1]BOURIGNAN, ANTOINETTE.

   

[vi-p101.2]Text.

[vi-p102]Oeuvres. 19 tomes. Amsterdam, 1686.

   

[vi-p102.1]Mons.

[vi-p103]  Anon   . An Apology for Mrs. Antonia Bourignan. London, 1699.

[vi-p104]  Cockburn, J.    Bourignianism Detected: or, the Delusions and Errors of Antonia  Bourignan and her growing Sect. London, 1689.

[vi-p105]  MacEwen,    A. R. Antoinette Bourignan, Quietist. London, 1910.

[vi-p106]  Von der Linde, A.    Antoinette Bourignan, das Licht der Welt. Leyden, 1895.

   

[vi-p106.1]BRIDGET OF SWEDEN, SAINT.

   

[vi-p106.2]Text.

[vi-p107]Revelationes. Rome, 1628.

[vi-p108]Vita S. Brigettae. Edited by M. Annerstedt. Upsala,  1876.

   

[vi-p108.1]Mons.

[vi-p109]  Flavigny, Comtesse de.    Ste. Brigitte de Suede. Paris, 1910.

[vi-p110]  Hormann, P. Simon.    Birgittenischer Calender, 1676, Reprint, Munich, 1880.

[vi-p111]  Williamson, B.    The Bridgettine Order. London, 1922. [p. 479] [vi-Page_479]

   

[vi-p111.1]CASSIAN.

   

[vi-p111.2]Text.

[vi-p112]Dialogues. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t. 49, 50.)  Paris, 1845.

   

[vi-p112.1]Trans.

[vi-p113]Cassian: (Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers.  Ser. II.). London, 1894.

   

[vi-p113.1]CATHERINE DEI RICCI, SAINT.

   

[vi-p113.2]Text.

[vi-p114]Lettere. Edited by Gherardi. Florence, 1890.

   

[vi-p114.1]Mons.

[vi-p115]Vita, par S. Razzi. Lucca, 1594.

[vi-p116]Vie, par H. Bayonne. Paris, 1873.

   

[vi-p116.1]CATHERINE OF GENOA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p116.2]Texts.

[vi-p117]Vita Mirabile e dottrina celeste di Santa Caterina  da Genova, insieme col Trattato del Purgatorio e col Dialogo della  Santa. 1743.

[vi-p118]Dialogo di S. Caterina da Genova. Milano, 1882.

[vi-p119](The authenticity of this dialogue is denied by Von  Hugel.)

   

[vi-p119.1]Trans.

[vi-p120]The Treatise on Purgatory. With a Preface by  Cardinal Manning. London, 1858.

[vi-p121]La Vie et les Oeuvres de Ste. Catherine de  Genes, traduits par le Vicomte de Bussierre. Paris, 1860.

   

[vi-p121.1]Mon.

[vi-p122]  Vallebona, S.    La Perla dei Fieschi. Genova, 1887.

[vi-p123](See also Pt. II., Von Hugel, for the best modern  account of this mystic.)

   

[vi-p123.1]CATHERINE OF SIENA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p123.2]Texts.

[vi-p124]S. Catherinae Senensis Vitae. Auctore Fr. Raimundo  Capuano. Acta S.S. Aprilis. T. III. Paris and Rome, 1860.

[vi-p125]Opere della Seraphica Santa Caterina da Siena.  Edited by Gigli. 5 vols. Siena, 1727.

[vi-p126]Le lettere di S. Caterina da Siena. Edited by P.  Misciatelli. 6 vols. Siena, 1922.

   

[vi-p126.1]Trans.

[vi-p127]The Divine Dialogue of St. Catherine of Siena.  Translated by Algar Thorold. Second ed. London, 1926.

[vi-p128]St. Catherine of Siena as seen in her Letters.  Edited by Vida Scudder. London. 1905.

   

[vi-p128.1]Mons.

[vi-p129]  Curtayne A.    St. Catherine of Siena. London, 1929.

[vi-p130]  Drane, A T.    The History of St. Catherine of Siena and her Companions. 2 vols.  London, 1887.

[vi-p131]  Fawtier, R.    Ste. Catherine de Sienne; essai de critique des sources, T. I. Paris,  1921.

[vi-p132]  Gardner, Edmund   . St. Catherine of Siena. London, 1907. (The best modern  biography.)

[vi-p133]  Joergensen, J.    Ste. Catherine de Sienne. Paris, 1920.

[vi-p134]  Mignaty, M. A.    Catherine de Sienne. Paris, 1886.

   

[vi-p134.1]CHANTAL: JEANNE FRANCOISE DE, SAINT.

   

[vi-p134.2]Text.

[vi-p135]Vie et Oeuvres. 8 vols. Paris, 1874-79.

   

[vi-p135.1]Trans.

[vi-p136]Her Spirit as shown in her Letters. London, 1922,  selected Letters. London, 1917.

   

[vi-p136.1]Mons.

[vi-p137]  Bougaud, E.    Histoire de Ste. Chantal. 2 t. Paris, 1899.

[vi-p138]  Bremond, H.    Ste. Chantal. 3 eme edition. Paris, 1912.

[vi-p139]  Sanders, E. K.,    St. Chantal. London, 1918.

   

[vi-p139.1]CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA.

   

[vi-p139.2]Text.

[vi-p140]Opera Omnia. Recog. R. Klotz. 4 vols. Lipsiae,  1831-34.

   

[vi-p140.1]Trans.

[vi-p141]Writings, translated by W. Wilson. 2 vols.  Edinburgh. 1867-69. [p. 480] [vi-Page_480]

   

[vi-p141.1]Mons.

[vi-p142]  De Faye.    Clement d'Alexandrie. Paris, 1898.

[vi-p143]  Tollinton, R. B.    Clement of Alexandria. 2 vols. London, 1914.

[vi-p144]  Wagner.    Der Christ und die Welt nach Clemens von Alexandrien. Gottingen,  1903.

   

[vi-p144.1]DANTE.

   

[vi-p144.2]Texts.

[vi-p145]Tutte le Opere. Rived nel testo da Dr. E. Moore.  Oxford, 1894.

[vi-p146]La Divina Commedia. II testo Wittiano rived. da  Toynbee. London, 1900.

   

[vi-p146.1]Text & rans.

[vi-p147]The Hell of Dante. Edited, with Translation and  Notes, by A. J. Butler. London, 1892.

[vi-p148]The Purgatory. London, 1880.

[vi-p149]The Paradise. London, 1885.

[vi-p150]The Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso. Text, with  Translation by Carlyle. Okey, and Wicksteed. (Temple Classics.) 3  vols. London, 1900.

[vi-p151]Readings on the Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso;  chiefly based on the Commentary of Benvenuto da Imola by W. W. Vernon.  6 vols. London, 1894-1900.

   

[vi-p151.1]Minor Works.

[vi-p152]The Convivio of Dante. Translated by P. H.  Wicksteed. (Temple Classics.) London. 1903.

[vi-p153]Dante's Convivio. Translated by W. W. Jackson.  Oxford, 1909.

[vi-p154]Dante's Eleven Letters. Translated, with  Notes, &c.by C. S. Latham. Boston, 1902.

[vi-p155]A Translation of Dante's Latin Works. (Temple  Classics.) London, 1896.

[vi-p156]The New Life. Translated by D. G. Rossetti. (The  Siddal Edition.) London, 1899.

   

[vi-p156.1]Mons.

[vi-p157]  Baratono, A.    Dante e la Visione di Dio. 1909.

[vi-p158]  Barelli, V.    L'Allegoria della Divina Commedia di Dante Alighieri. Firenze,  1864.

[vi-p159]  Bonanni, T.    II Cantico al Sole di S. Francesco d'Assisi commentato nella  Divina Commedia. Aquila. 1890.

[vi-p160]  Capetti V.    L'Anima e l'arte di Dante. 1907.

[vi-p161]  Carroll Rev. J. S.    Exiles of Eternity: an Exposition of Dante's Inferno. London,  1903.

[vi-p162]--Prisoners of Hope: an Exposition of  Dante's Purgatorio. London, 1906.

[vi-p163]  Ciuffo, G   . La visione ultima della Vita Nuova. 1899.

[vi-p164]  Croce, B.    La Poesia di Dante. Rome, 1921.

[vi-p165]Translation. The Poetry of Dante. London, 1922.

[vi-p166]  Dunbar, H.    F. Symbolism in Mediaeval Thought and its Consummation in the Divine  Comedy. Oxford, 1929.

[vi-p167]  Fardel, M. D.    La Personne de Dante dans la Divine Comedie: etude  psychologique. Paris, 1894.

[vi-p168]  Gardner, Edmund.    Dante's Ten Heavens. London, 1898.

[vi-p169]--Dante and the Mystics. London, 1913.

[vi-p170]--A Dante Primer. Third edition. London,  1923.

[vi-p171]  Guiliozzi, C.    Dante e il Simbolismo. 1900.

[vi-p172]  Hettinger, Franz.    Dante's Divina Commedia, its Scope and Value. Translated and  edited by Rev. H. S. Bowden. London, 1887.

[vi-p173]  Perez, Paolo.    ISette Cerchi del Purgatorio di Dante, Saggio di Studi. Milano, 1896.  [p. 481] [vi-Page_481]

[vi-p174]  Wicksteed, Rev. P.    H. Dante: Six Sermons. Second edition. London, 1890.

[vi-p175]--Dante and Aquinas. London, 1913.

[vi-p176]--From Vita Nuova to Paradiso. London, 1922. (I  select from the mass of Dante literature a few books useful to the  student of mysticism. For full bibliographies, see the works of Vernon  and Gardner, above cited.)

   

[vi-p176.1]DENIS THE CARTHUSIAN.

   

[vi-p176.2]Texts.

[vi-p177]Doctoris Ecstatici D. Dionysii Cartusiani opera  omnia in unum corpus digesta. Cura et labore monachorum S. Ordinis  Cartusiensis. 45 vols. (In progress.) Monstrolii, 1896, etc.

[vi-p178]D. Dionysii Carthusiani de perfecto mundi contemptu.  Colonie, 1533.

   

[vi-p178.1]Mons.

[vi-p179]  Krogh-Tonning, K.    Der Letzte Scholastiker. 1904.

[vi-p180]  Loer.    Dionysii Carthusiani doctorus extatici vita. Cologne, 1532.

[vi-p181]  Mougel, D. A.    Denys le Chartreux. Montreuil-sur-Mer, 1896.

   

[vi-p181.1]DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE.

   

[vi-p181.2]Texts.

[vi-p182]Opera Omnia. (Migne, Patrologia Graeca. t. 3-4.)  Paris, 1855

[vi-p183]Greek text of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, with  Preface by Rev. John Parker. London, 1899.

   

[vi-p183.1]Trans.

[vi-p184]Dionise Hid Divinity. (An old English translation of  the Theologia Mystica, attributed to the author of The Cloud of  Unknowing, q.v.)

[vi-p185]Opera S. Dionysii Areopagitae, &c.a Balthazar  Corderius Latine interpretata. Folio. 1634.

[vi-p186]Oeuvres de Saint Denys l'Areopagite.  Traduits du grec et precedees d'une Introduction par  l'Abbe Darboy. Paris, 1815.

[vi-p187]The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite. Translated by  the Rev. J. Parker. 2 vols. Oxford, 1897.

[vi-p188]The Divine Names and Mystical Theology. Translated  by C. E. Rolt. London, 1920.

   

[vi-p188.1]Mon.

[vi-p189]  Ball, Hugo.    Byzantin, Christentum III. Heiligen leben. Munich, 1923.

[vi-p190]  Colet, J.    Two Treatises on the Hierarchies of Dionysius. London, 1869.

[vi-p191]  Erigena.    Expositiones super Hierarchies Caelestes S. Dionysii. Roma, 1871.

[vi-p192]  Koch, Dr. Hugo.    Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita. Maintz, 1900.

[vi-p193]  Muller, H. F.    Dionysius, Proclus, Plotinus. Munster, 1918.

   

[vi-p193.1]DOUCELINE, SAINT.

   

[vi-p193.2]Text.

[vi-p194]La Vie de Ste. Douceline, fondatrice des  beguines de Marseilles. Annote par J. H. Albanes.  (Provencal text, French translation.) Marseille, 1879.

   

[vi-p194.1]Mon.

[vi-p195]  Macdonell, Anne.    Saint Douceline. London, 1905.

   

[vi-p195.1]ECKHARTSHAUSEN, C. VON.

   

[vi-p195.2]Texts.

[vi-p196]Kostis Reise von Morgen gegen Mittag. Leipzig,  1795.

[vi-p197]Gott ist die reinste Liebe. Neu ungearbeitet und  vermehrt son F. X. Steck. Reutlingen, 1899.

[vi-p198]Der Wolke vor dem Heiligthume. 1802.

   

[vi-p198.1]Trans.

[vi-p199]God is Love most pure, my Prayer and my  Contemplation. Freely translated from the original by J. Grant.  London, 1817.

[vi-p200]The Cloud upon the Sanctuary. Translated, with  Notes, by Isabel de Steiger. London, 1896. [p. 482] [vi-Page_482]

   

[vi-p200.1]ECKHART, MEISTER.

   

[vi-p200.2]Texts.

[vi-p201]Deutsche Mystiche des 14ten Jahrhunderts. Band 2.  Meister Eckhart. F. Pfeiffer. Gottingen, 1906.

[vi-p202]Meister Eckhart's Schriften und Predigten aus  dem Mittelhochdeutschen ubersetzt und herausgegeben von  Buttner. Leipzig, 1903.

[vi-p203]Meister Eckhart's lateinische Schriften.  Edited by Denifle. (Archiv. fur Litt. u. Kirchengeschichte d.  Mittelalters, 1886.)

[vi-p204]Meister Eckhart's Mystische Schriften, an  unsere Sprache ubertragen von Gustav Landauer. (Verschollene  Meister der Literatur.) Berlin, 1903.

   

[vi-p204.1]Trans.

[vi-p205]Eckhart's Sermons, etc. Translated by C. de B.  Evans. London, 1924.

   

[vi-p205.1]Mons.

[vi-p206]  Denifle, H. S.    Akten z. Process, Meister Eckhart's. (Archiv. fur Litt. u.  Kirchengeschichte d. Mittelalters, 1886).

[vi-p207]  Jundt, A.    Essai sur le Mysticisme speculatif de Maitre Eckhart. Strasbourg,  1871.

[vi-p208]  Lasson, A.    Meister Eckhart der Mystiker. Berlin, 1868.

[vi-p209]  Martensen, H.    Meister Eckhart, Eine theologische Studie. Hamburg, 1842.

[vi-p210]  Michelsen. Carl.    Meister Eckhart, Ein Versuch. 1888.

   

[vi-p210.1]ELIZABETH OF SCHONAU, SAINT.

[vi-p211]Die Visionen. Edited by F. W. Roth. Brunn.  1884.

   

[vi-p211.1]ERIGENA, JOHN SCOTUS.

   

[vi-p211.2]Texts.

[vi-p212]Opera. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t. 122.) Paris.  1850.

[vi-p213]De Divisione Naturae. Monasterii Guestphal,  1838.

   

[vi-p213.1]Mon.

[vi-p214]  Gardner, Alice.    Studies in John the Scot. London, 1900.

   

[vi-p214.1]FOX, GEORGE.

   

[vi-p214.2]Texts.

[vi-p215]Journal of George Fox. Edited from the MSS. by N.  Penney. Cambridge, 1911.

[vi-p216]Short Journal and Itinerary Journals. Edited by N.  Penney. Cambridge, 1925.

   

[vi-p216.1]Mon.

[vi-p217]  Braithwaite, W.    The Beginnings of Quakerism. London, 1912.

[vi-p218]  Hodgkin, T.    George Fox. London, 1896.

[vi-p219]  Watson, J. S.    Life of Fox. London, 1860.

   

[vi-p219.1]FRANCIS OF ASSISI, ST.

   

[vi-p219.2]Texts.

[vi-p220]Opuscula S. Patris Francisci Assisiensis. Quarrachi,  1904.

[vi-p221]Seraphici Doctoris S. Bonaventura Legendae duae de  Vita S. Francisci Seraphici. Editae a P.P. Collegii S. Bonaventurae.  Quarrachi, 1898.

[vi-p222]S. Francisci Assisiensis. Vita et Miracula. Auctore  Fr. Thoma de Celano. Edited by Fr. E. Alencon, O.F.M. Roma,  1906.

[vi-p223]La Leggenda di S. Francisco scritta da tre suoi  compagni. (Latin and Italian.) Roma, 1899.

[vi-p224]Speculum Perfectionis seu S. Francisci Assisiensis  legenda antiquissima, auctore Fr. Leo. Ed. P. Sabatier. Paris,  1898.

[vi-p225]I Fioretti di S. Francesco e il Cantico del Sole.  Milano, 1907.

[vi-p226]Bartolommeo da Pisa. De Conformitate B. Francisci ad  Vitam Domini Jesu. (Analecta Franc. iv. et v. Quarrachi, 1906-12.)

   

[vi-p226.1]Trans.

[vi-p227]The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi. Newly  translated, with an Introduction and Notes, by Fr. Paschal Robinson,  O.F.M. London, 1906.

[vi-p228]The Words of St. Francis from His Works and the  Early Legends. Selected and translated by Anne Macdonell. London,  1904. [p. 483] [vi-Page_483]

[vi-p229]The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi. New  translation into English from the original texts, by Constance  Countess de la Warr London, 1907.

[vi-p230]The Life of St. Francis, by St. Bonaventura. English  translation. (Temple Classics.) London, 1904.

[vi-p231]The Lives of St. Francis of Assisi, by Brother  Thomas of Celano. Translated by A. G. Ferrers Howell. London,  1908.

[vi-p232]Legend of St. Francis by the Three Companions.  English translation by E. G. Salter. (Temple Classics.) London  1902.

[vi-p233]The Mirror of Perfection. English translation by  Robert Steele. (Temple Classics.) London, 1903.

[vi-p234]The Little Flowers of St. Francis of Assisi.  Translated by T. W. Arnold. (Temple Classics.) Sixth edition. London,  1903.

   

[vi-p234.1]Mons.

[vi-p235]  Cotette, T. S.    Francois d'Assise. Etude Medicale. Paris  1895.

[vi-p236]  Cuthbert, Fr.    Life of St. Francis of Assisi. London, 1914.

[vi-p237]  Fortini, A.    Nova vita di S. Francesco d'Assisi. Milan, 1926.

[vi-p238]  Joergensen, J.    Vie de S. Francois d'Assise. Paris, 1911.

[vi-p239]Translation, by T. O'Connor Sloane. London,  1922.

[vi-p240]  Parenti, Giovanni.    Sacrum Commercium: the Converse of Francis and his Sons with Holy  Poverty. (Latin text and English translation by Canon Rawnsley.  Introduction by P. Sabatier.) Temple Classics. London, 1904.

[vi-p241]  Robinson, Fr. Pascal, O.F.M.    A Short Introduction to Franciscan Literature. New York, 1907, (A  valuable and scholarly little book.)

[vi-p242]  Sabatier, P.    Vie de S. Francois d'Assise. 22me edition. Paris,  1899.

[vi-p243]Translation. Life of St. Francis of Assisi.  Translated by L. S. Houghton. London, 1901.

   

[vi-p243.1]FRANCOIS DE SALES, SAINT.

   

[vi-p243.2]Texts.

[vi-p244]Oeuvres Completes. 22 vols. Annecy,  1893-1925.

[vi-p245]Introduction a la Vie Devote.  (Reimpression textuelle de latroisieme edition.) 2  tomes. Mountiers, 1895.

[vi-p246]Traicte de l'Amour de Dieu. Paris,  1647.

   

[vi-p246.1]Trans.

[vi-p247]Introduction to the Devout Life. Trans. by Rev. A.  Ross. London, 1925.

[vi-p248]On the Love of God. Edited by W. J. Knox Little.  London, 1901.

[vi-p249]Spiritual Letters. Trans. by Sidney Lear. London,  1892.

   

[vi-p249.1]Mons.

[vi-p250]  Hamon.    Vie de S. Francois de Sales. 2 vols. Paris, 1854.

[vi-p251]Eng. trans. by H. Burton. 2 vols. London, 1929.

[vi-p252]  Sanders, E. K.    St  .    Francois de Sales. London, 1928.

[vi-p253]  Thamery, E.    Le mysticisme de S. Francois de Sales. Arras, 1906.

[vi-p254]  Vincent, F. S.    Francois de Sales, Directeur d'Ames. Paris, 1923.

   

[vi-p254.1]FRIENDS OF GOD.

[vi-p255](See Part I. Merswin, Suso, Tauler; and Part II.,  Dalgairns, Delacroix, Denifle, Jones Jundt, Preger; also Pfeiffer,  Deutsche Mystiche der 14ten Jahrhunderts. Band I. Gottingen,  1907.)

   

[vi-p255.1]GERARD GROOT.

   

[vi-p255.2]Texts.

[vi-p256]Gerardi Magni epist. XIV edit. J. G. Acquoy  Amsterdam, 1857.

[vi-p257]Moll, W. and Scheffer, H. Studien en Bijdragen t.  I., II., III Amsterdam, 1870-76 (for texts of Gerard Groot's  works).

[vi-p258]Thomas a Kempis, Opera Omnia. Paris, 1549.  (Containing early lives of G. Groot and other founders of the New  Devotion.) [p. 484] [vi-Page_484]

   

[vi-p258.1]Mons.

[vi-p259]  Bonet-Maury.    G. Groot un precurseur de la Reforme. Paris, 1878.

[vi-p260]  Grube, C.    L. Gerhard Groot u s. Stiftungen. Cologne, 1883.

[vi-p261]Des Augustines propstes J. Busch Chron.  Windesheimense Bearbeitet. (Geschichtsquellen des Prov. Sachsen, Bd.  19, 1880.)

   

[vi-p261.1]GERSON.

   

[vi-p261.2]Text.

[vi-p262]Opera Omnia. 3 vols. Antwerp, 1706.

   

[vi-p262.1]Mons.

[vi-p263]  Masson, A. L.    Jean Gerson, sa vie, son temps. Lyons, 1894.

[vi-p264]  Schwab J. B.    Johannes Gerson. Wurtzburg, 1858.

   

[vi-p264.1]GERTRUDE, SAINT.

   

[vi-p264.2]Text.

[vi-p265]Sanctae Gertrudis magnae Virginis ordinis S.  Benedicti, Legatus Divinae Pietatis. Accedunt ejusdem exercitia  spiritualia. (Contained in Revelationes Gertrudianae ac  Mechtildianiae. Vol. I. Paris, 1875.)

   

[vi-p265.1]Trans.

[vi-p266]The Exercises of St. Gertrude. London, 1863.

[vi-p267]Le Heraut de l'amour divin, trad. par les P.  P. Benedictins Nouv. ed. Paris, 1921.

[vi-p268]Prayers of St. Gertrude and St. Mechthild. London,  1917.

   

[vi-p268.1]Mons.

[vi-p269]  Ledos, G.    Ste. Gertrude. Paris, 1901.

[vi-p270]The Life and Revelations of St. Gertrude, by a  Religious of the Order of Poor Clares. London, 1865.

   

[vi-p270.1]GUYON, MADAME.

[vi-p271]Oeuvres Completes. 40 vols. Paris, 1789-91.

[vi-p272]Vie, par Elle-meme. 3 tomes. Paris, 1791.

[vi-p273]Lettres. 4 vols. Paris, 1718.

[vi-p274]Receuil de divers traitez de Theologie  Mystique. Paris, 1699.

[vi-p275]Les Opuscules Spirituelles. 2 vols. Paris, 1790.

[vi-p276](Contains the Moyen Court, Torrents, and minor  tracts and letters.)

   

[vi-p276.1]Trans.

[vi-p277]Autobiography of Mme. Guyon. Translated in full by  T. T. Allen. 2 vols. London, 1897.

[vi-p278]A Short Method of Prayer and Spiritual Torrents.  Translated by A. W. Marston. London, 1875.

[vi-p279]A Short and Easy Method of Prayer. (Heart and Life  Booklets.) London, 1900.

   

[vi-p279.1]Mons.

[vi-p280]  Masson, Maurice.    Fenelon et Mme. Guyon. Paris, 1907.

[vi-p281]  Upham, T. C.    Life, Religious Opinions, and Experience of Mme. Guyon. New edition.  With an Introduction by W. R. Inge, London, 1905.

[vi-p282](See also Part II., Delacroix and Leuba.)

   

[vi-p282.1]HAFIZ.

   

[vi-p282.2]Trans.

[vi-p283]The Divan. Translated into prose, with a Life, note  on Sufiism, &c.by H. W. Clarke. 2 vols. London, 1891.

[vi-p284]Ghazels from the Divan of Hafiz, done into English  by J. H. McCarthy. London, 1893.

   

[vi-p284.1]HILDEGARDE, SAINT.

   

[vi-p284.2]Text.

[vi-p285]Analecta S. Hildegardis opera, Spicilegio Solesmensi  parata. (Pitra, Analecta Sacra, Vol. VIII.) Paris, 1882.

   

[vi-p285.1]Trans.

[vi-p286]Revelations. 2 vols. Paris, 1912.

   

[vi-p286.1]Mons.

[vi-p287]  Bronarski.    Lieder der h. Hildegard. Leipzig, 1922.

[vi-p288]  Cochem, M. von.    Hildegardis die Heilige. Passau, 1844.

[vi-p289]  Godefridus.    Vie de Ste. Hildegarde. 1907.

[vi-p290]  May, J.    Die h. Hildegard. Munich, 1911.

[vi-p291]  Renard J.    Histoire de Ste. Hildegarde. Paris, 1865.

[vi-p292]  Singer, C.    Scientific views of St. Hildegarde. London, 1917. [p. 485] [vi-Page_485]

   

[vi-p292.1]HILTON, WALTER.

   

[vi-p292.2]Texts.

[vi-p293]The Scale of Perfection. Edited from MS. sources,  with an Introduction, by E. Underhill. London, 1923.

[vi-p294]The Scale of Perfection, Modernized from the first  printed edition, with an Introduction from the French of Dom M.  Noetinger (Orchard Books.) London, 1927.

[vi-p295]Minor Works. Edited by D. Jones. (Orchard Books.)  London, 1929.

[vi-p296](Only the first piece, Mixed Life, can be ascribed  to Hilton with certainty. His other authentic work, The Song of  Angels, is printed by Gardner, The Cell of Self-Knowledge. See Part  II.)

   

[vi-p296.1]HUGH OF ST. VICTOR.

   

[vi-p296.2]Text.

[vi-p297]Opera Omnia. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t. 175-177.)  Paris, 1854.

   

[vi-p297.1]Mons.

[vi-p298]  Haureau, J.      B.    Les oeuvres de Hugues de S. Victor: essai critique Paris, 1886.

[vi-p299]  Mignon, A.    Les origines de la Scholastique et Hugues de S. Victor, 2 vols.  Paris, 1895.

   

[vi-p299.1]IGNATIUS LOYOLA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p299.2]Texts.

[vi-p300]Exercitia spiritualia ex autographe Hispanico,  notis. J. Roothaan. Namur, 1841.

[vi-p301]Ejercicios espirituales. Rome, 1615.

[vi-p302]Cartas de S. Ignacio de Loyola, ed. A. Cabre, etc. 6  vols. Madrid, 1874-90.

   

[vi-p302.1]Trans.

[vi-p303]The Spiritual Exercises, Spanish and English, with  Commentary by J. Rickaby, S. J. London, 1915.

[vi-p304]The Testament of St. Ignatius Loyola. Translated by  E. M. Rix with a Preface by G. Tyrrell. London, 1900.

[vi-p305]Letters and Instructions of St. Ignatius Loyola.  Translated by D. F. O'Leary. London, 1914.

   

[vi-p305.1]Mons.

[vi-p306]  Brou.    La Spiritualite de St. Ignace. Paris, 1914.

[vi-p307]  Greff, N.    Der heilige Ignatius und seine Zeit. Kalden Kirchen, 1903.

[vi-p308]  Joly, H   . St. Ignace de Loyola (Les Saints). Paris, 1899.

[vi-p309]Translation, St. Ignatius of Loyola, translated by  M. Partridge. London, 1898.

[vi-p310]  Malzac, M.    Ignace de Loyola: essaie de psychologie religieuse. 1898.

[vi-p311]  Peers, E. Allison.    St. Ignatius: in Studies of the Spanish Mystics, Vol. I. London,  1927. (With full bibliography.)

[vi-p312]  Ribaniera.    Vita Ignatii Loyolae. Naples, 1572.

[vi-p313]  Rose, S.    Ignatius Loyola and the Early Jesuits. London, 1871  . 

[vi-p314]  Thompson, Francis.    St. Ignatius Loyola. London, 1909.

[vi-p315]  Venturi, P. T   . Storia della Compagnia di Gesu in Italia. 2 vols. Roma,  1910-22.

   

[vi-p315.1]JACOPONE DA TODI.

   

[vi-p315.2]Texts.

[vi-p316]Laude di Fr. Jacopone da Todi. Firenze, 1490.

[vi-p317]Laude di frate Jacopone da Todi. A cura di G. Ferri.  Bari, 1915.

   

[vi-p317.1]Mons.

[vi-p318]  Ancona, A. d'.    Jacopone da Todi il Giullare di Dio. Roma, 1914.

[vi-p319]  Brugnoli, B.    Le Satire di Jacopone da Todi. Firenze, 1914.

[vi-p320]  Pacheu, J.    Jacopone da Todi, Paris, 1914.

[vi-p321]  Underhill, E.    Jacopone da Todi: with a selection from the Spiritual Songs trans. by  Mrs. T. Beck. London, 1919  .    [p. 486] [vi-Page_486]

   

[vi-p321.1]JALALU 'DDIN RUMI.

   

[vi-p321.2]Text.

[vi-p322]Selected Poems from the Divan i Shamsi Tabriz.  Translated by R. A. Nicholson. Persian and English. Cambridge,  1898.

   

[vi-p322.1]Trans  .  

[vi-p323]Masnavi i Ma' navi: the Spiritual Couplets of  Jalalu 'ddin. Translated by E. H. Whinfield. London,  1887.

[vi-p324]The Mesnevi. Bk. I  .   , with Life, &c.ranslated by J. W. Redhouse. London, 1881.

[vi-p325]Jalalu 'ddin. Selections by F. Hadland  Davis. (Widsom of the East Series.) London, 1907.

   

[vi-p325.1]JAMI

   

[vi-p325.2]Trans  .  

[vi-p326]Joseph and Zuleika. Translated by A. Rogers. London,  1892.

[vi-p327]Yusuf and Zulaikha. Translated by R. T. H. Griffith.  London, 1882.

[vi-p328]Lawa'ih: a treatise on Sufiism. Fascimile  of MS. with translation by Whinfield and Mirza Muhammed Kazvini  (Oriental Translation Fund, new series), 1906.

[vi-p329]Jami. Selections, by F. Hadland Davis.  (Wisdom of the East Series.) London, 1908.

   

[vi-p329.1]JOACHIM OF FLORA.

   

[vi-p329.2]Texts.

[vi-p330]Liber Concordia novi ac veteris Testamenti. Venice,  1519.

[vi-p331]Expositio in Apocalipsum Psalterium decem chordarum.  Venice, 1527.

   

[vi-p331.1]Trans  .  

[vi-p332]L'evangile Eternel traduction avec  biographie par. E. Aegerter.

   

[vi-p332.1]Mons.

[vi-p333]  Fournier, P.    Etudes sur J. de Flore et ses Doctrines. Paris, 1909.

[vi-p334]  Grundmann, H.    Studien uber Joachim von Floris. Berlin, 1927.

   

[vi-p334.1]JOAN OF ARC, SAINT.

   

[vi-p334.2]Texts.

[vi-p335]Proces de condamnation de Jeanne d'Arc.  Text, trad. et notes. 2 tomes. Paris, 1920.

   

[vi-p335.1]Mons.

[vi-p336]  Auriac, J. E. d'.    La Veritable Jeanne d'Arc. Paris, 1920

[vi-p337]  Ayroles.    La Vraie Jeanne d'Arc. 5 tomes. Paris, 1890-1902.

[vi-p338]  Barres,    M. Autour de Jeanne d'Arc. Paris, 1916.

[vi-p339]  Denis,    L. La verite sur Jeanne d'Arc. Paris, 1910.

[vi-p340]  France, Anatole.    Vie de Jeanne D'Arc. Paris, 1908.

[vi-p341]  Lang, A.    The Maid of France. London, 1908.

[vi-p342]  Petit dc Julleville.    Jeanne D'Arc. (Les Saints.) Paris, 1909.

   

[vi-p342.1]JOHN OF THE CROSS, SAINT.

   

[vi-p342.2]Texts.

[vi-p343]Obras del mistico Doctor S. Juan de la Cruz.  Edicion Critica. 3 vols. Toledo, 1912-14.

[vi-p344]Aphorismes: texte et trans. Intro. par J. Baruzi.  Bordeaux, 1924

   

[vi-p344.1]Trans.

[vi-p345]The Ascent of Mount Carmel. Trans. by David Lewis.  New edition. London, 1906.

[vi-p346]The Dark Night ofthe Soul. Trans. by D. Lewis.  London, 1916.

[vi-p347]The Flame of Living Love. Trans. by D. Lewis.  London, 1912.

[vi-p348]A Spiritual Canticle of the Soul. Trans. by D.  Lewis. London, 1911.

[vi-p349]Oeuvres: traduction nouvelle sur le texte de  l'edition critique espagnole par H. Hoornaert. 4 tomes.  Paris, 1925.

   

[vi-p349.1]Mons.

[vi-p350]  Baruzi, Jean.    S. Jean de la Croix et le probleme de l'Experience  Mystique. Paris., 1924. (Important.)

[vi-p351]  Besse, L   . de. Eclaircissements sur les Oeuvres mystiques de S. Jean de la  Croix. Paris, 1983.

[vi-p352]  Calaber, Abbe   . La Terminologie de S. Jean de la Croix, etc. Paris, 1904. [p. 487] [vi-Page_487]

[vi-p353]  Dominiguez Berrueta,    M. El Misticismo de S. Juan de la Cruz. 1894.

[vi-p354]  Dosithee de Saint Alexis.    Vie de St. Jean de la Croix. Paris, 1727.

[vi-p355]  Lewis, D.    The Life of St. John of the Cross: compiled from all his Spanish  biographers and other sources. London, 1897.

[vi-p356]  Peers, E. Allison.    St. John of the Cross (in Studies of the Spanish Mystics. Vol. I)  with bibliography.

[vi-p357]  Poulain, A.    La Mystique de S. Jean de la Croix. Paris, 1892.

   

[vi-p357.1]JULIAN OF NORWICH.

   

[vi-p357.2]Texts.

[vi-p358]The Shewings: from the Amherst MS. transcribed by  the Rev. Dundas Harford. 3rd ed. London, 1925. (The earliest  text.)

[vi-p359]Revelations of Divine Love, recorded by Julian,  Anchoress at Norwich. A.D. 1373. Edited by Grace Warrack. 5th ed.  London, 1923.

[vi-p360]Sixteen Revelations of Divine Love showed to Mother  Juliana of Norwich. With a Preface by G. Tyrrell. London, 1902.

   

[vi-p360.1]Mon.

[vi-p361]  Thouless, R. H.    The Lady Julian: a psychological study. London, 1924.

   

[vi-p361.1]KEMPE, MARGERY.

[vi-p362](See in Bibliography, Part II., Gardner: The Cell  ofSelf-Knowledge.)

   

[vi-p362.1]LAW, WILLIAM.

[vi-p363]Works. 9 vols. London, 1762. (Privately reprinted,  London, 1893.)

[vi-p364]An Appeal to all who doubt. London, 1742.

[vi-p365]The Spirit of Prayer. London, 1750.

[vi-p366]The Spirit of Love. London, 1759.

[vi-p367]The Liberal and Mystical Writings of W. Law. Edited  by W. Scott Palmer. London, 1908.

   

[vi-p367.1]Mons.

[vi-p368]  Gem, S. H.    William Law on Christian Practice and Mysticism. Oxford, 1905.

[vi-p369]  Hobhouse, S.    W  .    Law and 18th Century Quakerism. London, 1928.

[vi-p370]  Overton Canon    J. H. Law, Nonjuror and Mystic. London, 1881.

[vi-p371]  Walton C.    Notes and Materials for a Biography of William Law. London, 1854.

[vi-p372]  Whyte, A   . Character and Characteristics of W. Law. Edinburgh, 1893.

   

[vi-p372.1]LAWRENCE, BROTHER.

   

[vi-p372.2]Text.

[vi-p373]Laurent de la Resurrection (Nicholas Herman).  Abrege de la vie de Frere Laurent, ses maximes  spirituelles, et quelques lettres qu'il a escrites a des  personnes de piete. (Receuil de divers traitez de  theologie mystique.) Paris, 1699.

   

[vi-p373.1]Trans.

[vi-p374]The Practice of the Presence of God. With additional  letters. London, 1906.

[vi-p375]The Practice of the Presence of God. Trans. D.  Attwater. (Orchard Books ) London, 1926.

[vi-p376]The Spiritual Maxims of Brother Lawrence, together  with his character. London, 1907.

   

[vi-p376.1]LEAD, JANE.

   

[vi-p376.2]Texts.

[vi-p377]The Tree of Faith. London, 1696.

[vi-p378]The Ark of Faith: or a Supplement to the Tree of  Faith. London, 1696.

[vi-p379]The Revelation of Revelations. London, 1683.

[vi-p380]A Message to the Philadelphian Society. London,  1696.

[vi-p381]The Ascent to the Mount of Vision. (Reprint.)  Littleborough, 1906.

[vi-p382]The Enochian walks with God. (Reprint.) Glasgow,  1891.

[vi-p383]The Signs of the Times. (Reprint.) Glasgow. 1891.  [p. 488] [vi-Page_488]

   

[vi-p383.1]LUCIE-CHRISTINE.

   

[vi-p383.2]Text.

[vi-p384]Journal Spirituel. Paris, 1912.

   

[vi-p384.1]Trans.

[vi-p385]Spiritual Journal. London, 1915.

   

[vi-p385.1]LULL, RAMON.

   

[vi-p385.2]Text.

[vi-p386]Obras. 13 vols. (In progress.) Palma di Mallorca,  1906   seq   .

   

[vi-p386.1]Trans.

[vi-p387]The Book of the Lover and Beloved. London, 1923.

[vi-p388]The Art of Contemplation. London, 1925.

[vi-p389]The Tree of Love. London, 1926.

[vi-p390]Blanquerna. London, 1926.

   

[vi-p390.1]Mons.

[vi-p391]  Andre, M.    Le B. Raymond Lull. Paris, 1900.

[vi-p392]  Anon.    A Life of Ramon Lull, written by an unknown hand about 1311, Trans.  by E. Allison Peers. London, 1927.

[vi-p393]  Blanch, Mn. Antoni.    Vida de Beat. Ramon Lull. Barcelona, 1907.

[vi-p394]  Galmes, Mn. Salvador.    Vida Compendrosa del Bt. Ramon Lull. Palma, 1915.

[vi-p395]  Peers, E. Allison.    Ramon Lull. London, 1929. (With full bibliography.)

[vi-p396]  Probst,    M. L'Art de Contemplation et la Mystique de Raymond Lull.  Munster, 1912.

   

[vi-p396.1]LYDWINE OF SCHIEDAM, SAINT.

   

[vi-p396.2]Text.

[vi-p397]Acta S. S. Aprilis t. II. Paris and Rome, 1860. (The  original Lives, by her contemporaries Gerlac and Brugman.)

   

[vi-p397.1]Trans.

[vi-p398]La Vie de la Tres saincte et vrayment admirable  Vierge Lydwine, tiree du Latin de J. Brugman et mise en  abrege par M. Michel d'Esne, evesque de Tournay.  Douai, 1608.

   

[vi-p398.1]Mon.

[vi-p399]  Huysmans, J. K   . Sainte Lydwine de Schiedam. 3  me    ed. Paris, 1901.

   

[vi-p399.1]MARIA MADDELENA DEI PAZZI, SAINT.

   

[vi-p399.2]Text.

[vi-p400]Opere. Florence, 1893.

   

[vi-p400.1]Trans.

[vi-p401]Oeuvres, ed. par D. Anselme Bruniaux, 2 vols. Paris,  1873.

   

[vi-p401.1]MARIE DE L'INCARNATION.

   

[vi-p401.2]Texts.

[vi-p402]La Vie de la Venerable Mere Marie de  l'Incarnation tiree de ses lettres, etc. Paris 1684.

[vi-p403]Lettres de la Ven Mere Marie de l'Incarnation.  Paris, 1681. Nouv. ed. Paris, 1876.

[vi-p404]Meditations et retraites de la Ven Mere Marie  de l'Incarnation. Paris, 1681.

   

[vi-p404.1]Mons.

[vi-p405]See Part II. Bremond and Menzies.

   

[vi-p405.1]MECHTHILD OF HACKBORN, SAINT.

   

[vi-p405.2]Texts.

[vi-p406]Liber Specialis Gratiae. (Contained in Revelationes  Gertrudianae ac Mechtildianiae, t. 2. Paris, 1875.)

[vi-p407]Revelationes Selectae S. Mechthildis. Edited by Dr.  A. Heuser. (Bibliotheca Mystica et Ascetica.) Cologne, 1854.

[vi-p408]Das Buch des geistlichen Gnaden (Reliquien aus dem  Mittelalter. Band 3). 1860.

   

[vi-p408.1]Mons.

[vi-p409]Select Revelations of S. Mechtild, Virgin,  Translated from the Latin by a secular priest. London, 1872.

[vi-p410]Revelations. Paris, 1919.

   

[vi-p410.1]MECHTHILD OF MAGDEBURG.

   

[vi-p410.2]Texts.

[vi-p411]Offenbarungen der Schwester Mechthild von Magdeburg,  oder Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit aus der einzigen Handschrift  des [p. 489] [vi-Page_489] Stiftes Einsiedeln, herausgegeben von P. Gall  Morel. Regensburg, 1869.

[vi-p412]Lux Divinitatis. (Contained in Revelationes  Gertrudianae ac Mechtildianiae, t. 2. Paris, 1875.)

[vi-p413]Das flieszende Licht der Gottheit von Mechthild von  Magdeburg. Ins Neudeutsche ubertragen und erlautert von Mela  Escherich. Berlin, 1909.

   

[vi-p413.1]Mons.

[vi-p414]  Ancelet-Eustache, J.    Mechtilde de Magdebourg. Paris, 1926.

[vi-p415]  Luers, Dr. G   . Die Sprache der deutschen Mystik des Mittelalters in Werke d.  Mechthild von Magdeburg. Munich, 1924.

   

[vi-p415.1]MERSWIN, RULMAN.

   

[vi-p415.2]Texts.

[vi-p416]Das Buch von den Neun Felsen. Leipzig, 1859.

[vi-p417]Das grosse deutsche Memorial. (MS. in Universitats  u. Laudes Bibliothek, Strasbourg.) A collection of 16 treatises by R.  Merswin or his school.

   

[vi-p417.1]Mons.

[vi-p418]  Jundt, A.    Rulman Merswin et l'Ami de Dieu de l'Oberland. Paris,  1890.

[vi-p419]  Rieder, Carl.    Der Gottesfreund von Oberland. Innsbruck, 1905.

[vi-p420]  Schmidt,    Nikolaus von Basel. Wien, 1866. (Some of Merswin's treatises  are printed in this book.)

   

[vi-p420.1]MOLINOS, MIGUEL DE.

   

[vi-p420.2]Text.

[vi-p421]Manuductio Spiritualis. Leipzig, 1687.

   

[vi-p421.1]Trans.

[vi-p422]The Spiritual Guide which disentangles the Soul.  Edited, with Introduction, by Lyttelton. (Library of Devotion.)  London, 1908.

   

[vi-p422.1]Mon.

[vi-p423]  Dudon, P.    Le quietiste espagnol M. Molinos. Paris, 1921.

   

[vi-p423.1]MORE, GERTRUDE.

   

[vi-p423.2]Texts.

[vi-p424]The Spiritual Exercises of the Most Virtuous and  Religious Dame Gertrude More. Paris, 1658.

[vi-p425]The Inner Life and Writings of Dame Gertrude More.  Edited by Dom Benedict Weld Blundell, O.S.B. Vol. I., The Inner Life;  Vol. II., The Writings. London, 1910.

[vi-p426]The Holy Practices of a Divine Lover. Edited, with  Introduction, by Dom H. Lane Fox. London and Edinburgh, 1909.

   

[vi-p426.1]NICOLAS OF CUSA.

   

[vi-p426.2]Text.

[vi-p427]Opera. Basle, 1565.

   

[vi-p427.1]Trans.

[vi-p428]The Vision of God, trans. by E. Gurney Salter.  London, 1928.

   

[vi-p428.1]Mon.

[vi-p429]  Vansteenberghe, E.    Le Cardinal Nicolas de Cuse, Paris, 1920.

   

[vi-p429.1]ORIGEN

   

[vi-p429.2]Text.

[vi-p430]Origenes Werke. 8 vols. Leipzig, 1899-1925.

   

[vi-p430.1]Trans.

[vi-p431]Library Writings; trans. F. Crombie. 2 vols.,  (Anti-Nicene Library.) Edinburgh. 1869-72.

   

[vi-p431.1]Mons.

[vi-p432]  Fairweather, W.    Origen and Greek theology. London, 1901.

[vi-p433]  Faye, E. de.    Origene, sa Vie, etc. 2 vols., 1923-27.

[vi-p434]Translation. Origen and his Work. London, 1926.

   

[vi-p434.1]OSANNA ANDREASI, BLESSED.

   

[vi-p434.2]Mon.

[vi-p435]  Gardner, E.    AMystic of the Renaissance: Osanna Andreasi of Mantua. Privately  printed. London, 1910.

   

[vi-p435.1]PASCAL.

   

[vi-p435.2]Text.

[vi-p436]Les Pensees Fragments et Lettres de Blaise  Pascal. Edited by Faugere. 2  me    ed. Paris, 1897.

[vi-p437]Pensees, et Vie par Madame Perier. Paris,  1861.

[vi-p438](Pascal's other works, being unrelated to his  mystic life, are not given.) [p. 490] [vi-Page_490]

   

[vi-p438.1]Trans.

[vi-p439]The Thoughts of Pascal. Edited by C. S. Jerram. (The  Library of Devotion.) London, n.d.

   

[vi-p439.1]Mons.

[vi-p440]  Boutroux, Emile.    Pascal. Paris, 1900.

[vi-p441]  Bremond, H.    En Priere avec Pascal. Paris, 1923.

[vi-p442]Jovy, E. Etudes Pascaliennes. Paris, 1927.

[vi-p443]  St. Cyr, Viscount.    Pascal. London, 1910.

   

[vi-p443.1]PENINGTON, ISAAC.

   

[vi-p443.2]Text.

[vi-p444]Works. London, 1681.

   

[vi-p444.1]PETER OF ALCANTARA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p444.2]Text.

[vi-p445]Tratado de la oracion y meditacion. Ed.  Fr. A. de Ocerin Jauregui. Madrid, 1916.

   

[vi-p445.1]Trans.

[vi-p446]A Golden Treatise of Mental Prayer. Ed. by G. S.  Hollings. London, 1905.

[vi-p447]A Treatise on Prayer and Meditation. Trans. by  Dominic Devas, O.F.M. (Orchard Books.) London, 1926.

   

[vi-p447.1]Mon.

[vi-p448]  O'Connor, A.    Life of St. Peter of Alcantara. Bedworth, 1915.

   

[vi-p448.1]PETERSEN, GERLAC.

   

[vi-p448.2]Text.

[vi-p449]Gerlaci Petri, ignitum cum Deo soliloquium. Cologne,  1849. (A reprint of the edition of 1616.)

   

[vi-p449.1]Trans.

[vi-p450]The Fiery Soliloquy with God of Master Gerlac  Petersen. London, 1921.

   

[vi-p450.1]PHILO.

   

[vi-p450.2]Text.

[vi-p451]Opera. Recog. L. Cohn et P. Wendland. 5 vols.  Berlin, 1896-1906.

   

[vi-p451.1]Trans.

[vi-p452]Works, tr. Yonge. 4 vols. London, 1854.

[vi-p453]Philo on the Contemplative Life. Edited by F. C.  Conybeare. Oxford, 1895.

   

[vi-p453.1]Mons.

[vi-p454]  Drummond, J.    Philo: the Jewish Alexandrian philosopher. London, 1888.

[vi-p455]  Kennedy, H. A.    Philo's Contribution to Religion. London, 1919.

[vi-p456]  Lake, J. W.    Plato, Philo, and Paul. London, 1874.

[vi-p457]  Reville, J.    La Doctrine du Logos dans Philon. Paris, 1881.

   

[vi-p457.1]PLOTINUS.

   

[vi-p457.2]Text.

[vi-p458]Plotini Enneades, praemisso Porphyrii de Vita  Plotini deque ordine librorum ejus libello. Edidit R. Volkmann. 2  vols. Leipzig, 1883-84.

[vi-p459]Enneades: texte etabli et trad. par E. Brehier.  14 vols. Paris, 1924-27.

   

[vi-p459.1]Trans.

[vi-p460]The Enneads: trans. by Stephen Mackenna. 5 vols.  London 1917-24. (In progress.)

[vi-p461]Les Enneades de Plotin, traduites par M. N.  Bouillet. 3 tomes. Paris, 1857-61.

   

[vi-p461.1]Mons.

[vi-p462]  Arnou, R.    Le desir de Dieu dans la Philosophie de Plotin. Paris, 1921.

[vi-p463]  Inge, W.    R. The Philosophy of Plotinus. 2 vols. London, 1918.

[vi-p464]  Whitby, C. J.    The Wisdom of Plotinus, a Metaphysical Study. London, 1909.

   

[vi-p464.1]PROCLUS.

   

[vi-p464.2]Text.

[vi-p465]Opera. Edited by V. Cousin. 6 tomes. Paris.  1820-27.

   

[vi-p465.1]Trans.

[vi-p466]The Six Books of Proclus on the Theology of Plato.  Translated by T. Taylor. 2 vols. London, 1816.

[vi-p467]Two Treatises of Proclus. Translated by T. Taylor.  London 1833. [p. 491] [vi-Page_491]

   

[vi-p467.1]RABI'A.

   

[vi-p467.2]Mon.

[vi-p468]  Smith, M.    Rabi'a the Mystic. London, 1928. (With full Arabic and Persian  bibliography.)

   

[vi-p468.1]RICHARD OF ST. VICTOR.

   

[vi-p468.2]Text.

[vi-p469]Opera Omnia. (Migne, Patrologia Latina. t. 196.)  Paris, 1855.

[vi-p470](See also Pt. II., Gardner, The Cell of  Self-Knowledge, which contains an Old English translation of Richard  of St. Victor's Benjamin Minor.)

   

[vi-p470.1]Mons.

[vi-p471]  Buonamici. R.    di San Vittore Alatri, 1898.

[vi-p472]  Ebner, J.    Die Erkenntnis lehre R. von St. Victor. Berlin, 1917.

[vi-p473]  Lubner, A.    Richardi a S. Victore de Contemplatione doctrina. Gottingen,  1837-39.

   

[vi-p473.1]ROLLE, RICHARD, OF HAMPOLE.

   

[vi-p473.2]Texts.

[vi-p474]Works of Richard Rolle of Hampole and his followers.  Edited by C. Horstman. 2 vols. (Library of Early English Writers.)  London, 1895. (With biographical introduction and bibliography. All  the attributions cannot be accepted.)

[vi-p475]The Incendium Amoris: ed. by M. Deanesly.  Manchester, 1915.

[vi-p476]Officium et Miracula: ed. R. M. Woolley, London,  1919.

[vi-p477]Selected Works of Richard Rolle, Hermit, transcribed  by G. C. Heseltine. London, 1930. (All the English works,  modernized.)

[vi-p478]English Prose Treatises. (E.E.T.S. Vol. XX.) London,  1866.

[vi-p479]The Fire of Love, and The Mending of Life. Englished  by R. Misyn. Ed. F. Comper. London, 1914.

[vi-p480]The Amending of Life: from Misyn's  translation. (Orchard Books.) London, 1927.

[vi-p481]The Psalter translated by Richard Rolle of Hampole,  ed. by H. R. Bramley. Oxford, 1884.

[vi-p482]The Form of Perfect Living. Ed. by G. Hodgson.  London, 1910.

[vi-p483]Minor Works, ed. by G. Hodgson. London, 1923. (Not  all the pieces in this collection are by Rolle.)

   

[vi-p483.1]Mons.

[vi-p484]  Allen, Hope.    Writings ascribed to Richard Rolle, Hermit, of Hampole, and Materials  for his Biography. Oxford, 1927. (Most valuable piece of first-hand  research.)

[vi-p485]  Comper, F.    The Life and Lyrics of Richard Rolle. London, 1928.

   

[vi-p485.1]ROSE OF LIMA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p485.2]Text.

[vi-p486]  Hansen, Leonardus.    Rosa Peruana. Vita Mirabilis et Mors pretiosa S. Rosae a Sancta  Maria. Ulyssipone Occidentali, 1725.

   

[vi-p486.1]Trans.

[vi-p487]The Life of S. Rose of Lima (paraphrase of above).  In series of The Saints and Servants of God. Edited by F. W. Faber.  London, 1847.

   

[vi-p487.1]Mons.

[vi-p488]  Capes, F. M.    The Flower of the New World; a short history of St. Rose of Lima.  1899.

[vi-p489]  Renouard de Bussierre (M.T. de).    Lo Perou et Ste. Rose de Lima. Paris, 1863.

   

[vi-p489.1]RUYSBROECK.

   

[vi-p489.2]Text.

[vi-p490]Werken van Jan van Rhusbroec, ed. J. David. 6 vols.  Ghent, 1858-68.

   

[vi-p490.1]Trans.

[vi-p491]Opera Omnia: trad. Surius. Cologne, 1652.

[vi-p492]Oeuvres de Ruysbroeck l'Admirable, trad. du  Flamand par les Benedictins de S. Paul de Wisques. 3 tomes. Brussels,  1912, etc.

[vi-p493]L'Ornement des Noces Spirituelles de  Ruysbroeck l'Admirable, trad. par Maurice Maeterlinck. Brussels,  1900. [p. 492] [vi-Page_492]

[vi-p494]John of Ruysbroeck: Adornment of the Spiritual  Marriage, etc., trans. by P. Wynschenk Dom. London, 1916.

[vi-p495]The Book of the Twelve Beguines, trans. by J.  Francis. London, 1913.

   

[vi-p495.1]Mons.

[vi-p496]  Auger, A.    De doctrina et meritis Joannis van Ruysbroeck. Louvian, 1892.

[vi-p497]  De Vreese, W    L. Ruysbroeck. (In Biographie Nationale de Belgique. t. xx.,  1910.)

[vi-p498]  Engelhardt, J. G. von.    Richard von St. Victor und J. Ruysbroeck. Erlangen, 1838.

[vi-p499]  Otterloo, A. A. van,    Johannis Ruysbroeck. 'S. Gravenhage, 1896.

[vi-p500]  Pomerius:    De origine monasterii Viridisvallis una cum vita B. Johannis  Rusbrochii. (Analecta Bollandiana iv., 1885.)

[vi-p501]  Schmidt, G. C.    Etude sur J. Ruysbroeck. 1859.

[vi-p502]  Scully, Dom. V.    A Mediaeval Mystic: B. John Ruysbroeck. London, 1910.

[vi-p503]  Underhill, E.    Ruysbroeck. (Quest Series.) London, 1915.

[vi-p504]  Waffelaert, G. J.    L'union de l'ame aimante avec Dieu . . .  d'apres la doctrine du B. Ruusbroec. Paris et Lille,  1906.

[vi-p505]  Wautier d'Aygalliers, A.    Ruysbroeck l'Admirable. Paris, 1923. (Very valuable.)

[vi-p506]Translation. Ruysbroeck the Admirable. London, 1925.  (This omits much bibliographical material.)

   

[vi-p506.1]SA'DI.

   

[vi-p506.2]Text.

[vi-p507]Gulistan. New edition, collated by E. B. Eastwick.  Hertford, 1850.

   

[vi-p507.1]Trans.

[vi-p508]The Gulistan: translated by E. B. Eastwick.  Hertford, 1852.

   

[vi-p508.1]SAINT-MARTIN.

   

[vi-p508.2]Texts.

[vi-p509]Tableau naturel des rapports qui existent entre  Dieu, l'Homme et l'Univers. 1782.

[vi-p510]L'Homme de Desir, par le Philosophe  Inconnu. 1802.

[vi-p511]Des Nombres: oeuvre posthume. Edited by J. Schauer.  Paris, 1861.

[vi-p512]La Correspondence inedite de L. C. de  Saint-Martin dit le Philosophe Inconnu, et Kirchberger, Baron de  Liebestorf. Edited by Schauer and Chuquet. Paris, 1862.

   

[vi-p512.1]Trans.

[vi-p513]Man: his true nature. Translated by E. B. Penny.  London, 1864.

[vi-p514]Theosophic Correspondence. Trans. by E. B. Penny.  London, 1863.

   

[vi-p514.1]Mons.

[vi-p515]  Caro, E. M.    Du Mysticisme du 18eme Siecle: essai sur la Vie et la  Doctrine de Saint-Martin. Paris, 1852.

[vi-p516]  Matter, A. J.    Saint-Martin le Philosophe Inconnu, sa vie et ses ecrits.  1862.

[vi-p517]  Waite A. E.    The Life of Louis Claude de Saint-Martin, the Unknown Philosopher,  and the substance of his transcendental doctrine. London, 1901.

   

[vi-p517.1]STERRY, PETER.

   

[vi-p517.2]Texts.

[vi-p518]Discourse of the Freedom of the Will. London,  1675.

[vi-p519]The Rise, Race, and Royalty of the Kingdom of God in  the Soul. London, 1683.

[vi-p520]The Appearance of God to Man in the Gospel. London,  1710. [p. 493] [vi-Page_493]

   

[vi-p520.1]SUSO.

   

[vi-p520.2]Texts.

[vi-p521]Die deutschen Schriften des seligen H. Seuse. Edited  by H. S. Denifle. Munchen, 1876.

[vi-p522]Heinrich Susos Leben und Schriften. Edited by M.  Diepenbrock, Regensburg, 1825.

   

[vi-p522.1]Trans.

[vi-p523]Oeuvres mystiques du B. Henri Suso. Traduction par  le P. G. Thiriot. 2 vols. Paris, 1899.

[vi-p524]Life of B. Henry Suso, by Himself. Trans. by T. F.  Knox. London, 1913.

[vi-p525]Little Book of Eternal Wisdom. London, 1910.

   

[vi-p525.1]Mons.

[vi-p526]  Schmidt, C.    Der Mystiker Heinrich Seuse. (Theol. Studien und Kriken), 1843.

[vi-p527]  Vetter, F.    Ein Mystiker paar des xiv Jahrhundert. Basle, 1882.

   

[vi-p527.1]TAULER

   

[vi-p527.2]Texts.

[vi-p528]Die Predigten Taulers aus d. Engelberger und d.  Freiburger Handschrift. sowie aus Schmidt's Abschriften d.  ehemaligen Strasburger Handschrift. Ed. F. Vetter (Deutsche Texte d.  Mittelalters. Band xi.) Berlin, 1910. (This is the first critical text  of Tauler's sermons.)

[vi-p529]Johann Tauler's Predigten nach den besten  Ausgaben in die jetzige Schriftsprache ubertragen von J.  Hamberger. Zweite neu bearbeitete Auflage. 3 Band. Prague, 1872.

   

[vi-p529.1]Trans.

[vi-p530]D. Joannes Thauleri. Sermones de tempore et de  Sanctis totius anni, plane piissime: R. F. Laurentio Surio in Latinum  Sermonem translata, &c.ologne, 1603.

[vi-p531]The History and Life of the Rev. Doctor John Tauler,  with 25 of his sermons, translated by Susanna Winkworth. Preface by  Charles Kingsley. New edition. London, 1906.

[vi-p532]The Inner Way: Being 36 sermons for Festivals. New  translation, with Introduction, by Rev. A. W. Hutton. (Library of  Devotion.) 3rd edition. London, 1909.

[vi-p533]Sermons . . . traduits de l'Allemand par C.  Saint-Foi. 2 tomes. Paris, 1845.

[vi-p534]Oeuvres Completes. Trad. Iitterale de la  version latine de Surius: par G. P. Noel, O. P. 8 vols. Paris, 1911.  (In progress.)

   

[vi-p534.1]Mon.

[vi-p535]  Denifle.    Tauler's Bekehrung in Quellen u. Forschungen zur Sprach u.  Cultur-geschichte. Strasburg, 1879.

   

[vi-p535.1]TERESA, SAINT.

   

[vi-p535.2]Text.

[vi-p536]Obras de Santa Teresa de Jesus. Editadas y  anotadas por el P. Silverio de S. Teresa. C.D. 9 vols. Burgos 1915-26.  (The best edition of the Spanish text.)

   

[vi-p536.1]Trans.

[vi-p537]Oeuvres de Sainte Theresa, traduites par  les Carmelites du Premier Monastere de Paris. 6 tomes. Paris,  1907-10.

[vi-p538]Lettres, traduites selon l'ordre chronologique  par le Pere Marcel Bouix. Troisieme edition. 3 tomes. Paris,  1898.

[vi-p539]The Life of St. Teresa of Jesus, written by Herself,  translated by D. Lewis. 5th edition. London, 1916.

[vi-p540]The Book of the Foundations of St. Teresa of Jesus,  written by Herself. Translated by D. Lewis. London, 1913.

[vi-p541]The History of the Foundations Translated by Sister  Agnes Mason. 1909.

[vi-p542]The Interior Castle: translated from the autograph  of St. Teresa by the Benedictines of Stanbrook Abbey. London, 1912.  [p. 494] [vi-Page_494]

[vi-p543]The Way of Perfection, translated from the autograph  of St. Teresa by the Benedictines of Stan brook Abbey, with Notes by  Zimmerman. London, 1911.

[vi-p544]Letters. 4 vols. translated by the Benedictines of  Stanbrook Abbey. London, 1919-24.

[vi-p545]Minor Works: translated by the Benedictines of Stan  brook Abbey. London, 1913.

   

[vi-p545.1]Mons.

[vi-p546]  Baring, Arvede.    Psychologie d'une Sainte: Sainte Theresa. (Revue des  Deux Mondes. I  e    Juin, 1886.)

[vi-p547]  Berrueta, A.    D. Sta Teresa de Jesus y S. Juan della Cruz: bocetos psicologica.  Madrid, 1915.

[vi-p548]  Carmelite, Une.    Histoire de Ste. Theresa. 2 vols. Paris, 1887.

[vi-p549]  Canal, E.    Ste. Theresa. Paris, 1921.

[vi-p550]  Coleridge, H. J.    Life and Letters of St. Teresa. 3 vols. London, 1872.

[vi-p551]  Colvill, H. H.    Saint Teresa of Spain. London, 1909.

[vi-p552]  Carton H. do.    Bibliographie Teresienne. Paris, 1902.

[vi-p553]  Genonville. S.    Theresa et son Mysticisme. Montaubon, 1893.

[vi-p554]  Graham, G. Cunninghame.    Santa Teresa. New ed. I vol. London, 1907.

[vi-p555]  Hoornaert, R. S.    Terese ecrivain. Paris, 1922.

[vi-p556]  Joly, H.    Ste. Theresa (Les Saints). Paris, 1902.

[vi-p557](Translation.) St. Teresa, translated by E. Waller.  London, 1903.

[vi-p558]  Legardere. S.    Theresa, Psychologique et Mystique. Besancon,  1900.

[vi-p559]  Mir, M.    Santa Teresa de Jesus. 2 vols. Madrid, 1912.

[vi-p560]  Norero, H.    L'Union mystique chez Ste. Theresa. Macon, 1905.

[vi-p561]  Peers, E. Allison.    St. Teresa (in "Studies of the Spanish Mystics." London,  1927), with full bibliography.

[vi-p562]  Ribera, Francisco do,    Vida de S. Teresa de Jesus. Nuova ed. Barcelona, 1908. (First  published in 1590.)

[vi-p563]  Whyte A.    Santa Teresa: an appreciation. Edinburgh, 1897.

[vi-p564]  Yepes D. do.    Vida, Virtudes, y Milagros de Santa Teresa de Jesus. Lisbon,  1616.

   

[vi-p564.1]THEOLOGIA GERMANICA.

   

[vi-p564.2]Texts.

[vi-p565]Der Frankforter, Ein deutsch Theologia. Ed. Willo  Uhl. Bonn, 1912. (From the best MS.)

[vi-p566]Theologia Deutsch. Neue nach der einziger bis jetzt  bekannten Handschrift besorgte vollstandige Ausgabe. Edited by F.  Pfeiffer. Stuttgart, 1851. (Imperfect.)

[vi-p567]Theologia Germanica, translated from  Pfeiffer's edition; edited by Susanna Winkworth, with a Preface  by Charles Kingsley. 4th edition. (Golden Treasury Series.) London,  1907.

[vi-p568]Le Livre de la Vie Parfait, trad. par J. Paquier.  Paris, 1928. (Complete translation from Uhl's text.)

   

[vi-p568.1]Mon.

[vi-p569]  Paquier, J.    L'orthodoxie de la Theologie Germanique. Paris, 1922.

   

[vi-p569.1]THOMAS A KEMPIS.

   

[vi-p569.2]Texts.

[vi-p570]Opera Omnia. I vol. Cologne, 1660.

[vi-p571]De Imitatione Christi. Edited by P. E. Puyal. Paris,  1886.

[vi-p572]Libri Quatuor de Imitatione Christi, in versiculos  distributi, Justa rythmum ex-MSS de promptum, Cura et studie, Dr. C.  Albini de Agala. Paris, 1905.

   

[vi-p572.1]Trans.

[vi-p573]Of the Imitation of Christ. Revised translation by  Dr. C. Bigg. (Library of Devotion.) London, 1901.

[vi-p574]The Imitation of Christ: the Earliest English  Translation. (Everyman's Library.) London, n.d. [p. 495] [vi-Page_495]

   

[vi-p574.1]Mons.

[vi-p575]  Acquoy, J.    G. Het Klooster te Windesheim. Utrecht, 1875.

[vi-p576]  Busch J.    Chron. Canonicorum Ordine S. Augustini, cap. Windesimensis. Antwerp  1631.

[vi-p577]  Butler, Dugald.    Thomas a Kempis, a religious study. London, 1908.

[vi-p578]  Do Mongmorency. J. G.    Thomas a Kempis. London, 1906.

[vi-p579]  Kettlewell, S.    The authorship of the De Imitatione Christi. London, 1877.

[vi-p580]--Thomas a Kempis and the Brothers of the  Common Life. London, 1882.

[vi-p581]  Wheatley, L. A.    The Story of the Imitatio. London, 1891.

   

[vi-p581.1]VERNAZZA, VEN. BATTISTA.

   

[vi-p581.2]Text.

[vi-p582]Opere Spirituali. Genova, 1755.

[vi-p583](See also in Pt. II., Von Hugel, the Mystical  Element of Religion.)

   

[vi-p583.1]WOOLMAN, JOHN.

   

[vi-p583.2]Text.

[vi-p584]Journal and Essays. Edited by A. M. Gummere. London,  1922.

      

[vi-p584.1]PART II

   

[vi-p584.2]GENERAL WORKS ON MYSTICISM

[vi-p585]  Arintero, J. G   . Cuestiones misticas. Salamanca, 1916.  
   Evolution mistica. Salamanca, 1921.

[vi-p586]  Auger   . Etude sur les Mystiques des Pays Bas au Moyen (Collectiones des  Memoires Publies par l'Academie Royale de Belgique,  tome 46.)

[vi-p587]  Baker, Ven. Augustine   . Holy Wisdom; or Directions for the Prayer of Contemplation. (Edited  by Abbot Sweeny, O.S.B.) London, 1908.

[vi-p588]  Barbancon, C   . The Secret Paths of Divine Love. (Orchard Books.) London, 1928.

[vi-p589]  Barluke, John Evangelist of.    The Kingdom of God in the Soul. (Capuchin Classics.) London,  1930.

[vi-p590]  Benson, Rev. R. H   . Mysticism. (Westminster Lectures.) London, 1907.

[vi-p591]  Besse, Dom L. de   . La Science de la Priere. Paris, 1903.  
   Translation. The Science of Prayer. London, 1925.  
   Les Mystiques Benedictine des origines au XVII. Siecle. Parish  1922.

[vi-p592]  Biscioni, A. M   . Lettere di Santi e Beati Fiorentini. Firenze, 1736.

[vi-p593]  Boutroux, Emile   . Psychologie du Mysticisme. (Bulletin de l'Institut  Psychologique.) Paris, 1902.

[vi-p594]  Bremond, Abbe    H. La Provence Mystique. Paris, 1908.  
   Histoire Litteraire du Sentiment Religieux en France. 8 vols. Paris  1916-28. (Indispensable. Contains a detailed account of the French  seventeenth-century school, with numerous quotations and  bibliographical references.  
   Priere et Poesie. Paris, 1926.  
   (Translation.) Prayer and Poetry. London, 1928.  
   Philosophie de la Priere. Paris, 1929.

[vi-p595]  Brenier de Montmorand   . Ascetisme et Mysticisme. (Revue Philosophique Mars, 1904.)

[vi-p596]  Buonaiuti, E   . Il Misticismo Mediaeval. Pinerolo, 1928.

[vi-p597]  Butler, Dom Cuthbert   . Western Mysticism. London, 1919.

[vi-p598]  Chaillot   . Principes de Theologie Mystique. Parish 1866.

[vi-p599]  Chandler, Rev. A   . Ara Coeli; studies in mystical religion. London, 1908. [p. 496] [vi-Page_496]

[vi-p600]  Chapman, Dom J.    Mysticism. (In Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics.)

[vi-p601]  Davison, Ellen S   . Forerunners of St. Francis. London, 1928.

[vi-p602]  Delacroix, H   . Essai sur lo Mysticisme Speculatif en Allemagne au XIV.  Siecle. Paris, 1900.  
   Etudes d'Histoire at de psychologie du Mysticisme. Les  Grands Mystiques Chretiens. Paris, 1908. (Detailed analyses of  St. Teresa, Madame Guyon, Suso. Indispensable to the student.)

[vi-p603]  Denifle, H. S   . Das geistliche Leben: Blumenlese aus der deutschen Mystikern der 14  Jahrhunderts. Graz, 1895.

[vi-p604]  Devine, Rev. A   . A Manual of Mystical Theology. London, 1903.

[vi-p605]  Farges, Mgr. A   . Les phenomenes mystiques. Paris, 1920.

[vi-p606]Translation. Mystical Phenomena, trans. from 2nd  French edition. London, 1926.

[vi-p607]  Gardner, Edmund   . The Cell of Self-Knowledge: Seven Old English Mystical Works.  Reprinted from Pepwell's edition, with Notes and Introduction.  (New Mediaeval Library.) London, 1910. (This contains a translation of  Richard of St. Victor's Benjamin Minor, the only known work of  Margery Kempe, Hilton's Song of Angels, and three works of the  Cloud of Unknowing group.)

[vi-p608]  Garrigou-Lagrange, Pere   . Perfection Chretienne et Contemplation selon S. Thomas  d'Aquin et S. Jean de la Croix. 2 t. Paris, 1923.

[vi-p609]  Gebhart, E   . L'Italie Mystique. 5  me    edition. Paris, 1906.

[vi-p610]Translation. Mystics and Heretics in Italy. London,  1922.

[vi-p611]  Gichtel, J. G   . Theosophia Practica. Leyden, 1722.

[vi-p612]  Godfernaux   . Sur la Psychologie du Mysticisme. (Revue Philosophique, 1902.)

[vi-p613]  Gorres   , J. J. v. Die Christliche Mystik. 5 Bande. Regensburg,  1836-42.

[vi-p614]  Gregory, Eleanor C   . An Introduction to Christian Mysticism. London, 1901.  
   A Little Book of Heavenly Wisdom. Selections from so no English Prose  Mystics. With Introduction. (Library of Devotion.) London, 1904.

[vi-p615]  Harphius    (H. de Herp). Theologia Mystica. Cologne, 1538.

[vi-p616]  Hebert, M   . Le Divin: Experiences et hypotheses. Paris, 1907.

[vi-p617]  Heiler, F   . Das Gebet. Munich, 1920.  
   Die Bedeutung der Mystick fur die Weltreligionen, Munich, 1919.

[vi-p618]  Hello, E   . Physionomies de Saints. New edition. Paris, 1900.

[vi-p619]  Heppe, H   . Geschichte der Quietistischen Mystik. Berlin, 1875.

[vi-p620]  Herman, E   . The Meaning and Value of Mysticism. London, 1915.

[vi-p621]  Inge, W. R   . Christian Mysticism. (Bampton Lectures.) London, 1899. (A standard  work indispensable to the student.)  
   Studies of English Mystics. (St. Margaret's Lectures.) London,  1906.  
   Light, Life and Love. Selections from the German Mystics. With  Introduction. (Library of Devotion.) London, 1905.  
   Personal Idealism and Mysticism. (Paddock Lectures.) London, 1907.

[vi-p622]  Joly, Henri   . Psychologie des Saints. Paris, 1895.

[vi-p623]Translation. The Psychology of the Saints. With  Preface and Notes by George Tyrrell. London, 1898.

[vi-p624]  Jones, Rufus M   . Studies in Mystical Religion. London, 1909.

[vi-p625]Spiritual Reformers in the 16th and 17th Centuries.  London, 1914.

[vi-p626]  Joret, Pere   . La Contemplation Mystique d'apres S. Thomas d'Aquin  Paris, 1923.

[vi-p627]  Jundt, A   . Les Amis de Dieu au XIV. Siecle. Paris, 1879. [p. 497] [vi-Page_497]

[vi-p628]  Klein, F   . Madeleine Semer, Convertie et Mystique. 16  me    edition. Paris, 1924.

[vi-p629]  Knowles, Dom D   . The English Mystics. London, 1928.

[vi-p630]  Lehmann, E   . Mysticism in Heathendom and Christendom. Translated by G. M. G.  Hunt. London, 1910.

[vi-p631]  Lejeune, Abbe P   . Manual de Theologie Mystique. 1897.

[vi-p632]  Leuba, J. H   . Les Tendances Fondamentales des Mystiques Chretiens (Revue  Philosophique, Juillet, 1902.)  
   The Psychology of Religious Mysticism. London, 1925.

[vi-p633]  Malaval   . La Pratique de la vraie theologie mystique. 2 tomes. Paris,  1709.

[vi-p634]  Marechal, J.    Etudes sur la psychologie des Mystiques. Paris, n.d.  
   Translation. Studies in the Psychology of the Mystics. London, 1927.  (Valuable.)

[vi-p635]  Massignon, L   . Essai sur les origines du lexique technique de la mystique  Musulmane. Paris, 1922.

[vi-p636]  Menzies, L   . Mirrors of the Holy. London, 1928. (Studies of women mystics.)

[vi-p637]  Nicholson, R. A   . The Mystics of Islam. London, 1914.

[vi-p638]  Oman, J. C   . The mystics, ascetics, and saints of India. London, 1905.

[vi-p639]  Ossuna, Francesco de   . Abecedario Spiritual. 6 vols. (Gothic letter.) Medina, 1554. (This  is the book from which St. Teresa first learned the method of  contemplation.)

[vi-p640]  Otto, Rudolf   . Westostliche Mystick. Klotz. 1926.

[vi-p641]  Pacheu, J   . Psychologie des Mystiques Chretiens. Parish 1909.

[vi-p642]  Palmer, E. H   . Oriental Mysticism. A Treatise on the Sufiistic and Unitarian  Theosophy of the Persians. Cambridge, 1867.

[vi-p643]  Patmore, Coventry   . The Rod, the Root, and the Flower. 2nd edition. London, 1907.

[vi-p644]  Peers, Allison   . Spanish Mysticism. London, 1924.  
   Studies in the Spanish Mystics. Vol. I. London, 1927. (With excellent  bibliographies.)

[vi-p645]  Poiret, Pierre   . Theologiae Mysticae idea generalis. Paris, 1702. Petri Poireti  Bibliotheca Mysticorum Selecta. Paris, 1708. (This contains a useful  list of mystical and ascetic works, many of which are now lost.)

[vi-p646]  Poulain, A   . Les desiderata de la Mystique. (Etudes Jesuites.) Paris, 1898.  
   Les Graces d'Oraison. 10  me    edition. Paris, 1922. (Useful citations.)

[vi-p647]Translation. The Graces of Interior Prayer. London  1910.

[vi-p648]  Pourrat, P   . La Spiritualite Chretienne. 3 tomes. Paris, 1921-25.

[vi-p649]Translation. Christian Spirituality. 3 vols. London.  1922-26. (Very useful.)

[vi-p650]  Preger, W   . Geschichte der deutschen Mystick in Mittelalter. B. I-3. Leipzig,  1874-93

[vi-p651]  Recejac, E   . Essai sur les fondements de la Connaissance Mystique. Paris,  1897

[vi-p652]Translation. Essay on the bases of the Mystic  Knowledge. Translated by S. C. Upton. London, 1899. (An important  study of the psychology of mysticism.)

[vi-p653]  Reinach, S   . Une Mystique au 18  e    Siecle. (Cultes, Mythes, et Religions.) Paris, 1906.

[vi-p654]  Renda, Antonio   . Il Pensiero Mistico. Milano e Palermo, 1902.

[vi-p655]  Ribet, J   . La Mystique Divine. 3 tomes. Paris, 1879. (A standard Roman Catholic  work. Elaborate, but uncritical.) L'Ascetique  Chretienne. Paris, 1888.

[vi-p656]  Rousselot, P   . Les Mystiques Espagnols. Paris, 1867. [p. 498] [vi-Page_498]

[vi-p657]  Saudreau, L   . Les degres de la vie Spirituelle. 5th edition. 2 vols. Paris,  1920.  
   La Vie d'Union a Dieu. 3rd edition. Paris 1921.  
   L'Etat Mystique et les faits extraordinaires de la Vie  Spirituelle. 2nd edition. Paris, 1921.

[vi-p658]Translations. The Degrees of the Spiritual Life,  trans. by Dom Bede Camm, O.S.B. 2 vols. London, 1907.  
   The Life of Union with God. London, 1927.  
   The Mystical State. London, 1924.

[vi-p659]  Scaramelli, G. B   . Il direttorio Mistico. Roma, 1900.

[vi-p660]  Schmolders, A   . Essai sur les Ecoles Philosophiques chez les Arabes. Paris,  1842. (Contains the best account of the Sufi philosopher, Al Ghazzali.  )

[vi-p661]  Sharpe, A   . Mysticism, its true Nature and Value. London, 1910.

[vi-p662]  Spurgeon, Caroline   . Mysticism in English Literature. London, 1913.

[vi-p663]  Thorold, Algar   . An Essay in Aid of the better Appreciation of Catholic Mysticism.  London, 1900.

[vi-p664]  Tollemache, M   . Spanish Mystics. London, 1886.

[vi-p665]  Underhill, E   . The Mystic Way. London, 1913.  
   Practical Mysticism. London, 1914.  
   The Essentials of Mysticism. London, 1920.  
   The Mystics of the Church. London, 1925.

[vi-p666]  Vaughan, R. A   . Hours with the Mystics. 3rd edition. 2 vols. London, 1880.

[vi-p667]  Von Hugel, Baron F   . The Mystical Element of Religion, as studied in St. Catherine of  Genoa and her Friends. 2 vols. London, 1908. (Indispensable. The best  work on Mysticism in the English language.)

[vi-p668]  Waite, A. E   . Studies in Mysticism. London, 1906.

[vi-p669]  Watkin, E. I   . The Philosophy of Mysticism. London, 1919.

      

[vi-p669.1]PART III

   

[vi-p669.2]PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY, AND THEOLOGY

[vi-p670]   [vi-p670.1]Adam, James. 

[vi-p671]The Religious Teachers of Greece. (Gifford  Lectures.) 1908.

[vi-p672]Bergson, Henri.

[vi-p673]Essai sur les Donnees immediates de la  Conscience. Paris, 1889.

[vi-p674]Matiere et Memoire. Paris, 1896.

[vi-p675]Introduction a la Metaphysique. Paris,  1903.

[vi-p676]L'Evolution Creatrice. Paris, 1907.

[vi-p677]  Translations   . Time and Free Will: an Essay on the Immediate data of Consciousness,  translated by F. L. Pogson. London, 1910.

[vi-p678]Matter and Memory, trans. by N. Paul and W. Scott  Palmer. London, 1910.

[vi-p679]Creative Evolution, trans. by A. Mitchell. London,  1911.

[vi-p680]Berguer, M.

[vi-p681]Psychologie religieuse. Geneva, 1914.

[vi-p682]Bessemans, Dr.

[vi-p683]Die Stigmatisatie in het licht der hedendaagsche  biologie. Antwerp, 1923.

[vi-p684]Bigg, Dr. C.

[vi-p685]The Christian Platonists of Alexandria. (Bampton  Lectures.) Oxford, 1885.

[vi-p686]Neoplatonism. London, 1895. [p. 499] [vi-Page_499]

[vi-p687]Binet, A.

[vi-p688]La Suggestibilite. Paris, 1900.

[vi-p689]Boutroux, Emile.

[vi-p690]Science et Religion dans la Philosophie  Contemporaine. Paris, 1908.

[vi-p691]  Translation   . Science and Religion in Contemporary Philosophy. Translated by G. J.  Nield. London, 1909. (Compare Pt. I., Boehme.)

[vi-p692]Boyce Gibson, W. B.

[vi-p693]An Introduction to Rudolph Eucken's  Philosophy. London, 1908.

[vi-p694]God with us. London, 1909.

[vi-p695]Bradley, F. H.

[vi-p696]Appearance and Reality. 2nd ed. London, 1897.

[vi-p697]Brunschvieg, L.

[vi-p698]Introduction a la Vie de l'Esprit. 1900.

[vi-p699]Buber, M.

[vi-p700]Ekstatische Konfessionen. 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1922.

[vi-p701]Bucke, R. M.

[vi-p702]Cosmic Consciousness: a study in the evolution of  the Human Mind. Philadelphia, 1905.

[vi-p703]Caird, Edward.

[vi-p704]The Evolution of Religion, 2 vols. (Gifford  Lectures.) Glasgow, 1893.

[vi-p705]The Evolution of Theology in the Greek Philosophers.  2 vols. Glasgow, 1904.

[vi-p706]Caird, John.

[vi-p707]Introduction to the Philosophy of Religion. Glasgow,  1880.

[vi-p708]Fundamental Ideas of Christianity. Glasgow,  1899.

[vi-p709]Cutten, G. B.

[vi-p710]The Psychological Phenomena of Christianity. London,  1909.

[vi-p711]De Sanctis. S.

[vi-p712]Religious Conversion; a bio-psychological study.  Trans. by Helen Augur. London, 1927.

[vi-p713]Dewing, A. S.

[vi-p714]Life as Reality: a Philosophical Essay. London,  1910.

[vi-p715]Driesch, Hans.

[vi-p716]The Science and Philosophy of Organism. 2 vols.  (Gifford Lectures.) 1908.

[vi-p717]Elsee, C.

[vi-p718]Neoplatonism in its Relation to Christianity.  London, 1908.

[vi-p719]Eucken, Rudolph.

[vi-p720]Die Einheit des Geisteslebens. Leipzig, 1888.

[vi-p721]Der Kampf um einen geistigen Lebensinhalt. Leipzig,  1896.

[vi-p722]Geistige Stromungen der Gegenwart. Leipzig,  1909.

[vi-p723]Der Wahrheitsgehalt der Religion. 2nd ed. Leipzig,  1905.

[vi-p724]Die Lebensanschauungen der Grossen Denker. Leipzig,  1909.

[vi-p725]Hauptprobleme der Religionsphilosophie der  Gegenwart. Berlin, 1907.

[vi-p726]Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens. Leipzig, 1908.

[vi-p727]  Translations   . The Life of the Spirit: an Introduction to Philosophy 2nd ed.  London, 1909.

[vi-p728]The Problem of Human Life. London, 1909.

[vi-p729]The Meaning and Value of Life. London, 1909.

[vi-p730]Christianity and the New Idealism. New York,  1909.

[vi-p731]Flournoy, T.

[vi-p732]Les Principes de la Psychologie religieuse (Archives  de Psychologie 1902.)

[vi-p733]Une mystique moderne (ibid, 1915). [p. 500] [vi-Page_500]

[vi-p734]Franck, A.

[vi-p735]La Kabbale. 3rd ed. Paris, 1892.

[vi-p736]Granger, F. G.

[vi-p737]The Soul of a Christian. London, 1900.

[vi-p738]Harrison, Jane E.

[vi-p739]Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion.  Cambridge, 1903.

[vi-p740]Hebert, M.

[vi-p741]La forme idealiste du sentiment religieux.  Paris, 1909.

[vi-p742]Hocking, W. E.

[vi-p743]The Meaning of God in Human Experience. New York,  1922.

[vi-p744]Huby, J.

[vi-p745]La Conversion. Paris, 1919.

[vi-p746]Imbert-Gourbeyre, Dr.

[vi-p747]Les Stigmatisees. 2 vols. Paris, 1873.

[vi-p748]La Stigmatization. 2 vols. Paris, 1894.

[vi-p749]James, M. R.

[vi-p750]Apocrypha Anecdota Series II. Cambridge. 1897.

[vi-p751]James, William.

[vi-p752]The Principles of Psychology. 2 vols. London,  1890.

[vi-p753]Textbook of Psychology. London, 1892.

[vi-p754]The Will to Believe. New York, 1897.

[vi-p755]The Varieties of Religious Experience. (Gifford  Lectures.) London, 1902.

[vi-p756]A Pluralistic Universe. (Hibbert Lectures.) London,  1909.

[vi-p757]Janet, Pierre.

[vi-p758]L'Automatisme Psychologique. Paris, 1889.

[vi-p759]L'Etat Mentale des Hysteriques. 2 vols. Paris,  1893-94.

[vi-p760]Nevroses et idees fixes. Paris, 1898.

[vi-p761]Une extatique (Bulletin de l'Institut  Psychologique). Paris, 1901.

[vi-p762]Obsessions et Psychasthenie. Paris, 1903.

[vi-p763]  Translations   . The Mental State of Hystericals. New York, 1901.

[vi-p764]The Major Symptoms of Hysteria. New York, 1907.

[vi-p765]Jastrow, J.

[vi-p766]The Subconscious: A Study in Descriptive Psychology.  London, 1906.

[vi-p767]Jefferies, Richard.

[vi-p768]The Story of My Heart. 2nd ed. London, 1891.

[vi-p769]Jundt, A.

[vi-p770]Histoire du pantheisme populaire au moyen age.  Paris, 1875.

[vi-p771]Ladd, G. T.

[vi-p772]An Introduction to Philosophy. London, 1891.

[vi-p773]The Philosophy of Knowledge. New York, 1897.

[vi-p774]The Philosophy of Religion. 2 vols. New York,  1905.

[vi-p775]Leroy, B.

[vi-p776]Nature des Hallucinations. (Revue Philosophique,  1907.)

[vi-p777]Interpretation psychologique des Visions  Intellectuelles. (Revue de l'Histoire des Religions, 1907.)

[vi-p778]Maritain, J.

[vi-p779]Introduction Generale a la Philosophie. Paris,  1920.

[vi-p780]De la Vie d'Oraison. Paris, 1924.

[vi-p781]  Translations   . An Introduction to Philosophy. London, 1930.

[vi-p782]Prayer and Intelligence. London, 1928.

[vi-p783]Mead, G. R. S.

[vi-p784]Thrice Greatest Hermes. 3 vols. London, 1906.

[vi-p785]Munsterberg, Hugo.

[vi-p786]The Eternal Values. London, 1909. [p. 501] [vi-Page_501]

[vi-p787]Murisier, H.

[vi-p788]Les Maladies des Sentiments Religieux. n.d.

[vi-p789]Meyers, F. W. H.

[vi-p790]Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death.  2 vols. London, 1903.

[vi-p791]Ormond, A. T.

[vi-p792]Foundations of Knowledge. London, 1900.

[vi-p793]Otto, R.

[vi-p794]Das Heilige. Stuttgart, 1917.

[vi-p795]Translation. The Idea of the Holy. London, 1923.

[vi-p796]Plato.

[vi-p797]Opera. Ed. J. Burnet. 5 vols. Oxford, 1899-1907.

[vi-p798]Republic, with Notes and Introduction, by J. Adam.  Cambridge, 1897.

[vi-p799]  Translations   . The Dialogues, translated by B. Jowett. 3rd edition. 5 vols. Oxford,  1892.

[vi-p800]The Republic, translated by B. Jowett. 3rd edition.  Oxford, 1888.

[vi-p801]Powicke, F. J.

[vi-p802]The Cambridge Platonists. London, 1926.

[vi-p803]Pratt, J. B.

[vi-p804]The Religious Consciousness. New York, 1921.

[vi-p805]Prince, Morton.

[vi-p806]The Dissociation of a Personality. New York,  1906.

[vi-p807]Raymond, G. L.

[vi-p808]The Psychology of Inspiration. 1908.

[vi-p809]Rhode, Erwin.

[vi-p810]Psyche. 2nd ed. 2 vols. Freiburg, 1898.

[vi-p811]  Translation   . London, 1925.

[vi-p812]Ribot, T.

[vi-p813]Les Maladies de la Memoire. Paris, 1881.

[vi-p814]Les Maladies de la Volonte. Paris, 1883.

[vi-p815]Les Maladies de la Personnalite. Paris,  1885.

[vi-p816]Psychologie de l'Attention. Paris, 1889.

[vi-p817]Essai sur l'imagination creatrice. Paris,  1900.

[vi-p818]  Translations   . Diseases of Memory. London, 1882.

[vi-p819]Diseases of the Will. 2nd edition. Chicago,  1896.

[vi-p820]The Diseases of Personality. Chicago, 1891.

[vi-p821]The Psychology of Attention. Chicago, 1890.

[vi-p822]Essay on the Creative Imagination. 1906.

[vi-p823]Rolleston, T. W.

[vi-p824]Parallel Paths: a study in biology, ethics, and art.  London, 1908.

[vi-p825]Royce, Josiah.

[vi-p826]Studies of Good and Evil. New York, 1898.

[vi-p827]The World and the Individual. (Gifford Lectures.) 2  vols. London, 1900.

[vi-p828]Schiller, F. C. S.

[vi-p829]Humanism. London, 1903.

[vi-p830]Plato or Protagoras. Oxford, 1908.

[vi-p831]Schofield, A. T.

[vi-p832]The Unconscious Mind. London, 1899.

[vi-p833]Seglas.

[vi-p834]Phenomenes dits Hallucinations psychiques  (Congres de Psychologie) Paris, 1901.

[vi-p835]Segond, J.

[vi-p836]La Priere: etude de psychologie religieuse.  Paris, 1911. [p. 502] [vi-Page_502]

[vi-p837]Starbuck, E. T.

[vi-p838]The Psychology of Religion. 2nd edition. London,  1901.

[vi-p839]Stewart, J. A.

[vi-p840]The Myths of Plato. London, 1905.

[vi-p841]Plato's Doctrine of Ideas. London, 1909.

[vi-p842]Taylor, A. E.

[vi-p843]Plato, the Man and his Work. London, 1926.

[vi-p844]Taylor, H. O.

[vi-p845]The Mediaeval Mind. 2 vols. London, 1911.

[vi-p846]Thomas Aquinas, Saint.

[vi-p847]Summa Theologica diligenter emendata. Nicolai,  Sylvii, Billuart et Drioux, notis ornata. 8 vols. Paris, 1880.

[vi-p848]Summa contra Gentiles. Paris, 1877.

[vi-p849]  Translations   . Summa Theologica. Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican  Province. 12 vols. London, 1912-17.

[vi-p850]Of God and His Creatures: an annotated translation  of the Summa Contra Gentiles, by Father J. Rickaby, S.J. London,  1905.

[vi-p851]Thouless, R. H.

[vi-p852]An Introduction to the Psychology of Religion.  Cambridge, 1923.

[vi-p853]Tulloch, J.

[vi-p854]Rational Theology and Christian Philosophy in  England in the seventeenth century. 2 vols Edinburgh, 1872.

[vi-p855]Underhill, E.

[vi-p856]The Life of the Spirit and the Life of To-day.  London, 1922.

[vi-p857]Man and the Supernatural. London, 1928.

[vi-p858]Von Hugel, Baron F.

[vi-p859]Eternal Life. Edinburgh, 1912.

[vi-p860]Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy of Religion.  2 series. London, 1921, 1926.

[vi-p861]Waite, A. E.

[vi-p862]The Holy Kabbalah. London, 1929.

[vi-p863]Ward, James.

[vi-p864]Naturalism and Agnosticism. (Gifford Lectures.) 2  vols. London, 1889.

[vi-p865]Westcott, W. W.

[vi-p866]An Introduction to the Study of the Kabalah. London,  1910.

[vi-p867]Whateley, A. R.

[vi-p868]The Inner Light. London, 1908.

[vi-p869]Whittaker, T.

[vi-p870]The Neoplatonists: a study in the History of  Hellenism. Cambridge, 1901.

[vi-p871]Wittgenstein, L.

[vi-p872]Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London, 1922.

[vi-p873]Wulf, N. de.

[vi-p874]Histoire de la Philosophie Medievale. 2  me    ed. Louvain and Paris, 1905.

[vi-p875]Translation. History of Mediaeval Philosophy.  London, 1909.

[vi-p876]Scholasticism, Old and New. Dublin. 1907. [p. 503] [vi-Page_503]

      

[vi-p876.1]PART IV

   

[vi-p876.2]ALCHEMY AND MAGIC

[vi-p877]Anonymous.

[vi-p878]The Hermetic Museum restored and enlarged.  Translated by A. E. Waite 2 vols. 1893. (A reissue of an old  collection of alchemic tracts.)

[vi-p879]A Revelation of the Secret Spirit of Alchemy.  London, 1523.

[vi-p880]A Short Enquiry Concerning the Hermetic Art.  (Reprint.) 1894.

[vi-p881]A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery.  London, 1850. (This curious treatise by the late Mrs. Atwood was  suppressed by its author and is now scarce.)

[vi-p882]The Turba Philosophorum or Assembly of the Sages.  Translated by A. E. Waite. London. n.d.

[vi-p883]Ashmole, Elias.

[vi-p884]Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum, 1652.

[vi-p885]Barrett, F.

[vi-p886]Lives of the Alchemistical Philosophers. 1815.  (Includes a long bibliography, and translations of numerous alchemic  tracts.)

[vi-p887]Figuier, L.

[vi-p888]L'Alchemie et les Alchemistes. Paris,  1856.

[vi-p889]Figular, B.

[vi-p890]A Golden and Blessed Casket of Nature's  Marvels. Edited by A. E. Waite. London. n.d.

[vi-p891]Hartmann, F.

[vi-p892]Magic, White and Black: or the Science of Finite and  Infinite Life. 1904.

[vi-p893]Hermetis Trismegisti.

[vi-p894]Seven Chapters. London, 1692.

[vi-p895]Hitchcock.

[vi-p896]Remarks on Alchemy and the Alchemists. 1865,

[vi-p897]Honorious III.   (attributed to). 

[vi-p898]Grimoire du Pape Honorius. 1800.

[vi-p899]Kelly, E.

[vi-p900]The Alchemical Writings of. Edited by A. E. Waite.  1893,

[vi-p901]Levi, Eliphas.

[vi-p902]Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie. 2 vols. 2  me    edition. Paris, 1861.

[vi-p903]Histoire de la Magie. Paris, 1860.

[vi-p904]La Clef des Grands Mysteres. Paris, 1861.

[vi-p905]Le Livre des Splendeurs. Paris, 1894.

[vi-p906]  Translations   . The Mysteries of Magic: a digest of the writings of E. Levi, by  A. E. Waite. London, 1886.

[vi-p907]Transcendental Magic. Translated by A. E. Waite.  London, 1896.

[vi-p908]The Magical Ritual of the Sanctum Regnum. Edited by  W. W. Westcott. 1896.

[vi-p909]Papus.

[vi-p910]Traite Elementaire de Science Occulte. Paris,  1903.

[vi-p911]Qu'est-ce que l'occultisme? Paris,  1900.

[vi-p912]L'occultisme et le Spiritualisme. Paris,  1902.

[vi-p913]Paracelsus.

[vi-p914]Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of. Edited by A. E.  Waite. 2 vols. 1894. [p. 504] [vi-Page_504]

[vi-p915]Pazic, C.

[vi-p916]Treatyse of Magic Incantations. (Reprint.) 1886.

[vi-p917]Philalethes, Eirenaeus   (  i.e.   , George Starkey). 

[vi-p918]The Marrow of A1chemy. London, 1709.

[vi-p919]Redgrove, Stanley.

[vi-p920]Alchemy Ancient and Modern. London, 1911.

[vi-p921]Sepharial.

[vi-p922]A Manual of Occultism. London, 1911.

[vi-p923]Steiner, Rudolph.

[vi-p924]The Way of Initiation. Translated from the German by  Max Gysi. London, 1908.

[vi-p925]Initiation and its Results: A Sequel to The Way of  Initiation. London, 1909.

[vi-p926]Valentinus.

[vi-p927]The Triumphal Chariot of Antimony. Translated by A.  E. Waite. 1893.

[vi-p928]Vaughan, Thomas (Eugenius Philalethes).

[vi-p929]Lumen de Lumine. London, 1651.

[vi-p930]Aula Lucis, or the House of Light. London, 1652.

[vi-p931]Magical Writings. (Reprint.) London and Edinburgh,  1888.

[vi-p932]Venetiana, Antoine.

[vi-p933]Le Grand Grimoire. 1845.

[vi-p934]Waite, A. E.

[vi-p935]The Occult Sciences. London, 1891.

[vi-p936]Azoth, or the Star in the East. London, 1893.

[vi-p937]Lives of Alchemystical Philosophers. London, 1888.  (Full bibliography.)

[vi-p938]The Book of Black Magic. Edinburgh, 1898.

[vi-p939]The Book of Ceremonial Magic; including the Rites  and Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy and Sorcery, and Infernal Necromancy.  London, 1911.

[vi-p940]The Secret Doctrine. London, 1926.

[vi-p941]Willis, T.

[vi-p942]Theophysical Alchemy. London, 1616. [p. 505] [vi-Page_505]

[vi-p943][p. 505] [vi-Page_505_1]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Bibliographical Note

 [vii]   

[vii-p0.1]PART I

   

[vii-p0.2]THE WORKS AND LIVES OF THE MYSTICS

   

[vii-p0.3]ANGELUS SILESIUS.

   

[vii-p0.4]Text.

[vii-p1]Cherubinischer Wandersmann. Propylaen-Verlag,  Berlin, 1923.

   

[vii-p1.1]Trans.

[vii-p2]Selections from the Cherubinic Wanderer. Translated  by J. E. Crawford Flitch. London, 1932.

   

[vii-p2.1]AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO, SAINT.

   

[vii-p2.2]Mon.

[vii-p3]A Monument to St. Augustine. By Various Authors.  London, 1932.

   

[vii-p3.1]BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX, SAINT.

   

[vii-p3.2]Trans.

[vii-p4]On the Love of God. Translated by T. L. Connelly,  S.J. London. 1937.

   

[vii-p4.1]Mon.

[vii-p5]  Gilson, Etienne.    La Theologie mystique de St. Bernard. Paris, 1934. (Important.)

[vii-p6]English trans. The Mystical Theology of St. Bernard.  London, 1940.

[vii-p7]  Williams, Watkin.    The Mysticism of St. Bernard of Clairvaux. London, 1931.

[vii-p8]  Williams, Watkin    St. Bernard of Clairvaux. Manchester, 1935.

   

[vii-p8.1]BLAKE, WILLIAM.

   

[vii-p8.2]Text.

[vii-p9]Note-book of William Blake, called the Rossetti MS.  Edited by G. Keynes. London, 1935.

   

[vii-p9.1]BOEHME, JACOB.

   

[vii-p9.2]Mon.

[vii-p10]  Struck, Wilhelm.    Der Einfluss Jakob Boehmes auf die Englische Literatur des 17.  Jahrhunderts. Berlin, 1936.

   

[vii-p10.1]ECKHART, MEISTER.

   

[vii-p10.2]Text.

[vii-p11]Opera Latina. Vols. I and II. Leipzig, 1934-5.

   

[vii-p11.1]Mon.

[vii-p12]  Strauch,    P. Meister Eckhart Probleme. Halle, 1912.

   

[vii-p12.1]FOX, GEORGE.

   

[vii-p12.2]Mon.

[vii-p13]  Jones, Rufus.    George Fox, Seeker and Friend. London, 1930.

   

[vii-p13.1]FRIENDS OF GOD.

   

[vii-p13.2]Mons.

[vii-p14]  Jones, Rufus.    The Flowering of Mysticism. New York, 1939.

[vii-p15]  Seesholtz, Anna.    The Friends of God. New York, 1934. (The best general account of the  Movement.) [p. 506] [vii-Page_506]

   

[vii-p15.1]GROOT, GERARD.

   

[vii-p15.2]Trans.

[vii-p16]The Following of Christ; the Spiritual Diary of  Gerard Groot. Edited by J. van Ginneken. Translated by J. Malaise. New  York, 1937.

   

[vii-p16.1]HARITH B. ASAD AL-MUHASIBI.

   

[vii-p16.2]Mon.

[vii-p17]  Smith, Margaret.    An Early Mystic of Baghdad. A Study of the Life and Teaching of  Harith B. Asad Al-Muhasibi, A.D. 781-857. London, 1935.

   

[vii-p17.1]JOHN OF THE CROSS, SAINT.

   

[vii-p17.2]Text.

[vii-p18]Obras de S. Juan de la Cruz, Doctor de la Iglesia.  Editadas y anotadas por el P. Silverio de S. Teresa, C.D. Burgos,  1929-31. 5 vols. (The best Spanish text.)

   

[vii-p18.1]Trans.

[vii-p19]Complete Works. Translated by E. Allison Peers. 3  vols. London, 1934-5. (From the critical text of Padre Silverio.  Supersedes all previous versions. Full bibliography.)

   

[vii-p19.1]Mons.

[vii-p20]  Pere Bruno de Jesus Marie, O.P.    S  .    Jean de la Croix. Paris, 1929.

[vii-p21]English trans. St. John of the Cross. London,  1932.

[vii-p22]  Frost, Bede.    St. John of the Cross: Introduction to his Philosophy, Theology, etc.  London, 1937.

[vii-p23]  Hoornaert, R.    L'Ame ardente de S. Jean de la Croix. Bruges, 1928.

[vii-p24]English trans. The Burning Soul of St. John of the  Cross. London, 1931.

   

[vii-p24.1]KEMPE, MARGERY.

   

[vii-p24.2]Text.

[vii-p25]The Book of Margery Kempe, 1436. Modern version by  W. Butler-Bowdon. London, 1936. (An important discovery.)

   

[vii-p25.1]LAW, WILLIAM.

   

[vii-p25.2]Text.

[vii-p26]The Mystical Writings of William Law. Edited by  Stephen Hobhouse. London, 1938.

   

[vii-p26.1]MARIE DE L'INCARNATION.

   

[vii-p26.2]Text.

[vii-p27]Ecrits spirituels et historiques. Edited by Dom  Jamet. Paris.

   

[vii-p27.1]Mon.

[vii-p28]  Renaudin, Paul.    Une grande mystique francaise au XVIIe siecle, Marie de  l'Incarnation. Paris, 1938.

   

[vii-p28.1]ROLLE, RICHARD.

[vii-p29]Text. The English Writings of Richard Rolle. Edited  by E. Hope Allen. Oxford, 1931.

[vii-p30]The Life and Lyrics of Richard Rolle. Frances M.  Comper. London, 1928.

   

[vii-p30.1]PART II

   

[vii-p30.2]GENERAL WORKS ON MYSTICISM

[vii-p31]Bergson, PI.

[vii-p32]Les Deux Sources de la Morale et de la Religion.  Paris, 1932.

[vii-p33]English trans. The Two Sources of Morality and  Religion.

[vii-p34]Boisen, Anton T.

[vii-p35]The Exploration of the Inner World. A Study of  Mental Disorder and Religious Experience. Chicago-New York, 1936.  (George Fox is one of the characters used to illustrate the  study.)

[vii-p36]Bremond, H.

[vii-p37]Histoire Litteraire du Sentiment Religieux en  France. Paris, 1916-33.

[vii-p38]English trans. A Literary History of Religious  Thought in France. Translated by K. Montgomery. 3 vols. London, 1928.  [p. 507] [vii-Page_507]

[vii-p39]Brinton, Howard H.

[vii-p40]The Mystic Will. Based on a study of the Philosophy  of Jacob Boehme. New York, 1930.

[vii-p41]Caussade, J. P. de.

[vii-p42]Bossuet Maitre d'Oraison. Edited by H.  Bremond, Paris, 1931.

[vii-p43]English trans. On Prayer. Translated by Algar  Thorold. London, 1931.

[vii-p44]L'Abandon a la Providence Divine. (18  eme    Ed. Paris, 1921.)

[vii-p45]English trans. Abandonment to Divine Providence.  Translated by Algar Thorold. London, 1933.

[vii-p46]Spiritual Letters. Translated by Algar Thorold.  London, 1934.

[vii-p47]Chapman, Dom John.

[vii-p48]Spiritual Letters. London, 1935. (With important  discussions of contemplative prayer.)

[vii-p49]David of Augsbourg.

[vii-p50]Spiritual Life and Prayers: a translation of De  Exterioris et Interioris Hominis Compositione by Dominic Devas, O.F.M.  2 vols. London, 1937.

[vii-p51]Garrigou-Lagrange, Pere.

[vii-p52]Le Sauveur et son Amour pour nous. Paris, 1933.

[vii-p53]Traite de Theologie ascetique et mystique.  2 vols. Paris, 1939.

[vii-p54]Hermans, F.

[vii-p55]Mystique. Paris, 1938.

[vii-p56]Propos d'Ascese. Paris, 1939.

[vii-p57]Hess, M. Whitcomb.

[vii-p58]The Name is Living: the Life and Teachings of Isaac  Penington. Chicago-New York, 1936.

[vii-p59]Hort, Greta.

[vii-p60]Sense and Thought. London, 1936.

[vii-p61]Jaegen, H.

[vii-p62]The Mystic Life of Graces. Trans. Anderson. London,  1936.

[vii-p63]Jones, Rufus.

[vii-p64]Some Exponents of Mystical Religion. London,  1930.

[vii-p65]Malaval, Francois.

[vii-p66]A Simple Method of Raising the Soul to  Contemplation. Translated by Lucy Menzies. Dent, 1931.

[vii-p67]Marechal, J.

[vii-p68]Etudes sur la Psychologie des Mystiques. Tome II.  Paris, 1937.

[vii-p69]Maritain, J.

[vii-p70]Les Degres du Savoir. Paris, 1932.

[vii-p71]English trans. The Degrees of Knowledge. London,  1938.

[vii-p72]Otto, Rudolf.

[vii-p73]Mysticism East and West (Sankara and Eckhart).  Translated by B. L. Bracey and R. C. Paine. London, 1932.

[vii-p74]Smith, Margaret.

[vii-p75]Studies in Early Mysticism in the Near and Middle  East. London, 1931. (Important.)

[vii-p76]Von Hugel F.

[vii-p77]Selected Letters. London, 1927.

   

[vii-p77.1]PART III

   

[vii-p77.2]PHILOSOPHY, PSYCHOLOGY AND THEOLOGY

[vii-p78]Baruzi, J.

[vii-p79]Problemes d'Histoire des Religions.  Paris, 1935.

[vii-p80]Penido, M. T. L.

[vii-p81]La Conscience religieuse. Paris, 1935. (Psychology  of conversion.)

[vii-p82]Watkin, E. I.

[vii-p83]A Philosophy of Form. London, 1935.  [p. 508] [vii-Page_508] 

[vii-p84][p. 509] [vii-Page_509]

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Index

 [viii][viii-p1]and mysticism, 24, 35, 37, 42, 67, 72, 82, 92,  97, 102, 105, 120, 127, 330, 387   seq. 

[viii-p2]and vitalism, 29

[viii-p3]apprehension of, 36, 84, 171, 241   seq   ., 378, 389

[viii-p4]search for, 45, 418

[viii-p5]union with, 51, 91, 174, 198, 245, 310, 401,  446

[viii-p6]man and, 55, 220, 229, 238, 289

[viii-p7]love of, 72, 86, 239, 334, 348

[viii-p8]immanent, 98   seq.,    174, 190   seq   .

[viii-p9]and Christianity 117   seq. 

[viii-p10]its desire of man 132

[viii-p11]awakening to, 169, 232

[viii-p12]and contemplation, 251   seq.,    332, 355

[viii-p13]fruition of, 340, 373

[viii-p14]and ecstasy, 374

[viii-p15]Abyss, The, 73, 84, 97, 122, 229, 257, 335   seq.   , 345   seq.   , 425

[viii-p16]Acarie, Madame, 470

[viii-p17]Adolescence, 386

[viii-p18]Aeldred, St., 466

[viii-p19]Albertus Magnus, 143

[viii-p20]Alchemists, Spiritual, 102, 140   seq   ., 226, 401, 418, 432

[viii-p21]Alexander, S., 29

[viii-p22]Al Ghazzali, 50, 83, 171, 210, 226, 462

[viii-p23]Al Hallaj, 462

[viii-p24]Allegory, 129   seq.,    285

[viii-p25]Ambrose, St., 274

[viii-p26]Anaesthesia, 226, 329, 359

[viii-p27]Analogy, 159

[viii-p28]Angela of Foligno, 216, 267, 269, 277   seq   ., 293, 332, 375, 392, 393, 461, 470

[viii-p29]her visions, 252, 282   seq.,    341, 343

[viii-p30]on contemplation, 350

[viii-p31]Anthony of Padua, St., 267

[viii-p32]Aquinas,   see    Thomas

[viii-p33]Archetypal World, 154, 262   seq. 

[viii-p34]Areopagite,   see    Dionysius

[viii-p35]Aridity, 241, 383, 391

[viii-p36]Aristotle, 47, 103

[viii-p37]Arius, 105

[viii-p38]d'Ars, Cure, 206

[viii-p39]Art, Function of, 74   seq   .

[viii-p40]Artists--

[viii-p41]and mystics, 76, 237

[viii-p42]and illumination, 169, 239, 259

[viii-p43]and vision, 271, 285

[viii-p44]and contemplation, 300

[viii-p45]Asceticism, 205, 215, 224   seq.,    230

[viii-p46]Astral Light, 154   seq. 

[viii-p47]Athanasius, St., 419

[viii-p48]'Attar, 131, 132, 226, 462

[viii-p49]Atwood, Mrs., 143

[viii-p50]Auditions, 66, 78, 181, 185, 241, 266   seq.,    273   seq.,    332

[viii-p51]Augustine, St., 21, 29, 50, 88, 98, 100, 104,  115, 129, 133, 178, 216, 239, 248, 250, 253, 336, 419   seq.,    456, 470

[viii-p52]on God, 38

[viii-p53]on Trinity, 111

[viii-p54]on Love, 117

[viii-p55]vision, 331

[viii-p56]Automatic composition, 80, 241, 278, 293   seq. 

[viii-p57]examples, 66, 293   seq   .

[viii-p58]Automatism, 63, 161, 240, 255, 266   seq   ., 281

[viii-p59]Autoscopes, 159

[viii-p60]Aziz bin Mahommed Nafasi, 130

[viii-p61]Azoth, 172

[viii-p62]  [viii-p62.1]Baker   , Ven. Augustine, 218, 291, 308, 362, 470

[viii-p63]on contemplation, 305

[viii-p64]on quiet, 323

[viii-p65]on Dark Night, 387

[viii-p66]Barbancon, C., 471

[viii-p67]Barluke, John Evangelist of, 471

[viii-p68]Basil the Monk, 145

[viii-p69]Beatific Vision, 96, 132, 190, 196, 335, 340,  389, 423, 437

[viii-p70]Beauty, 20   seq.,    258

[viii-p71]Plato on, 22, 216

[viii-p72]Divine, 196, 289, 342

[viii-p73]Becoming, World of, 28, 35   seq.,    73, 99, 101, 192, 222, 234, 238, 258, 367, 401, 433, 449

[viii-p74]Being--

[viii-p75]Eckhart on, 5, 93

[viii-p76]and Becoming, 28, 37   seq.,    67, 113, 116, 240, 340, 433

[viii-p77]Pure, 39   seq.,    73, 97, 100   seq., 249,    257, 304, 331, 339, 367, 433

[viii-p78]Science of, 151, 453

[viii-p79]union with, 319, 343, 345

[viii-p80]Berger, 89

[viii-p81]Bergson, 27, 29, 30

[viii-p82]Bernadette of Lourdes, 359

[viii-p83]Bernard, St., 50, 75, 173, 215, 241, 324, 331,  414, 458   seq,    470

[viii-p84]on God, 92, 113

[viii-p85]on Spiritual Marriage, 137

[viii-p86]on ecstasy, 303

[viii-p87]Bernardino of Siena, St., 467

[viii-p88]Berulle, Pierre de, 470

[viii-p89]Betrothal, Spiritual, 137   seq.,    245, 273

[viii-p90]Bhagavad Gita, 155

[viii-p91]Binyon, L., 75

[viii-p92]Birds and Mystics, 260

[viii-p93]Blake, William, 80, 104, 106, 107, 116, 154,  166, 168, 173, 19l, 236, 238, 240, 255, 257, 259, 267, 279, 293   seq.,    355, 469, 473

[viii-p94]automatic writing, 66

[viii-p95]on art, 74

[viii-p96]on Incarnation, 106

[viii-p97]his illumination, 235   seq   .

[viii-p98]on Nature, 259

[viii-p99]his visions 280

[viii-p100]Blood, B. P. 371

[viii-p101]Blosius, 468

[viii-p102]Boehme, Jacob, 57, 93, 96, 104, 120, 123, 141,  144   seq.,    154, 160, 229, 238, 241, 259, 263, 307, 349, 469, 472

[viii-p103]his ecstasy, 58

[viii-p104]on recollection, 64, 313

[viii-p105]on immanence, 100

[viii-p106]on Incarnation, 119

[viii-p107]on New Birth, 123

[viii-p108]his purgation, 226

[viii-p109]illumination, 255   seq. 

[viii-p110]automatic composition, 296

[viii-p111]on deification, 421

[viii-p112]Bonaventura, St., 106, 124, 131, 462

[viii-p113]Bossuet, 471

[viii-p114]Bourignan, Antoinette, 215, 306, 471

[viii-p115]her renunciation, 212

[viii-p116]Boutroux, E., 40

[viii-p117]Boyce Gibson, 62, 103

[viii-p118]Bremond, H., 54, 67, 189, 232

[viii-p119]Brethren of Free Spirit, 105, 150

[viii-p120]Bridget of Sweden, St., 274, 467

[viii-p121]Browne, Sir T., 143, 148, 160

[viii-p122]Bruno St., 458

[viii-p123]Bucke R. M., 193, 255

[viii-p124]Bunyan, J., 130

[viii-p125]Butler, Dom C., 138

[viii-p126]  [viii-p126.1]Canfield   , Benedict, 470

[viii-p127]Catalepsy, 360

[viii-p128]Catherine of Alexandria, St., 292

[viii-p129]Catherine of Bologna, St., 467

[viii-p130]Catherine of Genoa, St., 79, 80, 85, 127, 129,  173, 177, 182, 229, 252, 331, 396, 436, 461, 467

[viii-p131]her fasts, 59

[viii-p132]on love, 92

[viii-p133]her conversion, 181, 196

[viii-p134]purgation, 201, 219   seq.,    225

[viii-p135]on Purgatory, 202, 221

[viii-p136]her illumination, 247

[viii-p137]ecstasies, 362, 364

[viii-p138]on mystic way, 441   seq. 

[viii-p139]Catherine dei Ricci, St. 469

[viii-p140]Catherine of Siena, St. 19, 63, 84, 86, 101,  173, 221, 228, 268, 297, 359, 362, 375, 377, 398   seq.,    412, 414, 421, 436, 438, 459, 464, 467

[viii-p141]on union, 37, 365

[viii-p142]her fasts, 59

[viii-p143]mystic marriage of, 80, 273,

[viii-p144]on Incarnation, 119

[viii-p145]mystic life, 174

[viii-p146]on self-knowledge, 200

[viii-p147]her visions, 270, 392

[viii-p148]Dialogue, 293

[viii-p149]ecstasies, 365   seq. 

[viii-p150]Catholicism, 469

[viii-p151]and magic, 163

[viii-p152]Caussade, J. P. de, 383, 390, 391, 472

[viii-p153]Chantal, St.,   see    Jeanne Francoise de Chantal

[viii-p154]Character--

[viii-p155]remaking, 204, 216   seq.,    306, 381, 396, 416

[viii-p156]in quiet, 323

[viii-p157]purgation, 388

[viii-p158]of unitives, 429   seq. 

[viii-p159]Chastity, 205

[viii-p160]Christ, 109, 118, 128, 138, 233, 344, 391,  412

[viii-p161]life of, and mystics, 120, 222, 448

[viii-p162]humanity of, 120, 283

[viii-p163]Eternal, 134

[viii-p164]indwelling, 144

[viii-p165]visions of, 279, 283

[viii-p166]Christian mysticism,   see    Mysticism

[viii-p167]Christian science, 156

[viii-p168]Christianity--

[viii-p169]and Mysticism, 104   seq.,    222, 236, 344, 448

[viii-p170]and philosophy, 105   seq. 

[viii-p171]and magic, 153, 163

[viii-p172]and deification, 419

[viii-p173]Church and magic, 163   seq. 

[viii-p174]Clairvoyance, 155, 256

[viii-p175]Cleanthes, 106

[viii-p176]Clement of Alexandria, 104, 455

[viii-p177]Cloud of Unknowing, The, 48, 335, 337, 348   seq.,    459, 466

[viii-p178]Cognition, 46   seq.,    67

[viii-p179]Colette, St., 467

[viii-p180]Columba Rieti, 468

[viii-p181]Common Life, Brotherhood of, 465

[viii-p182]Conation, 46   seq.,    67, 314

[viii-p183]Consciousness--

[viii-p184]mystical, twofold, 35   seq.,    90, 195, 215, 227, 240, 337, 345, 433

[viii-p185]transcendental, 51   seq.,    55, 67, 70, 212   seq.,    241   seq   ., 385, 444

[viii-p186]alteration of, 56, 176, 295, 389

[viii-p187]field of, 56, 58, 67   seq   ., 91, 176, 329

[viii-p188]threshold of, 56   seq   ., 67, 74, 314

[viii-p189]oscillations of, in mystics, 167   seq   ., 177, 227   seq   ., 233, 253, 381, 383, 445

[viii-p190]Mystic, its awakening, 176   seq. 

[viii-p191]Cosmic, 192   seq.,    255

[viii-p192]growth, 264, 402

[viii-p193]unification of, 308, 363, 366

[viii-p194]in introversion, 309   seq.,    314, 329, 336

[viii-p195]ecstatic, 370

[viii-p196]Constant, A. L.,   see    Levi Eliphas

[viii-p197]Contemplation, so, 56, 67   seq.,    184, 241, 243, 282, 294, 298   seq   ., 304, 328   seq.,    358   seq.,    375

[viii-p198]its nature, 50, 300

[viii-p199]passive, 64

[viii-p200]forms of, 92, 329, 335

[viii-p201]infused, 245

[viii-p202]an experiment in, 301   seq. 

[viii-p203]degrees of, 311

[viii-p204]its function, 330

[viii-p205]dark, 332, 346   seq   ., 353, 383

[viii-p206]marks of, 332

[viii-p207]descriptions of, 335

[viii-p208]method of, 346   seq. 

[viii-p209]and ecstasy, 363, 367, 373

[viii-p210]Contemplative--

[viii-p211]life, 197

[viii-p212]state, 131

[viii-p213]experience, 331

[viii-p214]Contemplatives, 172, 432

[viii-p215]Conversion, 177   seq.,    229   seq.,    269, 376, 412

[viii-p216]two types of, 195

[viii-p217]Counter-reformation, 468

[viii-p218]Cutten, G. B., 52, 59

[viii-p219]  [viii-p219.1]Dance   , Mystic 231, 233

[viii-p220]Dante, 35, 39, 75, 101, 105, 115, 120, 129,  135, 256, 307, 331, 344, 355, 367, 369, 412, 415   seq.,    418   seq.    435, 437, 443, 460, 462

[viii-p221]on emanation, 97

[viii-p222]and mystic way, 131

[viii-p223]Purgatorio, 200, 202

[viii-p224]on Divine Light, 249

[viii-p225]his vision of God, 251, 340

[viii-p226]and symbolic vision, 286

[viii-p227]on mystic joy, 437

[viii-p228]Dark Night of Soul, 121, 169, 229, 241, 380   seq.,    416

[viii-p229]mystic aspect of, 387   seq   .

[viii-p230]Suso and, 403   seq   .

[viii-p231]Deification, 99, 102, 139, 170, 175, 379, 401,  415   seq   .

[viii-p232]Deified man, 146   seq   .

[viii-p233]Delacroix, 14, 242, 289, 308, 416, 419

[viii-p234]on mystics, 62, 172

[viii-p235]on St. Teresa, 108

[viii-p236]on automatism, 273

[viii-p237]on contemplation, 330

[viii-p238]Denis the Carthusian, 364, 465

[viii-p239]De Sanctis, 179

[viii-p240]Detachment 130, 205   seq   ., 396   seq   .

[viii-p241]Devotion, 130

[viii-p242]Dialogue, mystical, 241, 277 Sty.

[viii-p243]Dionysius the Areopagite, 46, 65, 79, 97, 101,  104, 13'2, 171, 188, 253, 318, 320, 337, 456, 460, 465

[viii-p244]on surrender, 93

[viii-p245]on ignorance, 93

[viii-p246]on Divine Love, 197

[viii-p247]on Divine Dark, 251, 347

[viii-p248]on contemplation, 333

[viii-p249]Disintegrated Personality,   see    Personality

[viii-p250]Dissociation, Mental, 278

[viii-p251]Divine Absence,   see    God, Absence of

[viii-p252]Divine Dark, 73, 97, 132, 171, 251, 318, 335   seq   ., 347, 353   seq   .

[viii-p253]its meaning, 348

[viii-p254]Divine Fecundity, 166, 170   seq   ., 428

[viii-p255]examples of, 429

[viii-p256]Divine Humanity, 388   seq   .

[viii-p257]Divine Ignorance,   see    Ignorance

[viii-p258]Divine Principle, 100

[viii-p259]Divine Union,   see    Union

[viii-p260]Douceline, St. 216, 461

[viii-p261]Driesch, Hans 27

[viii-p262]  [viii-p262.1]Ebner   , Margaret, 269, 465

[viii-p263]Eckartshausen, C. von, 123, 473

[viii-p264]Eckhart, 6, 10, 64, 83, 133, 136, 173, 188,  229, 255, 305, 312, 318   seq   ., 344, 389, 463

[viii-p265]on Being, 5, 93

[viii-p266]on silence, 38, 64

[viii-p267]on immanence 101

[viii-p268]on Holy Spirit 117

[viii-p269]on Eternal Birth, 122

[viii-p270]on purity, 206

[viii-p271]on poverty, 203   seq   .

[viii-p272]on detachment, 209

[viii-p273]on union, 370

[viii-p274]on deification, 419

[viii-p275]Ecstasy, 32, 56   seq   ., 60, 81, 94, 128, 132, 161, 228, 243, 299, 303, 358   seq   ., 380

[viii-p276]creative, 64, 378

[viii-p277]and union, 170

[viii-p278]examples, 187   seq   ., 362   seq   .

[viii-p279]and purgation, 226   seq   .

[viii-p280]its psychology, 363   seq   .

[viii-p281]and mysticism, 367   seq   .

[viii-p282]and contemplation, 373

[viii-p283]dark 394

[viii-p284]Ecstatics, 368

[viii-p285]Elizabeth of Schonau, 459

[viii-p286]Emanation, 97   seq   .

[viii-p287]and immanence, 102   seq   .

[viii-p288]Emotion, 45   seq   .

[viii-p289]conative, 46

[viii-p290]and symbolism, 126

[viii-p291]and mysticism, 135

[viii-p292]and contemplation, 335

[viii-p293]Entelechy, 39

[viii-p294]Epistle of Discretion, 85

[viii-p295]of Private Counsel, 320

[viii-p296]of Prayer, 427

[viii-p297]Erigena, John Scotus, 111, 259, 263, 457

[viii-p298]Eucken, Rudolph, 27, 34, 112, 114, 414, 417

[viii-p299]on Reality, 21, 33

[viii-p300]Euripides, 236

[viii-p301]Evocation, 157, 161

[viii-p302]  [viii-p302.1]Faith    and life, 15

[viii-p303]Fasting, 59

[viii-p304]Father, The, 41, 108   seq   ., 115, 304, 340

[viii-p305]Feeling--

[viii-p306]thought and will, 67, 311, 329

[viii-p307]and mysticism, 71, 335   seq   ., 367, 437

[viii-p308]Fenelon, 471

[viii-p309]Field of Consciousness,   see    Consciousness

[viii-p310]Fire, Mystic, 114, 124, 141, 189, 221, 231,  257, 421

[viii-p311]of Love,   see    Love

[viii-p312]Flowers, Mystics and, 215, 255

[viii-p313]Fox, George, 173, 177   seq   ., 226, 238, 255, 414, 469

[viii-p314]his illumination, 257

[viii-p315]Francis of Assisi, St., 77, 173, 196, 206, 210,  212, 215, 237, 239, 241, 267   seq   ., 276   seq   ., 364, 430, 431, 436   seq   ., 460, 467

[viii-p316]his character and conversion, 180   seq   .

[viii-p317]on poverty, 208

[viii-p318]purgation, 224

[viii-p319]and animals, 260   seq   .

[viii-p320]stigmata, 267, 290, 375

[viii-p321]his joy, 439   seq   .

[viii-p322]Francis de Sales, St., 10, 52, 183, 394,  471

[viii-p323]Francis Xavier, St., 222

[viii-p324]Franck Sebastian, 297

[viii-p325]Fraticelli, 105

[viii-p326]Freedom, 27, 30   seq   ., 129, 199, 207, 279, 330, 357, 367, 371, 404, 416   seq   .

[viii-p327]Freyer, D. A., 472

[viii-p328]Friends of God, 185, 370, 410, 432, 464

[viii-p329]Fruition, 173, 345, 356, 373, 417   seq   ., 433   seq   .

[viii-p330]Funklein, 54

[viii-p331]  [viii-p331.1]Game    of Love,   see    Love

[viii-p332]Gardiner, Edmund, 59, 268, 294

[viii-p333]Genius, 63   seq   ., 73

[viii-p334]and mysticism 65, 232, 366

[viii-p335]spiritual, 103, 235, 375, 450

[viii-p336]Gerson, 467

[viii-p337]Gertrude, St., 343, 389, 460, 463

[viii-p338]Gertrude, Nun, 460

[viii-p339]Gichtel, John, 472

[viii-p340]Gnosticism, 58, 105, 149, 153   seq   .

[viii-p341]God, 97, 105, 107, 238, 330, 341, 447

[viii-p342]union with,   see    Union

[viii-p343]love of,   see    Love

[viii-p344]as Being, 37   seq   ., 127, 249, 337, 369

[viii-p345]mystics and, 38, 111   seq   ., 189

[viii-p346]knowledge of, 57, 83, 130   seq   ., 195, 369   seq   .

[viii-p347]transcendent, 96   seq   ., 102, 195, 251   seq   ., 336, 344   seq   .

[viii-p348]immanent, 99   seq   ., 103, 128, 263, 342   seq   .

[viii-p349]names of, 103, 106, 163

[viii-p350]needs man, 132, 425

[viii-p351]absence of, 170, 376, 388   seq   ., 393   seq   ., 410

[viii-p352]absorption in, 170

[viii-p353]presence of, 184, 239   seq   ., 282, 314, 382   seq   .

[viii-p354]glory of, 192, 249

[viii-p355]craving for, 248, 265

[viii-p356]in quiet, 319

[viii-p357]sons of, 433

[viii-p358]Godfernaux, 75, 269, 361

[viii-p359]Godhead, Unconditioned, 40, 101, 109   seq   ., 120, 132, 171, 344, 346, 433   seq   .

[viii-p360]vision of, 109, 340

[viii-p361]aspects of, 109   seq   ., 336

[viii-p362]emanations of, 263

[viii-p363]desert of, 304, 337   seq   .

[viii-p364]and God, 344

[viii-p365]Ruysbroeck on, 345

[viii-p366]  see      also    Abyss and Absolute

[viii-p367]Grail, quest of, 129

[viii-p368]Granger, F., 267

[viii-p369]Gravitation, spiritual 132

[viii-p370]Gregory of Nyssa, 104, 263

[viii-p371]Gregory the Great, 457

[viii-p372]Groot, Gerard, 465

[viii-p373]Grou, J. N., 306

[viii-p374]Ground of Soul,   see    Soul

[viii-p375]Guyon, Madame, 196, 246, 293, 322, 390   seq   ., 401   seq   ., 407

[viii-p376]automatic writing, 66, 295

[viii-p377]youth and conversion, 182   seq   .

[viii-p378]and St. Catherine of Genoa, 183

[viii-p379]purgation, 225   seq   .

[viii-p380]on contemplation, 326

[viii-p381]dark nights 383   seq   .

[viii-p382]on union, 431

[viii-p383]  [viii-p383.1]Hafiz    462

[viii-p384]Hall, Bishop, 470

[viii-p385]Harphius, 465

[viii-p386]Hazlitt, 160, 419.

[viii-p387]Heart, 71

[viii-p388]Heat, mystic, 193

[viii-p389]Hebert, M., 71

[viii-p390]Hegel on Beuty, 21

[viii-p391]Helfde, 460

[viii-p392]Henry de Mande, 465

[viii-p393]Henry of Nordlingen, 465

[viii-p394]Heracleitus, 10, 38, 106, 116, 238

[viii-p395]and vitalism, 28   seq   .

[viii-p396]Hermes Trismegistus, 143, 153, 159

[viii-p397]Hermetic act,   see    Alchemy

[viii-p398]books, 153

[viii-p399]science, 152   seq   .

[viii-p400]Hervey, Christopher, 113

[viii-p401]Higher Thought,   see    New Thought

[viii-p402]Hildegarde, St., 62, 115, 249, 274, 276,  458

[viii-p403]Hilton, Walter, 51, 87, 132, 200, 220, 264,  323, 332, 342   seq   ., 348   seq   ., 401, 428, 466

[viii-p404]on pilgrimage, 129

[viii-p405]on presence of God, 242

[viii-p406]on automatism 280

[viii-p407]on contemplation, 307   seq   ., 334

[viii-p408]Holland, B., 117

[viii-p409]Holy Spirit, 109, 116   seq   .

[viii-p410]"Hound of Heaven," 135

[viii-p411]Hugh of St. victor 129, 309

[viii-p412]on music, 77

[viii-p413]on contemplation, 92, 245

[viii-p414]Humility, 200, 209, 221, 252   seq   ., 317, 337, 348, 400

[viii-p415]Huysmans, 222, 271

[viii-p416]Hymn of Jesus, 134, 234, 455

[viii-p417]Hypnotic states, 57   seq   .

[viii-p418]Hysteria and mystics, 58   seq   .

[viii-p419]  [viii-p419.1]Idealism   , 11   seq. 

[viii-p420]Ignatius Loyola, St., 173, 414, 430, 431, 436,  468

[viii-p421]his lucidity, 58

[viii-p422]mortifications, 225

[viii-p423]visions, 272

[viii-p424]Ignorance, Divine, 319, 337, 340, 348

[viii-p425]Illumination, state of, 130   seq   , 139, 169, 191   seq   ., 206, 227, 279   seq   ., 310, 340, 381   seq   ., 388, 396

[viii-p426]and alchemy, 145

[viii-p427]its nature, 199, 246   seq   .

[viii-p428]characteristics 234   seq   .

[viii-p429]transcendental, 250   seq   .

[viii-p430]Illuminative Way,   see    Illumination

[viii-p431]Immanence, 35, 40, 97   seq   ., 103   seq   ., 240, 251

[viii-p432]psychology and, 99

[viii-p433]consciousness of, 178, 191   seq   ., 196, 234, 257, 283, 342   seq   .

[viii-p434]  see    also Absolute and God

[viii-p435]Incarnation, The, 106   seq   ., 118   seq   ., 355

[viii-p436]and deification, 419

[viii-p437]Independent spiritual life, 33, 55

[viii-p438]spiritual world, 23, 169

[viii-p439]Indifference, 205, 323   seq   ., 412

[viii-p440]Initiation, 156   seq   .

[viii-p441]Inspiration, 63, 234, 293, 299

[viii-p442]Intellect, 45   seq   .

[viii-p443]Bergson's theory of, 30

[viii-p444]darkness of, 385   seq   .

[viii-p445]satisfaction of, 437

[viii-p446]Introversion, 99, 250, 298   seq   .

[viii-p447]Intuition, 33, 64, 130, 259, 274   seq.   , 306, 363

[viii-p448]Irenaeus, 104

[viii-p449]  [viii-p449.1]Jacopone da Todi   , 121, 219, 249, 461

[viii-p450]on poverty, 207

[viii-p451]on ecstasy, 374

[viii-p452]Jacques of la Massa, 237

[viii-p453]Jalalu 'd Din, 32, 87, 134, 171, 348,  389, 426

[viii-p454]James, William, 7   seq   ., 98

[viii-p455]on mysticism, 81, 331

[viii-p456]Jami, 82, 127, 462

[viii-p457]Janet, Pierre, 60   seq   ., 267

[viii-p458]Jeanne Francoise de Chantal, St., l83,  383

[viii-p459]Jefferies, Richard, 192, 195

[viii-p460]Jerome, St., 13

[viii-p461]Jerusalem, 124, 129, 334

[viii-p462]Joan of Arc, St., 173, 276, 414, 430, 467

[viii-p463]John, St., Gospel of, 250

[viii-p464]John of Parma, 237

[viii-p465]John of the Cross, St., 73, 79, 89, 92, 96, 98,  139, 173, 203, 221, 229, 350, 354, 388, 402, 407, 440, 468

[viii-p466]poems quoted, 83, 236, 352, 371

[viii-p467]on detachment, 206, 211

[viii-p468]on attachments, 212

[viii-p469]on automatism 275   seq   ., 280

[viii-p470]on dark contemplation, 353

[viii-p471]on Dark Night, 389   seq   ., 399

[viii-p472]Jones, Rufus, 185   seq   ., 267

[viii-p473]Joy, Mystic, 189, 239, 253, 342, 354, 437   seq   .

[viii-p474]Julian of Norwich, 36, 68, 90, 101, 133, 202,  239, 242, 247, 252   seq   ., 258, 268, 301, 304   seq   ., 364, 467

[viii-p475]on Trinity, 111   seq   .

[viii-p476]on Incarnation, 119

[viii-p477]visions, 270

[viii-p478]Jundt, A., 185, 402

[viii-p479]  [viii-p479.1]Kabalah   , the, 153, 154, 159

[viii-p480]Kabalists, 63, 97   seq   ., 103, 108, 263   seq. 

[viii-p481]Kant, 58, 301

[viii-p482]Kempe, Margery, 224, 466

[viii-p483]Knowledge, 44   seq   .

[viii-p484]desire of, 45   seq   ., 72, 90, 151

[viii-p485]by union, 68, 84

[viii-p486]enouncement of, 93

[viii-p487]transcendental, 268, 301, 329   seq   ., 334

[viii-p488]law of, 342, 446

[viii-p489]and ecstasy, 369   seq   ., 376

[viii-p490]  [viii-p490.1]Law   , William, 141, 250, 263, 397, 469, 472

[viii-p491]on Trinity, 114

[viii-p492]Laurence, Brother, 188, 195, 241, 246, 253,  471

[viii-p493]character and conversion, 190

[viii-p494]Lead, Jane, 123, 470, 473

[viii-p495]Leadbeater, C. W., 156

[viii-p496]Leuba, 47, 183, 267

[viii-p497]on mystics, 91   seq   ., 94

[viii-p498]Levi, Eliphas, 153   seq   ., 161   seq   .

[viii-p499]Levitation, 186, 376   seq   .

[viii-p500]Liberty,   see    Freedom

[viii-p501]Libido, 45

[viii-p502]Ligature, 330

[viii-p503]Light, Inward, 100, 103, 353

[viii-p504]uncreated, 73, 114, 239, 308, 342

[viii-p505]mystic, 249   seq   ., 289, 421

[viii-p506]Light, life, and love, 115   seq   . ,190, 239, 341

[viii-p507]Liturgies, 163   seq   .

[viii-p508]Logos, 28, 38, 109   seq   ., 115   seq   ., 118   seq   ., 134, 233

[viii-p509]Love--

[viii-p510]Spirit of,   see    Holy Spirit

[viii-p511]and pain, 19, 221   seq   .

[viii-p512]desire of, 44   seq   ., 71

[viii-p513]active, 46   seq   .

[viii-p514]mystic, 49, 70   seq   ., 77, 81, 85   seq   ., 92   seq   ., 197, 208, 264, 281, 311, 355, 371, 389, 426   seq   .

[viii-p515]of God, 68   seq   ., 81   seq   ., 181, 191, 223

[viii-p516]divine, 103, 196, 343

[viii-p517]as Holy Spirit, 116   seq   .

[viii-p518]symbols of, 128, 136

[viii-p519]mutual, 130   seq   .

[viii-p520]following, 135

[viii-p521]Four Degrees of, 139, 309, 312, 315   seq   ., 327, 379

[viii-p522]Fire of, 189, 197, 418

[viii-p523]pure, 201, 229, 247, 312, 325, 331, 412

[viii-p524]game of, 227, 286, 383

[viii-p525]vision of, 279

[viii-p526]in orison, 306, 313, 330

[viii-p527]language of, 425

[viii-p528]and fruition, 435   seq   .

[viii-p529]Lucia of Narni, 468

[viii-p530]Lucidity, Mystic, 58   seq   ., 177, 238, 255   seq.   , 360, 363, 390

[viii-p531]Lucie-Christine, 179, 384, 389

[viii-p532]Luis de Granada, 468

[viii-p533]Luis de Leon, 214, 468

[viii-p534]Lull, Ramon, 462

[viii-p535]Lydwine of Schiedam, St., 222, 467

[viii-p536]visions, 271

[viii-p537]  [viii-p537.1]Macarius    of Egypt, St., 457

[viii-p538]Maeterlinck, M., 340

[viii-p539]Magic, 70, 82, 84, 149   seq   .

[viii-p540]and religion, 151

[viii-p541]and psychology, 157   seq   .

[viii-p542]therapeutics, 161

[viii-p543]and Christianity, 162   seq   .

[viii-p544]Magnum Opus,   see    Alchemy

[viii-p545]Magus, 144

[viii-p546]Malaval, 254, 361, 472

[viii-p547]Mantra, 158

[viii-p548]Margaret Mary, St., 267

[viii-p549]Maria Maddelena dei Pazzi, St., 222, 469

[viii-p550]Marie de l'Incarnation, Ven., 471

[viii-p551]Maritain, J., 301, 334

[viii-p552]Marriage of Soul,   see    Spiritual Marriage

[viii-p553]Martinists, 154

[viii-p554]Maury, A., 363

[viii-p555]McDougall, W., 228

[viii-p556]Mead, G. R. S., 134

[viii-p557]Mechthild of Hackborn, St., 31, 196, 460

[viii-p558]visions, 287

[viii-p559]Mechthild of Magdeburg, 62, 90, 135, 206   seq   ., 238   seq   ., 249   seq   ., 278   seq   ., 393, 420, 460

[viii-p560]on mystic pain, 61

[viii-p561]on love, 92

[viii-p562]on orison, 344

[viii-p563]Meditation, 49, 158, 311, 313   seq   ., 324   seq   .

[viii-p564]Mediums, 66, 293   seq   ., 360

[viii-p565]Mental Healing, 158, 161

[viii-p566]Menticulture, 153, 156

[viii-p567]Merswin, Rulman, 97, 177, 195   seq   ., 202, 376   seq.,    383, 393, 402, 465

[viii-p568]his vision of Nine Rocks, 98, 132, 204

[viii-p569]conversion, 185

[viii-p570]psychology, 186, 294

[viii-p571]penances, 228

[viii-p572]Metapsychic phenomena, 155   seq   .

[viii-p573]Microcosms 98, 102, 159

[viii-p574]Mirror of St. Edmund, The, 306

[viii-p575]Mirror of Simple Souls, The, 75, 219, 337, 342,  426, 437, 462

[viii-p576]Missal, 119, 163, 274

[viii-p577]Molinos, 324, 471

[viii-p578]Monet, 263

[viii-p579]Monoideism, 58   seq   ., 246, 363   seq   ., 373

[viii-p580]More, Gertrude, 59, 78, 88   seq   ., 128, 248, 470

[viii-p581]Mortification, 169, 186, 200   seq   ., 216   seq   ., 233, 396

[viii-p582]Music and Mysticism, 76   seq   ., 277, 336

[viii-p583]Musset, A. de., 293

[viii-p584]Myers, F., 359

[viii-p585]Mysteries, The, 235, 455

[viii-p586]Orphic, 24, 426, 454

[viii-p587]Dionysiac, 58, 236, 359, 454

[viii-p588]Mystic--

[viii-p589]marriage,   see    Spiritual philosophy,   see    Philosophy

[viii-p590]vision, 35   seq   ., 134

[viii-p591]type, 49, 91, 223   seq   ., 229

[viii-p592]sense, 50   seq   .

[viii-p593]feeling, 73

[viii-p594]literature, 80, 239

[viii-p595]experience, 91, 252, 336

[viii-p596]quest, 91   seq   ., 103, 129   seq   .

[viii-p597]education, 92, 298   seq   ., 310

[viii-p598]life process, 92

[viii-p599]theology, 104   seq   .

[viii-p600]death, 169, 383   seq   ., 401

[viii-p601]life, first, 169, 228, 238, 298, 310, 381

[viii-p602]life, second, 229, 381, 403   seq   .

[viii-p603]language, 335

[viii-p604]development, 381   seq   .

[viii-p605]heritage, 432

[viii-p606]Mystic Way, 81   seq   ., 91, 94, 127, 167   seq   ., 306, 381, 416, 426   seq   ., 432, 440   seq   .

[viii-p607]and life of Christ, 121

[viii-p608]and alchemy, 145

[viii-p609]stages of, 168   seq   .

[viii-p610]end of, 442

[viii-p611]Mystics The,   see    also Mystics

[viii-p612]his mechanism, 49   seq   .

[viii-p613]defined, 75   seq   .

[viii-p614]his states, 168

[viii-p615]great, mark of, 173

[viii-p616]as genius, 386

[viii-p617]and visions and voices, 266   seq   ., 279

[viii-p618]and artistic expression, 272   seq   .

[viii-p619]and orison, 324, 328   seq   .

[viii-p620]and ecstasy, 370   seq   .

[viii-p621]and Dark Night, 387   seq   .

[viii-p622]mature, 432   seq   .

[viii-p623]Mysticism--

[viii-p624]its doctrines, 23

[viii-p625]Indian, 31, 57, 158, 170, 314, 434

[viii-p626]and vitalism, 34

[viii-p627]its nature, 70   seq   ., 81   seq   .

[viii-p628]and music,   see    Music

[viii-p629]and symbols, 79, 125   seq   .

[viii-p630]defined, 82

[viii-p631]love and, 85   seq   . its branches, 94

[viii-p632]and theology, 95   seq   .

[viii-p633]its valid part, 102

[viii-p634]Christian, 104, 172   seq   ., 234, 304, 311, 323, 344, 364, 401, 419

[viii-p635]theurglc, 150

[viii-p636]and magic, 162   seq   .

[viii-p637]European, 171, 434

[viii-p638]and goodness, 199

[viii-p639]passive, 322

[viii-p640]German, 396   seq   ., 459, 462

[viii-p641]its meaning, 444

[viii-p642]curve of, 453   seq   .

[viii-p643]tradition of, 454, 469

[viii-p644]Medieval, 458

[viii-p645]Italian, 460   seq   .

[viii-p646]Franciscan, 460   seq   .

[viii-p647]Dominican, 462

[viii-p648]Mahommedan,   see    Sufis

[viii-p649]Flemish, 465

[viii-p650]English, 466

[viii-p651]Spanish, 468

[viii-p652]Mystics, The, 23   seq   ., 34   seq   ., 49   seq   ., 94, 104, 344

[viii-p653]their claim, 4, 22   seq   .

[viii-p654]and artists, 35, 75, 223, 236, 259, 271

[viii-p655]practical, 59, 101, 246   seq   ., 347, 414

[viii-p656]psycho-physical peculiarities, 58   seq   ., 363

[viii-p657]their wholeness of life, 63

[viii-p658]automatic powers, 65

[viii-p659]heroic types, 91   seq   ., 428

[viii-p660]and theology, 95   seq   ., 108   seq   .

[viii-p661]and occultists, 156

[viii-p662]as actives, 172   seq   ., 429   seq   .

[viii-p663]their love of nature, 206, 260

[viii-p664]and Unitive life, 414   seq   .

[viii-p665]two types of, 415

[viii-p666]as lovers, 428

[viii-p667]Unitive, 429   seq   .

[viii-p668]and humanity, 446

[viii-p669]Christian,   see    Mysticism

[viii-p670]  [viii-p670.1]Names    of God,   see    God

[viii-p671]Nativity, The, and Mysticism, 119, 122

[viii-p672]Naturalism, 8

[viii-p673]Nature--

[viii-p674]and Christ, 115

[viii-p675]mystic vision of, 178, 191   seq   ., 234, 240, 254

[viii-p676]mystics and, 206, 258   seq   .

[viii-p677]contemplation of, 301   seq   .

[viii-p678]Negation, 318, 337   seq   ., 344, 353   seq   ., 372, 387

[viii-p679]Negative states, 381   seq   .

[viii-p680]Neoplatonists, 96   seq   ., 104   seq   ., 109, 226, 318, 333, 337, 359, 372, 426, 454   seq   ., 470

[viii-p681]their Trinity 111

[viii-p682]New Birth, 34, 53, 122   seq   ., 140, 193, 303, 319, 419, 445, 454, 469

[viii-p683]New Man, 142, 217, 222, 259, 310, 402

[viii-p684]New Thought 71, 153, 156   seq   .

[viii-p685]Nicholson, R. A., 171

[viii-p686]Nicolas of Basle, 465

[viii-p687]Nicolas of Cusa, 114, 118, 465

[viii-p688]Nirvana, 171

[viii-p689]Norris, John, 470

[viii-p690]  [viii-p690.1]Obedience   , 205, 215

[viii-p691]Occult,   see    Magic

[viii-p692]Odes of Solomon, 455

[viii-p693]Odic force, 155

[viii-p694]One, The, 41, 81, 96, 97, 102, 107, 108, 113,  139, 212, 229, 307, 331, 337, 343   seq   ., 347, 372, 454, 455

[viii-p695]Dante's vision of, 340

[viii-p696]One Act, the, 325   seq   .

[viii-p697]Origen, 455

[viii-p698]Orison, 184, 243, 254, 306   seq   ., 344, 375, 380   seq   .

[viii-p699]of quiet,   see    Quiet

[viii-p700]union,   see    Union

[viii-p701]Degrees of, 169, 306   seq   ., 311

[viii-p702]naked, 307, 318

[viii-p703]ideal of, 325

[viii-p704]Ormond, A. T., 428

[viii-p705]Osanna Andreasi, 468

[viii-p706]Otto, R., 340, 348

[viii-p707]Oxyrhynchus Papyri, 101

[viii-p708]  [viii-p708.1]Pacheu   , J., 91

[viii-p709]Pain, 18   seq   .

[viii-p710]and love, 18, 221   seq   .

[viii-p711]mystic states of, 168   seq   ., 389, 403

[viii-p712]of God, 394

[viii-p713]Pantheism, 99

[viii-p714]Papus, 150

[viii-p715]Paracelsus, 150, 297

[viii-p716]Pascal, 368, 376, 379, 471

[viii-p717]memorial of, 188

[viii-p718]Passivity, 51, 65, 81, 183, 247, 306, 321, 325,  373

[viii-p719]Pathology and mysticism, 60   seq   ., 360

[viii-p720]Patmore, Coventry, 25, 135, 143, 311

[viii-p721]on Incarnation, 118

[viii-p722]on Church 164

[viii-p723]on Reality 199, 420

[viii-p724]Paul, St., 58, 178, 199, 267, 368, 429, 431,  437, 455

[viii-p725]on Trinity, 113

[viii-p726]conversion of, 178

[viii-p727]Pelagius, 105

[viii-p728]Penington, Isaac, 470

[viii-p729]Personality--

[viii-p730]divine, 42, 51, 105, 118, 128, 289, 337, 341,  346, 423

[viii-p731]sub-conscious,   see    Subliminal

[viii-p732]remaking of, 54   seq   ., 375, 402, 416   seq   .

[viii-p733]levels of, 330

[viii-p734]and deification, 420   seq   .

[viii-p735]Peter Damian, St., 458

[viii-p736]Peter of Alcantara, St., 468

[viii-p737]Petersen, Gerlac, 84, 200, 211, 427, 465

[viii-p738]Philadelphians, 470

[viii-p739]Philip of the Trinity, 275

[viii-p740]Philo, 63, 96, 454

[viii-p741]Philosopher's stone, 142   seq   ., 418, 432

[viii-p742]Philosophy, 5   seq   ., 262, 334

[viii-p743]vitalistic, 26   seq   ., 155

[viii-p744]activistic, 33

[viii-p745]transcendental, 73

[viii-p746]mystical, 83, 95   seq   ., 104   seq   ., 433

[viii-p747]Christian, 105

[viii-p748]Hermetic, 141

[viii-p749]occult, 152   seq   .

[viii-p750]Pilgrimage of soul, 98, 128   seq   .

[viii-p751]Plato, 5, 39, 101, 103, 169, 199, 235, 238,  243, 262, 372

[viii-p752]on beauty, 21, 216, 236

[viii-p753]on mystic sense, 50

[viii-p754]on contemplations 305

[viii-p755]Platonism and mysticism, 83

[viii-p756]Platonism Cambridge, 72, 470

[viii-p757]Pleasure, states of, 167   seq   ., 188, 241

[viii-p758]and pain, 228, 380   seq   ., 393

[viii-p759]Plotinus, 86, 93, 96, 101, 106, 173, 178, 207,  229, 233, 262, 271, 331, 335, 368, 374, 455

[viii-p760]on mystic sense, 50

[viii-p761]ecstasy, 82, 372

[viii-p762]union, 85, 333

[viii-p763]immanence, 99

[viii-p764]Poetry, 278, 286, 352

[viii-p765]Poets, 233   seq   ., 331, 375

[viii-p766]and illumination, 234

[viii-p767]mystical, 255, 383

[viii-p768]Poiret, P., 472

[viii-p769]Pordage, Dr., 470, 473

[viii-p770]Porphyry, 455

[viii-p771]Poulain, A., 242

[viii-p772]Poverty, 205   seq   ., 220, 400

[viii-p773]Pratt, J. B., 52, 138, 177, 269   seq   ., 288

[viii-p774]Prayer,   see    Orison

[viii-p775]Presence of God,   see    God

[viii-p776]Prince, Morton, 57

[viii-p777]Proclus, 456

[viii-p778]Prophecy, 277   seq   ., 295, 366

[viii-p779]Prophets, 279, 285, 376

[viii-p780]Psychology 44   seq   .

[viii-p781]of mystic way, 92, 102, 167   seq   .

[viii-p782]and magic, 157   seq   ., 161

[viii-p783]and automatism 266   seq   ., 294   seq   .

[viii-p784]of contemplation, 329, 337, 351

[viii-p785]of ecstasy, 361   seq   .

[viii-p786]of Dark Night, 381   seq   .

[viii-p787]of Unitive Life, 416   seq   .

[viii-p788]Purgation, 131, 147, 169, 177, 198   seq   ., 232, 240, 253, 381   seq   ., 388   seq   .

[viii-p789]factors of, 228   seq   .

[viii-p790]and illumination, 229   seq   .

[viii-p791]passive, 388, 399

[viii-p792]of spirit, 396

[viii-p793]Purgatory, 202, 221

[viii-p794]Purification,   see    Purgation

[viii-p795]  [viii-p795.1]Quia    amore langueo, 136

[viii-p796]Quakers, 100, 105, 464, 469

[viii-p797]Quiet, Orison of, 83, 172, 182, 283, 308   seq   ., 316   seq   ., 328   seq   ., 338, 349, 364, 368

[viii-p798]Quietism, 68, 150, 247, 321   seq   .

[viii-p799]Quietists, 105, 469   seq   .

[viii-p800]  [viii-p800.1]Rabi'a   , 85, 248, 462

[viii-p801]Rapture, 243, 248, 281, 303, 329, 359,   seq   ., 375   seq   .

[viii-p802]dark, 394

[viii-p803]Realism, 8

[viii-p804]Reality--

[viii-p805]philosophy and, 8   seq   ., 33   seq   .

[viii-p806]beauty and, 21   seq   .

[viii-p807]mystics and, 23   seq   ., 41, 68, 93   seq   ., 198, 314, 335, 369, 388, 414   seq   ., 420, 433   seq   .

[viii-p808]dual nature of, 33   seq   ., 195, 240, 340, 433   seq   .

[viii-p809]levels of, 34, 56, 64, 232

[viii-p810]negative descriptions, 42, 337, 345

[viii-p811]condition of knowing, 43, 47   seq   ., 175, 330, 395

[viii-p812]and ecstasy, 61, 187   seq   ., 367   seq   .

[viii-p813]transcendent, 72, 240, 251   seq   .

[viii-p814]and art, 74   seq   .

[viii-p815]and symbols, 78   seq   ., 285

[viii-p816]concepts of, 96, 114, 128, 195, 419

[viii-p817]and immanence, 98, 240, 250

[viii-p818]and theology, 101   seq   ., 116, 121

[viii-p819]self's movement to, 128   seq   .

[viii-p820]craving for, 200, 394

[viii-p821]of phenomena, 256

[viii-p822]Reason,   see    Intellect

[viii-p823]Re-birth,   see    New Birth

[viii-p824]Recejac, 16, 133, 220, 243, 328

[viii-p825]on beauty, 21

[viii-p826]on mysticism, 46, 82, 86, 262, 279

[viii-p827]Receptivity, 64   seq   ., 317   seq   .

[viii-p828]Recollection, 50, 308   seq   ., 313   seq   ., 328

[viii-p829]Regeneration, 122, 128, 417 symbols of, 140   seq   .

[viii-p830]Religion, 17, 47, 160

[viii-p831]and mysticism, 96

[viii-p832]and magic, 152, 157, 162   seq   .

[viii-p833]Rhythm, 76   seq   ., 157   seq   ., 162, 233, 238, 278

[viii-p834]and ecstasy, 58

[viii-p835]Ribet, 268

[viii-p836]Ribot, 60, 363, 371

[viii-p837]Richard of St. victor, 139, 204, 309, 370, 374,  429, 431, 458, 459, 466

[viii-p838]degrees of love, 139, 292, 312, 315, 327

[viii-p839]on ecstasy, 379

[viii-p840]on deification, 421

[viii-p841]Rolle, Richard, 77, 91, 196, 201, 206, 211, 237    seq   ., 239, 277, 317, 355, 369, 459, 466

[viii-p842]on song, 77   seq   ., 193, 439

[viii-p843]on mystic love, 86

[viii-p844]on Heat Sweetness, Song, 193

[viii-p845]his Conversion, 193

[viii-p846]on illumination, 264

[viii-p847]on contemplation, 336, 342

[viii-p848]on joy, 438   seq   .

[viii-p849]Romuald, St., 458

[viii-p850]Rose of Lima, St., 261, 440, 469

[viii-p851]Rosicrucians, 150, 469

[viii-p852]Royce, Josiah, 23, 132

[viii-p853]Rutherford, Samuel, 317   seq   .

[viii-p854]Ruysbroeck, 51, 77, 130, 133, 173, 210, 229,  235, 304, 331, 373, 409, 420   seq   ., 436, 437, 465

[viii-p855]on God, 35, 37, 115   seq   ., 435   seq   .

[viii-p856]on emotion, 48

[viii-p857]on love of God, 86, 265, 356

[viii-p858]on introversion, 100

[viii-p859]on Trinity, 116

[viii-p860]on contemplation, 117, 333, 345   seq   .

[viii-p861]on Birth of Son, 119, 122

[viii-p862]on union, 312, 422, 435

[viii-p863]on Quietism, 322

[viii-p864]on dual life, 325, 435

[viii-p865]on Dark Night, 391

[viii-p866]on Unitive Life, 422   seq   .

[viii-p867]on divine sonship, 433

[viii-p868]   [viii-p868.1]Sacraments 

[viii-p869]and Magic, 163

[viii-p870]and Mystics, 364

[viii-p871]Sacred Heart, vision of, 80

[viii-p872]Sacrum Commercium, 208

[viii-p873]Sadi, 462

[viii-p874]Saint-Martin, 7, 80, 469, 473

[viii-p875]Sanctity, 127, 390

[viii-p876]Scepticism, Philosophic, 13

[viii-p877]School of Holy Spirit, 403   seq   .

[viii-p878]Self--

[viii-p879]and world, 5

[viii-p880]the, its three activities, 45   seq   ., 84, 310, 329, 437

[viii-p881]its machinery 211,   seq   .

[viii-p882]its dual nature, 52   seq   ., 63, 90, 199, 213, 240, 302, 310, 432   seq   .

[viii-p883]surrender of,   see    Surrender

[viii-p884]and Reality, 68, 74, 82, 102, 304, 312, 317,  432

[viii-p885]loss of, 84, 208, 336   seq   ., 401, 434

[viii-p886]transmutation of, 91   seq   ., 140   seq   ., 217, 388, 396, 402, 414   seq   ., 418   seq   .

[viii-p887]cravings of, 126

[viii-p888]annihilation of, 132, 170, 396   seq   ., 418, 434

[viii-p889]suggestion, 159   seq   .

[viii-p890]awakening of, 168, 176   seq   ., 198

[viii-p891]conversion of,   see    Conversion

[viii-p892]knowledge, 200   seq   ., 233

[viii-p893]conquest, 200

[viii-p894]simplification, 204

[viii-p895]death of, 217, 221, 264, 400, 412

[viii-p896]illumination of, 238   seq   .

[viii-p897]education of, 311

[viii-p898]mergence, 312, 332, 343, 373

[viii-p899]naughting, 317, 399   seq   ., 416, 422   seq   .

[viii-p900]in contemplation, 329   seq   .

[viii-p901]in Dark Night, 385   seq   ,

[viii-p902]love, 397

[viii-p903]Semer, M., 193

[viii-p904]Senses--

[viii-p905]World of, 5, 338

[viii-p906]death of, 220

[viii-p907]night of, 239

[viii-p908]and automatism, 268

[viii-p909]hallucinations of, 268   seq   ., 275, 279

[viii-p910]"Seven Valleys, The," 131

[viii-p911]Shelley, 78

[viii-p912]Silence, Interior,   see    Quiet

[viii-p913]Simeon Mataphrastes, 419

[viii-p914]Sin, 198   seq   ., 219, 387

[viii-p915]conviction of, 390   seq   ,

[viii-p916]Smith, John, 470

[viii-p917]Solitude, 173, 324

[viii-p918]Son, The, 115, 120

[viii-p919]Eternal Birth of, 121

[viii-p920]Marriage with, 304

[viii-p921]Sonship Divine, 446

[viii-p922]Song, Mystic, 78, 194, 241, 439   seq   .

[viii-p923]Song of Songs, 137, 250, 373, 426

[viii-p924]Sophia, 123, 230, 233

[viii-p925]Soul, 85, 93, 99, 137

[viii-p926]apex of, 54, 366

[viii-p927]ground of, 54   seq   ., 99   seq   ., 233, 274, 304, 312, 319, 339, 343   seq   ., 349, 390, 401

[viii-p928]spark of, 54   seq   ., 74, 100, 108, 145, 230, 259, 274, 304, 366, 390, 396, 402, 445

[viii-p929]Space and Time, 12

[viii-p930]Spark of Soul,   see    Soul

[viii-p931]Spiritual Marriage, 80, 92, 129, 136   seq   ., 172, 302, 327, 355   seq   , 372   seq   ., 415   seq   ., 426   seq   .

[viii-p932]Ornaments of, 90

[viii-p933]of St. Catherine, 174, 291, 297

[viii-p934]Starbuck, 58, 172, 382

[viii-p935]on conversion, 176, 192

[viii-p936]Steiner, R., 150, 152, 156, 191

[viii-p937]Sterry, Peter, 470

[viii-p938]Stewart J. A., 54, 74

[viii-p939]Stigmatisation, 59, 267, 375

[viii-p940]Subliminal Mind, 52   seq   ., 62, 91, 102, 108, 273, 306, 311, 375, 392

[viii-p941]in mystics, 57, 66, 185

[viii-p942]and visions, 290

[viii-p943]Substance and Existence, 34

[viii-p944]Sufis, 63, 80, 83, 92, 96, 108, 127, 130, 171,  210, 226, 418, 462

[viii-p945]"Suggestive Enquiry, A", 143,  147

[viii-p946]Surrender, 68, 92, 135, 170   seq   ., 185, 190, 209, 223, 236, 244, 284, 308   seq   ., 317, 323   seq   ., 339, 347   seq   ., 355, 392   seq   ., 398   seq   ., 415, 445

[viii-p947]Suso, 91, 101, 172   seq   ., 185, 195   seq   ., 201, 206, 218, 222   seq   ., 229, 238   seq   ., 255, 267, 271   seq   ., 276   seq   ., 283, 291, 343, 371, 388, 393, 396, 464

[viii-p948]on theology, 97, 118

[viii-p949]his conversion, 186

[viii-p950]temperament, 186, 408   seq   .

[viii-p951]visions, 187, 283   seq   ., 386

[viii-p952]illumination, 253

[viii-p953]his Dark Night, 386, 403   seq   .

[viii-p954]and the knight, 408

[viii-p955]and the baby, 410

[viii-p956]on union, 424

[viii-p957]Swedenborg, 160, 473

[viii-p958]Symbolism, 78   seq   ., 97, 125   seq   ., 159, 271, 336

[viii-p959]Symbols, 101, 158, 234, 239, 257, 268, 283,  328

[viii-p960]of the Absolute, 113, 127   seq   ., 331

[viii-p961]three classes of, 126

[viii-p962]of quest, 129   seq   .

[viii-p963]of love, 136   seq   .

[viii-p964]of pilgrimage, 130   seq   .

[viii-p965]of marriage, 136, 425

[viii-p966]of transmutation, 140   seq   ., 418

[viii-p967]magic, 159

[viii-p968]philosophic, 341

[viii-p969]and ecstasy, 364   seq   .

[viii-p970]of Unitive Life, 415   seq   ., 427   seq   .

[viii-p971]of deification, 421

[viii-p972]Symons, Arthur, 83, 89, 236, 352

[viii-p973]Synteresis, 54, 145

[viii-p974]  [viii-p974.1]Tauler   , 55, 61, 87, 100   seq   ., 115, 173, 185, 265, 269, 278, 330, 393, 396, 463   seq   .

[viii-p975]on self loss, 85, 400

[viii-p976]on poverty, 215

[viii-p977]on mortification, 217

[viii-p978]on pain, 222

[viii-p979]on desert of God, 304

[viii-p980]on Abyss, 338

[viii-p981]Telepathy, 155, 295

[viii-p982]Tennyson, 238, 255

[viii-p983]Teresa, St., 58, 64, 79, 88, 91, 92, 96, 100,  102, 117, 168, 169, 172   seq   ., 201, 215   seq   ., 222, 227, 238, 241   seq   ., 246   seq   ., 267   seq   ., 269, 271, 278   seq   ., 283   seq   ., 313, 318, 326, 343, 361, 375, 392   seq   ., 414, 430, 432, 436, 440, 453, 464, 468, 471, 473

[viii-p984]on ecstasy, 61, 360, 368, 371

[viii-p985]on Trinity, 108   seq   .

[viii-p986]Spiritual Marriage, 138

[viii-p987]her character, 213   seq   .

[viii-p988]purgation, 213   seq   .

[viii-p989]visions, 270, 281, 284   seq   ., 288   seq   .

[viii-p990]on auditions, 274   seq   .

[viii-p991]her transverberation, 292

[viii-p992]automatic writing, 294   seq   .

[viii-p993]on orison, 308, 311   seq   ., 356   seq   .

[viii-p994]on recollection, 315

[viii-p995]on quiet, 321, 326

[viii-p996]on rapture, 329, 363, 376   seq   .

[viii-p997]on levitation, 376,   seq   ,

[viii-p998]on pain of God, 394

[viii-p999]Tewekkul Beg, 99

[viii-p1000]Theologia Germanica, 50, 55, 83, 121, 127, 141,  230, 245, 425, 464

[viii-p1001]on detachment, 207

[viii-p1002]on deification, 418

[viii-p1003]Theology, 114   seq   .

[viii-p1004]Theopathetic state, 132, 175

[viii-p1005]life, 431, 436

[viii-p1006]mystics, 429

[viii-p1007]Thomas a Kempis, 19, 217, 278, 437, 465,  470

[viii-p1008]on love, 87

[viii-p1009]Thomas Aquinas, St., 17, 39, 50, 65, 116, 150,  188, 361, 428, 462

[viii-p1010]on emanation, 97

[viii-p1011]on immanence, 99

[viii-p1012]on Trinity, 111

[viii-p1013]on Holy Spirit, 117

[viii-p1014]on Beatific vision, 190, 423

[viii-p1015]Thompson, Francis, 135

[viii-p1016]Towne, E., 156

[viii-p1017]Tradition, 300, 454, 470

[viii-p1018]Traherne, Thomas, 470

[viii-p1019]Trance, Ecstatic, 170   seq   ., 255, 294, 359   seq   ., 367, 375   seq   .

[viii-p1020]Transcendence, 34, 91, 97   seq   ., 103, 108, 232, 259, 307, 324, 335, 418, 444

[viii-p1021]symbols of, 126   seq   .

[viii-p1022]process of, 168, 198

[viii-p1023]vision of, 195

[viii-p1024]and immanence, 250, 259, 337

[viii-p1025]contemplation of, 337, 344   seq   .

[viii-p1026]dark, 355

[viii-p1027]and ecstasy, 365

[viii-p1028]Transcendental Consciousness,   see    Consciousness

[viii-p1029]feeling, 55   seq   ., 73, 232, 330

[viii-p1030]sense, 56   seq   ., 70   seq   .

[viii-p1031]powers, 63

[viii-p1032]life, 213

[viii-p1033]world, 258   seq   .

[viii-p1034]Transmutation,   see    Self and Symbols

[viii-p1035]Tree of Life, 98, 103, 263

[viii-p1036]Trinity, Christian, 107   seq   ., 133, 257, 272, 344, 422, 435

[viii-p1037]Hindu, 110

[viii-p1038]Neoplatonic, 111

[viii-p1039]Truth, Quest of, 334

[viii-p1040]  [viii-p1040.1]Unification   , 54, 108, 238, 416, 434 of consciousness 68, 364, 370

[viii-p1041]Union, Mystic, 24, 32, 35   seq   ., 68, 72   seq   ., 79   seq   ., 84   seq   ., 89, 100, 127, 133   seq   ., 146, 170   seq   ., 281   seq   ., 292, 310   seq   ., 325, 338,   seq   . 355   seq   ., 367, 372, 378, 396, 401, 417   seq   ., 422   seq   ., 446

[viii-p1042]hypostatic, 119

[viii-p1043]condition of, 203, 307

[viii-p1044]orison of, 245, 283, 308   seq   ., 329, 343, 346, 355   seq   .

[viii-p1045]St. Teresa on, 283, 357

[viii-p1046]passive, 333, 367

[viii-p1047]ecstatic, 370

[viii-p1048]Unitive Life, 57, 81, 290, 388, 402, 413   seq   .

[viii-p1049]and illumination, 245   seq   .

[viii-p1050]examples of, 429

[viii-p1051]dual character of, 433

[viii-p1052]its gaiety, 439   seq   .

[viii-p1053]Unitive Way, 121, 131, 139, 170, 229, 310, 381,  413   seq   .

[viii-p1054]Unity, 107, 109, 132, 258, 422

[viii-p1055]  [viii-p1055.1]Vaughan   , H. (Silurist), 255, 347, 409, 470

[viii-p1056]Vaughan, R. A., 150

[viii-p1057]Vaughan, Thomas, 470

[viii-p1058]Vernazza, Ven. Battista, 115, 356, 467

[viii-p1059]Vision, 74, 240, 307, 333

[viii-p1060]illuminated, 234   seq   ., 254   seq   .

[viii-p1061]fourfold, 259

[viii-p1062]Visions, 66, 79, 196, 266   seq   ., 279   seq   ., 375, 381

[viii-p1063]examples, 109, 181, 182, 187, 286   seq   ., 404   seq   .

[viii-p1064]of Godhead, 109, 251   seq   ., 283   seq   ., 340, 370

[viii-p1065]dynamic, 138, 290   seq   .

[viii-p1066]evil, 270, 392

[viii-p1067]and voices, 281

[viii-p1068]symbolic, 285

[viii-p1069]Vitalism, 26   seq   ., 155

[viii-p1070]Voices,   see    Auditions

[viii-p1071]Von Crevelsheim, Ellina, 370

[viii-p1072]Von Hugel, Baron F., 29, 40, 41, 60, 80,  122, 202, 247, 268, 317, 323, 351

[viii-p1073]on St. Catherine of Genoa, 59, 182, 362

[viii-p1074]on quietism, 325

[viii-p1075]  [viii-p1075.1]Waite   , A. E., 108

[viii-p1076]on Magic, 151, 154   seq   ., 157

[viii-p1077]Weigel, V., 297

[viii-p1078]Whichcote, B., 470

[viii-p1079]Whitman, Walt, 192, 238, 248, 255

[viii-p1080]Will, 45   seq   ., 153   seq   ., 161   seq   ., 392

[viii-p1081]and magic, 71, 153   seq   .

[viii-p1082]purgation of, 170, 395   seq   .

[viii-p1083]and conversion, 188, 197

[viii-p1084]surrender of, 208

[viii-p1085]in contemplation, 299, 303, 310, 313,   seq   ., 324, 329, 375

[viii-p1086]Woolman, John, 470

[viii-p1087]Word, The, 109, 113,115, 118, 193, 233, 241,  244, 258, 326, 331, 340, 417, 423

[viii-p1088]Words,   see    Auditions

[viii-p1089]Wordsworth, W., 238, 255, 285

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Index of Scripture References

 [x] 

[x-p0.1]Indexes

  [x.i]   

[x.i-p0.1]Index of Scripture References

   [x.i-p0.2]Job

  [*7:1] 

Song of Solomon

  [*2]    [*3:4] 

Romans

  [*7:14-25] 

2 Corinthians

  [*12:1-6] 

Ephesians

  [*4:6] 

Wisdom of Solomon

  [*18:14] 

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

Latin Words and Phrases

 [x.ii]   

[x.ii-p0.1]Index of Latin Words and Phrases

   [x.ii-p0.2]       [* 'Dilectus meus mihi et ego illi,]  [* 'Illuminare, illuminare, Jerusalem]  [* 'Non voglio quello che esce da te, ma sol voglio te, O dolce Amore]  [* "Amans volat, currit et laetatur: liber est et non tenetur]  [* "Dic nobis Maria]  [* "Lux vixens dicit,"]  [* "Militia est."]  [* "Non voglio quello che esce da te."]  [* "O felix culpa!"]  [* "Quid es ergo, Deus meus?"]  [* "Quod inferius sicut quod superius,"]  [* "Viriliter agite]  [* (Lapis Philosophorum),]  [* Abysses abyssum invocal]  [* Amans Deum anima sub Deo despicit universa.]  [* Cor ad cor loquitur]  [* Cot ad cot loquitur.]  [* Dei enim sumus adjutores]  [* Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat]  [* Et hoc intellegere, quis bominum dabit bomini?]  [* Gyrans]  [* Gyrans gyrando radii spiritus]  [* In]  [* Incendium Amoris]  [* Lapis Philosophorum]  [* Lapis Philosophorum,]  [* Ludus Amoris]  [* Mater Divinae gratiae.]  [* Mentis et Universi]  [* Mysterium tremendum et fascinans]  [* Nescis unde veniat aut quo vadat]  [* Panis Angelorum,]  [* Quod superius sicut quod inferius]  [* Quod superius, sicut quod inferius.]  [* Sapientia Patris.]  [* Solve et coagula]  [* Sponsa Dei]  [* Stella Maria maris, hodie processit ad ortum]  [* Vae soli]  [* Vestigia tua non cognoscentur]  [* fiat]  [* fiat voluntas tua]  [* in excelsis]  [* in via]  [* latens Deitas:]  [* lux vivens,]  [* patria splendida]  [* semper agens,]  [* semper quietus]  [* sub specie aeternitatis]  [* vie intime]  [*' Qui]  [*'dedi te in lucem gentium']  [*" Amor ordinem nescit:]  [*" Viriliter agite!"]  [*"Angelicos testes, sudarium, et vestes"]  [*"Beati oculi qui exterioribus clausi, interioribus autem sunt intenti,"]  [*"Dimitte omnia transitoria, quaere aeterna."]  [*"Hoc est claustrum nostrum, Domina,"]  [*"Lapis Philosophorum"]  [*"Mensam igitur ponunt panes cibosque offerunt, et Deum, quem in Scripturae sacrae expositione non cognoverant, in panis fractione cognoscunt."]  [*"Sanguis Christi, inebria me!" ]  [*"theodidacta, profunda, ecstatica,"]  [*"velle operari active est Deum offendere."]  [*, "Oportet hominem suas potentias anshilare,"]  [*Cot ad cot loquitur]  [*eterna luce] 

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 

French Words and Phrases

 [x.iii]   

[x.iii-p0.1]Index of French Words and Phrases

   [x.iii-p0.2]       [* "Dieu d'Abraham, Dieu d'Isaac, Dieu de Jacob,]    [* "Le monde ne t'a point connu, mais je t'ai connu.]  [* "d'une maniere douce et obligeante,"]  [* Diverses croix chez M. son pere]  [* Mon Dieu, me quitterez vous?]  [* Que je n'en sois pas separe eternellement!]  [* Renonciation, totale et douce]  [* coup de foudre]  [* en bloc]  [*"Traite de l'Amour de Dieu"]  [*"ou de tout autre objet exprimant l'abjection"] 

Mysticism, by Evelyn Underhill, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

 [x.iv]   

[x.iv-p0.1]Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [x.iv-p0.2][*xiv]  [*xv]  [*xvi]  [*xvii]  [*xix]  [*xx]  [*xxi]  [*xxii]  [*1]  [*3]  [*4]  [*5]  [*6]  [*7]  [*8]  [*9]  [*10]  [*11]  [*12]  [*13]  [*14]  [*15]  [*16]  [*17]  [*18]  [*19]  [*20]  [*21]  [*22]  [*23]  [*24]  [*25]  [*26]  [*27]  [*28]  [*29]  [*30]  [*31]  [*32]  [*33]  [*34]  [*35]  [*36]  [*37]  [*38]  [*39]  [*40]  [*41]  [*42]  [*43]  [*44]  [*45]  [*46]  [*47]  [*48]  [*49]  [*50]  [*51]  [*52]  [*53]  [*54]  [*55]  [*56]  [*57]  [*58]  [*59]  [*60]  [*61]  [*62]  [*63]  [*64]  [*65]  [*66]  [*67]  [*68]  [*69]  [*70]  [*71]  [*72]  [*73]  [*74]  [*75]  [*76]  [*77]  [*78]  [*79]  [*80]  [*81]  [*82]  [*83]  [*84]  [*85]  [*86]  [*87]  [*88]  [*89]  [*90]  [*91]  [*92]  [*93]  [*94]  [*95]  [*96]  [*97]  [*98]  [*99]  [*100]  [*101]  [*102]  [*103]  [*104]  [*105]  [*106]  [*107]  [*108]  [*109]  [*110]  [*111]  [*112]  [*113]  [*114]  [*115]  [*116]  [*117]  [*118]  [*119]  [*120]  [*121]  [*122]  [*123]  [*124]  [*125]  [*126]  [*127]  [*128]  [*129]  [*130]  [*131]  [*132]  [*133]  [*134]  [*135]  [*136]  [*137]  [*138]  [*139]  [*140]  [*141]  [*142]  [*143]  [*144]  [*145]  [*146]  [*147]  [*148]  [*149]  [*150]  [*151]  [*152]  [*153]  [*154]  [*155]  [*156]  [*157]  [*158]  [*159]  [*160]  [*161]  [*162]  [*163]  [*164]  [*165]  [*166]  [*167]  [*168]  [*169]  [*170]  [*171]  [*172]  [*173]  [*174]  [*175]  [*176]  [*177]  [*178]  [*179]  [*180]  [*181]  [*182]  [*183]  [*184]  [*185]  [*186]  [*187]  [*188]  [*189]  [*190]  [*191]  [*192]  [*193]  [*194]  [*195]  [*196]  [*197]  [*198]  [*199]  [*200]  [*201]  [*202]  [*203]  [*204]  [*205]  [*206]  [*207]  [*208]  [*209]  [*210]  [*211]  [*212]  [*213]  [*214]  [*215]  [*216]  [*217]  [*218]  [*219]  [*220]  [*221]  [*222]  [*223]  [*224]  [*225]  [*226]  [*227]  [*228]  [*229]  [*230]  [*231]  [*232]  [*233]  [*234]  [*235]  [*236]  [*237]  [*238]  [*239]  [*240]  [*241]  [*242]  [*243]  [*244]  [*245]  [*246]  [*247]  [*248]  [*249]  [*250]  [*251]  [*252]  [*253]  [*254]  [*255]  [*256]  [*257]  [*258]  [*259]  [*260]  [*261]  [*262]  [*263]  [*264]  [*265]  [*266]  [*267]  [*268]  [*269]  [*270]  [*271]  [*272]  [*273]  [*274]  [*275]  [*276]  [*277]  [*278]  [*279]  [*280]  [*281]  [*282]  [*283]  [*284]  [*285]  [*286]  [*287]  [*288]  [*289]  [*290]  [*291]  [*292]  [*293]  [*294]  [*295]  [*296]  [*297]  [*298]  [*299]  [*300]  [*301]  [*302]  [*303]  [*304]  [*305]  [*306]  [*307]  [*308]  [*309]  [*310]  [*311]  [*312]  [*313]  [*314]  [*315]  [*316]  [*317]  [*318]  [*319]  [*320]  [*321]  [*322]  [*323]  [*324]  [*325]  [*326]  [*327]  [*328]  [*329]  [*330]  [*331]  [*332]  [*333]  [*334]  [*335]  [*336]  [*337]  [*338]  [*339]  [*340]  [*341]  [*342]  [*343]  [*344]  [*345]  [*346]  [*347]  [*348]  [*349]  [*350]  [*351]  [*352]  [*353]  [*354]  [*355]  [*356]  [*357]  [*358]  [*359]  [*360]  [*361]  [*362]  [*363]  [*364]  [*365]  [*366]  [*367]  [*368]  [*369]  [*370]  [*371]  [*372]  [*373]  [*374]  [*375]  [*376]  [*377]  [*378]  [*379]  [*380]  [*381]  [*382]  [*383]  [*384]  [*385]  [*386]  [*387]  [*388]  [*389]  [*390]  [*391]  [*392]  [*393]  [*394]  [*395]  [*396]  [*397]  [*398]  [*399]  [*400]  [*401]  [*402]  [*403]  [*404]  [*405]  [*406]  [*407]  [*408]  [*409]  [*410]  [*411]  [*412]  [*413]  [*414]  [*415]  [*416]  [*417]  [*418]  [*419]  [*420]  [*421]  [*422]  [*423]  [*424]  [*425]  [*426]  [*427]  [*428]  [*429]  [*430]  [*431]  [*432]  [*433]  [*434]  [*435]  [*436]  [*437]  [*438]  [*439]  [*440]  [*441]  [*442]  [*443]  [*444]  [*445]  [*446]  [*447]  [*448]  [*449]  [*450]  [*451]  [*453]  [*454]  [*455]  [*456]  [*457]  [*458]  [*459]  [*460]  [*461]  [*462]  [*463]  [*464]  [*465]  [*466]  [*467]  [*468]  [*469]  [*470]  [*471]  [*472]  [*473]  [*475]  [*476]  [*477]  [*478]  [*479]  [*480]  [*481]  [*482]  [*483]  [*484]  [*485]  [*486]  [*487]  [*488]  [*489]  [*490]  [*491]  [*492]  [*493]  [*494]  [*495]  [*496]  [*497]  [*498]  [*499]  [*500]  [*501]  [*502]  [*503]  [*504]  [*505]  [*505]  [*506]  [*507]  [*508]  [*509]  

             


===== BOOK: nda.txt =====


     
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

THE NORSE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA

 

A Compilation in Extenso of all the Sagas, Manuscripts, and Inscriptive Memorials Relating to the Finding and Settlement of the

 

New World in the Eleventh Century.

 

With Presentations of Freshly Discovered Proofs, in the form of Church Records Supplied by the Vatican of Rome, Never Before Published.

 

TRANSLATIONS AND DEDUCTIONS BY

 

ARTHUR MIDDLETON REEVES,
 NORTH LUDLOW BEAMISH,
 HON. RASMUS B. ANDERSON.

______________

HON. RASMUS B. ANDERSON, LL.D.,

 

EDITOR IN CHIEF.

J. W. BUEL, Ph.D.,

 

MANAGING EDITOR.

______________

 

PUBLISHED BY THE

 

NORROeNA SOCIETY,
 LONDON STOCKHOLM COPENHAGEN BERLIN NEW YORK

 

[1906]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, February, 2004, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
LEIF ERIKSON DISCOVERS A NEW WORLD(From a drawing by Heller.)

THE discovery of America by Norsemen about the year 1000, is so well authenticated as to be no longer a matter of mere tradition, but to whom the honor is due is less easy to prove by the historical sagas. The claim set up in favor of Bjarne Herjulfson is well substantiated, but if the discovery be credited to Bjarne, to Leif Erikson belongs the fame of having founded the first settlement in the New World. This flourished for a time and was frequently visited by other voyagers, until all the settlers it is supposed perished from a plague known as the Black Death.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

 

LIST OF PHOTOGRAVURES.

(NORSE DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA.)

Frontispiece--Leif Erikson Discovers a New World.

     Page 
  Death of Thorvald Erikson  59 
  Karlsefni's Expedition Ascending the Charles River  93 
  Norsemen Celebrating their Settlement in the New World  203 
  

_____________

PLATES AND MAPS

  Reproduction of a Page from the Flatey Book  68 
  Reproduction of part of a Manuscript Letter of Pope Innocent III, 1206  103 
  Front View of an old Icelandic Skali, or Hall  169 
  Ground Plan of Interior of old Icelandic Hall  171 
  Chart of Discoveries Made by Northmen  247 
  Map of Vinland  298 
  Map of Iceland  342 
  

 

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

 

CONTENTS.

(NORSE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA.)

      Page 
  Preface by J. W. Buel  <page ix> 
  Introduction by Arthur M. Reeves  <page xiii> 
  CHAPTER I.    
  Early Fragmentary References to Wineland  <page 1> 
  Wineland the Good Found  <page 10> 
  CHAPTER II.    
   The Saga of Eric the Red  <page 16> 
  Eric the Red finds Greenland  <page 29> 
  Saga of Karselfni  <page 30> 
  Concerning Thorbion  <page 32> 
  Christianity is Introduced into Greenland  <page 40> 
  Thorstein Weds Gudrid, Apparitions Appear  <page 44> 
  Funeral Rites Among the Greenlanders  <page 47> 
  Beginning of the Wineland Voyages  <page 50> 
  Karlsefni Explores the Coast South of Vinland  <page 53> 
  The First Settlement in America  <page 55> 
  How a Woman Vanquished the Natives  <page 57> 
  Thorvald Killed by the Skrellings  <page 59> 
  Ireland the Great, or White Man's Land  <page 61> 
  Birth of the First White Child in America  <page 62> 
  CHAPTER III.    
  Wineland History of the Flatey Book  <page 63> 
  History of the Flatey Book  <page 64> 
  CHAPTER IV.    
   Translations from the Flatey Book    
  Story of Eric the Red and other Voyagers  <page 75> 
  Eric Founds a Settlement in America  <page 81> 
  A Country Abounding with Grapes  <page 83> 
  Thorvald goes to Wineland  <page 85> 
  An Engagement with the Natives  <page 87> 
  Thorstein Dies in the Western Settlement  <page 88> 
  A Plague Visits Greenland  <page 89> 
  Voyages of Thorfinn and His Companions  <page 92> 
  Karlsefni Visits Leif's Booths in America  <page 93> 
  [p. vi]    
  Freydis Murders two Men and five Women  <page 96> 
  Death of Gudrid, Father of Snorre (Snorri)  <page 101> 
  CHAPTER V.    
   Wineland in the Icelandic Annals  <page 102> 
  Bishop of Greenland goes to Wineland  <page 103> 
  The Church Fathers in the New World  <page 105> 
  Last Historic Reference to Wineland  <page 107> 
  CHAPTER VI.    
  Notices of Doubtful Value  <page 108> 
  The Wonderful Story of Biorn  <page 109> 
  Evidences of Irish Occupation of America  <page 113> 
  Difficulty in Locating "Newland"  <page 115> 
  Sagas that Puzzle Historians  <page 117> 
  CHAPTER VII.    
  Publication of the Wineland Discovery  <page 119> 
  Adam of Bremen Writes of Wineland  <page 121> 
  First Printed Theory Concerning Wineland  <page 123> 
  Arni Magnusson's Collection of Manuscripts  <page 124> 
  Sagas of which their Accuracy is Confirmed  <page 125> 
  Prof. Storm's Treatise upon the Wineland Discovery  <page 126> 
  Notes Explanatory of Prof. Reeves' Text  <page 128> 
  ________
 BOOK II.    
  Arguments and Evidences Respecting the Wineland Discovery  <page 148> 
  Introduction to a Study of Icelandic Records  <page 149> 
  Scalds and Sagamen in Icelandic Literature  <page 150> 
  Establishment of Law in Iceland  <page 153> 
  Origin of the Saga  <page 155> 
  Records of Great Deeds Preserved by Skalds  <page 157> 
  Important Position Held by the Skalds  <page 159> 
  Preservation of Ancient Traditions  <page 161> 
  Second Period of Icelandic Literature  <page 162> 
  Purpose served by Skaldic Verse  <page 163> 
  Subjects Treated by the Sagamen  <page 165> 
  Passion for Travel among Icelanders  <page 169> 
  Arne Magnussen (Arni Magnusson) the Learned  <page 171> 
  Third Period in Icelandic Literature  <page 174> 
  Effect of Christianity's Introduction  <page 175> 
  Importance of the Islendingabok  <page 177> 
  Link that Connects the Written and Oral Annals  <page 179> 
  First of Icelandic Historians  <page 191> 
  Chronology of the Historical Sagas  <page 193> 
  Last Period of Icelandic Literature  <page 184> 
  [p. vii]    
  Decline of Literary Ambition  <page 185> 
  Rise of Romance and Chivalry  <page 187> 
  The Genealogist Succeeds the Skald  <page 189> 
   Saga of Eric the Red.    
  Discovery and Colonization of Greenland  <page 191> 
  Bjarne Seeks out Greenland  <page 194> 
  Bjarne is Driven upon Strange Shores  <page 195> 
  Results of Bjarne's Voyage  <page 197> 
  Columbus and the Norse Navigators  <page 198> 
   Voyage of Leif Erikson.    
  Leif Discovers America  <page 201> 
  Leif's Description of the New World  <page 202> 
  He builds (booths) houses in the New Country  <page 203> 
  Lief Rescues a Shipwrecked Crew  <page 205> 
  Thorvald Repairs to Vinland  <page 206> 
  His Fatal Encounter with the Natives  <page 207> 
  Voyage of Thorstein Erikson  <page 209> 
  Death of Grimhild  <page 211> 
  The Heimskringla Record of the Vineland Discovery  <page 213> 
   The Saga of Thorfin Karlsefni.    
  His Voyage to Greenland  <page 216> 
  Leif Erikson Entertains Karlsefni  <page 217> 
  Settlement in Vinland by Karlsefni  <page 218> 
  Description of the New Country  <page 220> 
  Karlsefni Explores the Country South  <page 222> 
  The First Year Spent in America  <page 224> 
  A Battle with the Skrellings  <page 225> 
  Another Settlement Founded in America  <page 227> 
  In the Land of the Mysterious Unipeds  <page 228> 
  The Posterity of Karlsefni  <page 230> 
   Voyage of Freydis, Erik's Daughter (translation).    
  Frequency of Voyages between Iceland and Vinland  <page 231> 
  Discord among the Vinland Colonists  <page 232> 
  Murderous Frenzy of Freydis  <page 234> 
  The Mansur Wood of Vinland  <page 236> 
  Geographical Notices and Comments on the Saga Records  <page 237> 
  Inscriptive Evidences of the Discovery  <page 239> 
  The Dighton Writing Rock  <page 240> 
  Analogy between Dighton and other Inscriptions  <page 243> 
  Runic Stone at Kingikvrsaak  <page 244> 
  Voyages in the Thirteenth Century  <page 245> 
  Norse Discoveries in the Arctic Regions  <page 247> 
  Navigation as a Science among Norsemen  <page 249> 
  Extensive Commerce with many Nations  <page 251> 
  Cause of the Hegira from Norway  <page 252> 
  [p. viii]    
  Minor Narratives of the Vinland Discovery  <page 254> 
  Translations from the Saga of Tryggvason  <page 255> 
  Colonization of Great Ireland  <page 257> 
  Translation of the Bjorn (Bjarne) Legend  <page 258> 
  Remarkable Story of Thorvald  <page 259> 
  A Plot laid to kill Bjorn  <page 267> 
  Critical Examination of the Testimony  <page 271> 
  Voyage of Gudleif to New Ireland  <page 272> 
  The White Chief sends a Message  <page 275> 
  Great Ireland a part of America  <page 277> 
  Indian Traditions of White Men  <page 278> 
  Evidence Presented by Ancient Charts  <page 279> 
  Traces of Irish Origin among Indians  <page 280> 
  Language Affinities between Indian and Celtic  <page 282> 
  Cortez writes of a Strange White People  <page 285> 
  Kind of Vessels used by the Irish  <page 287> 
  Druids and Gauls of Caesar's Time  <page 289> 
  How the Celtic Settlers Reached America  <page 291> 
  Similarity between Mexican and Egyptian Monuments  <page 293> 
  ________________
 NORUMBEGA IN AMERICA.    
  By HON. R. B. ANDERSON.    
  CHAPTER I.    
  Recapitulation of early Voyages and Discoveries  <page 295> 
  Locating the Norse Settlement in America  <page 297> 
  A Boston Monument to Leif Erikson  <page 299> 
  Remarkable Find made by Prof. Horsford  <page 301> 
  Remains of Canals Dug by Norse Settlers  <page 303> 
  Inscription on Horsford's Commemorative Tower  <page 305> 
  Finding the Foundations of a Norse House  <page 307> 
  Prof. Anderson's Opinion of Norumbega  <page 311> 
  CHAPTER II.    
  Norse Voyages in the Tenth and following Centuries  <page 312> 
  Inducements to Settle Vinland  <page 321> 
  The Catholic Church in Vinland  <page 323> 
  CHAPTER III.    
   Columbus and the Norsemen  <page 326> 
  Credibility of Authorities Quoted  <page 328> 
  Columbus heard the Story of the Discovery  <page 331> 
  A Leif Erikson Commemorative National Festival  <page 335> 
  CHAPTER IV.    
   Discovery of America by the Irish  <page 317> 
  Authorities Respecting the Irish Discovery  <page 339> 
  A Mystery that may not be Revealed  <page 341> 
  Geography of Pre-Columbian America  <page 343> 
  

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

 

PREFACE.

In this work is brought together for the first time the interpretation of the best authorities respecting the evidences, historical, archaeologic, inscriptive and deductive, of Norse discovery, occupation, and colonization of America five centuries before the time of Columbus. The subject, though it has engaged in a general way the attention of historians for a long time, has only within recent years been brought into great prominence by a serious study of the Saga writers of Iceland and Scandinavia. The beginning of this interest dates from 1837 in which year was published, by the Royal Danish Society of Northern Antiquaries, a large quarto volume of old Icelandic documents, in which the proofs were set forth that the discovery credited to Columbus was anticipated by sea-roving Norsemen five hundred years earlier. This great work was edited by Prof. C. C. Rafn, founder of the Royal Danish Society, and was the result of painstaking labor and expensive research by that very distinguished antiquarian.

Interest in the subject thus aroused by Prof. Rafn was further promoted by Dr. R. B. Anderson's "America not First Discovered by Columbus," published in 1874, which ran through several editions and was translated into French, German and probably other languages.

Inspired by Dr. Anderson's work, Prof. Arthur entered most earnestly into a study of the question, for which he prepared himself by becoming a master of the Danish tongue,

[p. x]

with a view to investigating all the original documents in possession of the Antiquarian Society. Not being fully satisfied with what he was able to find in Copenhagen, Stockholm, Trondhjem, and other Scandinavian centers, in 1879, he set sail for Iceland and there continued his examination of records and his enquiries, results of which were published in London in 1895, which with a work by Prof. Beamish, are reproduced in this volume.

While Prof. Reeves does not in all matters pertaining thereto agree perfectly with Professor Rafn, there is sufficient concurrence in their arguments to establish corroboration of conclusions; this is most important because Professor Rafn's work was not freely translated into English, and thus escaped the notice of American historians, while Professor Reeves, a master of the Danish tongue, took up the work of investigating, in the original, the documents submitted by the Antiquarian Society in 1879.

It may truly be said that thirty years ago only a very cultured few professed even the least familiarity with the literature of the Gothic people, notwithstanding our descent from that sturdy race. The Vatican exhibit at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, 1904, intensified the interest aroused by Professor Reeves' investigations among the libraries of Copenhagen, Christiana, Stockholm and Reykjavik, Iceland's capital. Some had theretofore conjectured that the Church of Rome had maintained a brief relation to Pre-Columbian America, but not until the records were produced and placed on exhibition at St. Louis, did many believe that the Holy Church had established itself so successfully in the New World as early as the year 1000, as to require the services of an archbishop, whose See extended from Greenland to Vineland (Massachusetts?) This almost coincident, and in a way co-operative, enlightenment of the educated, scarcely

[p. xi]

less than of the popular mind on the subject of American discovery, has led to the liveliest appreciation of the Norsemen, and particularly so since with an understanding of their early visits to these shores we have learned that Americans, through the English, are descended from these rugged, fearless, sea-roving, liberty-loving people. The interest that has thus been aroused in the deeds of our Scandinavian ancestors has led to a wide-spread desire for knowledge respecting their civilization, by which the masses are coming to know that the Norsemen were not only the greatest of seamen, but even in their remote isolation, on Iceland's frigidly inhospitable coast, they developed a literature, as well also a popular form of government, the excellence of which is scarcely to be equalled by that of any other ancient people.

That America was discovered and colonized by Norsemen nine hundred years ago has been a disputed claim over which historians have for a long while contended, like enemies struggling in the dark, but in the light of recently exhumed evidence, resurrected out of the age-invested tome repositories of the Vatican, and libraries of the North, the question is fully resolved and the credit may now be properly placed. The argument and evidences that establish this claim are set forth in this volume by such distinguished authorities as Arthur Reeves, Charles Christian Rafn, North Ludlow Beamish and Rasmus B. Anderson. There is also printed, in connection with the historical presentation of the subject, confirmatory proofs, in the form of reproduced manuscripts, ancient maps, and church records not heretofore accessible to the general reader. In fact, some of these documents were not known to exist until accidentally discovered by very recent investigation and are now published as a whole for the first time.

[p. xii]

The allusions herein made to the tradition of Irish discovery of America will not wholly satisfy the critical enquirer, but it may lead to a more general study of this much neglected chapter of Irish history. This much may be set down as fact: Sixty-five years before the discovery of Iceland by Norsemen, Irish sea-rovers had not only visited but erected habitations on that island. About the year 725 Irish ecclesiastics are known to have sought seclusion on the Faroe Islands. In the Tenth Century voyages between Ireland and Iceland were so frequent as to be ordinary occurrences. Finally, in the Eleventh Century, a county west of Iceland and South of Vinland, known to the Norsemen as White-Man's Land, or Great Ireland, was discovered, and probably settled by Irish. All that history recounts, or that known documents confirm, regarding the New World anterior to the time of Columbus, will be found gathered and sifted in this volume, to which is added Professor Anderson's most interesting description of Norumbega, a supposed settlement of Norsemen established near Boston, about A. D. 1008.

W. BUEL.

 

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

 

INTRODUCTION.

THE Icelandic discovery of America was first announced, in print, more than two centuries and a half ago. Within the past fifty years of this period, the discovery has attracted more general attention than during all of the interval preceding,--a fact, which is no doubt traceable to the publication, in 1837, of a comprehensive work upon the subject prepared by the Danish scholar, Carl Christian Rafn. Although it is now more than half a century since this book was published, Rafn is still very generally regarded as the standard authority upon the subject of which he treats. But his zeal in promulgating the discovery seriously prejudiced his judgment. His chief fault was the heedless confusing of all of the material bearing directly or indirectly upon his theme,--the failure to winnow the sound historical material from that which is unsubstantiated. Rafn offered numerous explanations of the texts which his work contained, and propounded many dubious theories and hazardous conjectures. With these the authors, who have founded their investigations upon his work, have more concerned themselves than with the texts of the original documents. If less effort had been applied to the dissemination and defence of fantastic speculations, and more to the determination of the exact nature of the facts which have been preserved in the Icelandic records, the discovery should

[p. xiv]

not have failed to be accepted as clearly established by sound historical data. Upon any other hypothesis than this it is difficult to account for the disposition American historians have shown to treat the Icelandic discovery as possible, from conjectural causes, rather than as determined by the historical records preserved by the fellow-countrymen of the discoverers.

Bancroft, in his History of the United States, gave form to this tendency many years ago, when he stated, that:

"The story of the colonization of America by Norsemen rests on narratives mythological in form, and obscure in meaning, ancient yet not contemporary. The intrepid mariners who colonized Greenland could easily have extended their voyages to Labrador, and have explored the coasts to the south of it. No clear historic evidence establishes the natural probability that they accomplished the passage, and no vestige of their presence on our continent has been found."

The latest historian of America, traversing the same field, virtually iterates this conclusion, when he says:

"The extremely probable and almost necessary pre-Columbian knowledge of the northeastern parts of America follows from the venturesome spirit of the mariners of those seas for fish and traffic, and from the easy transition from coast to coast by which they would have been lured to meet more southerly climes. The chances from such natural causes are quite as strong an argument in favor of the early Northmen venturings as the somewhat questionable representations of the Sagas."

[p. xv]

The same writer states, elsewhere, in this connection, that:

"Everywhere else where the Northmen, went they left proofs of this occupation on the soil, but nowhere in America, except on an island on the east shore of Baffin's Bay, has any authentic runic inscription been found outside of Greenland."

If the authenticity of the Icelandic discovery of America is to be determined by runic inscriptions or other archaelogical remains left by the discoverers, it is altogether probable that the discovery will never be confirmed. The application of this same test, however, would render the discovery of Iceland very problematical. The testimony is the same in both cases, the essential difference between the two discoveries being, after all, that the one led to practical results, while the other, apparently, did not ( ). The absence of any Icelandic remains south of Baffin's Bay makes neither for nor against the credibility of the Icelandic discovery,--although it may be said, that it is hardly reasonable to expect that, in the brief period of their sojourn, the explorers would have left any buildings or implements behind them, which would be likely to survive the ravages of the nine centuries that have elapsed since the discovery.

The really important issue, which is raised by the paragraphs quoted, is the broader one of the credibility of the Icelandic records. These records, in so far as they relate to the discovery, disentangled from wild theories and vague assumptions, would seem to speak best for themselves, It is true that Icelandic historical sagas do

[p. xvi]

differ from the historical works of other lands, but this difference is one of form. The Icelandic saga is peculiarly distinguished for the presentation of events in a simple, straightforward manner, without embellishment or commentary by the author. Fabulous sagas there are in Icelandic literature, but this literature is by no means unique in the possession of works both of history and romance, nor has it been customary to regard works of fiction as discrediting the historical narratives of a people which has created both. It is possible to discriminate these two varieties of literary creation in other languages, so is it no less possible in Icelandic. There is, indeed, no clear reason why the statements of an historical saga should be called in question, where these statements are logically consistent and collaterally confirmed.

The information contained in Icelandic literature relative to the discovery of America by the Icelanders, has been brought together here, and an attempt has been made to trace the history of each of the elder manuscripts containing this information. Inconsistencies have been noted, and discriminations made in the material, so far as the facts have seemed to warrant, and especially has an effort been made to avoid any possibility of confusion between expressions of opinion and the facts.

It is not altogether consistent with the plan of this book, to suggest what seems to be established by the documents which it presents, these documents being offered to bear witness for themselves, but a brief recapitulation of the conclusions to which a study of the documents has led may not be amiss, since these conclusions

[p. xvii]

differ radically, in many respects, from the views advanced by Rafn and his followers, and are offered with a view to point further enquiry, rather than to supplant it.

The eldest surviving manuscript containing an account of the discovery of Wineland the Good, as the southernmost land reached by the Icelandic discoverers was called, was written not later than 1334. This, and a more recent manuscript containing virtually the same saga, present the most cogent and consistent account of the discovery which has been preserved. Many of the important incidents therein set forth are confirmed by other Icelandic records of contemporary events, and the information which this saga affords is simply, naturally and intelligibly detailed. This information is of such a character that it is natural to suppose it to have been derived from the statements of those who had themselves visited the lands described; it is not conceivable from what other source it could have been obtained, and, except its author was gifted with unparalleled prescience, it could not have been a fabrication. According to this history, for such it clearly is, Wineland was discovered by a son of Eric Thorvaldsson, called the Red, the first Icelandic explorer and colonist of Greenland. This son, whose name was Leif, returning from a voyage to Norway, probably not later than the year 1000, was driven out of the direct track to Greenland, and came upon a country of which he had previously had no knowledge. He returned thence to Greenland, and reported what he had found, and all ineffectual attempt was made soon after to reach this

[p. xviii]

strange land again. A few years later one Thorfinn Thordarson, called Karlsefni, an Icelander, who, had recently arrived in Greenland, determined to renew the effort to find and explore the unknown country which Leif had seen. He organized an expedition and sailed away from Greenland toward the south-west. He first sighted a barren land, which, because of the large flat stones that lay strewn upon its surface, received the name of Helluland. Continuing thence, with winds from the north, the explorers next found a wooded land, to which they gave the name of Markland, from its trees, which, to these inhabitants of a treeless land, were a sufficiently distinguishing characteristic. Proceeding thence, they next described a coast-land, along which they sailed, having the land upon their starboard side. The first portion of this land-fall proved to be a long, sandy shore, but when they had followed it for some time, they found it indented with bays and creeks, and in one of these they stopped, and sent two of their company inland to explore the country. These explorers, when they returned, brought with them, the one a bunch of grapes, the other an ear of wild ["self-sown"] grain. They hoisted anchor then, and sailed on until they came to a bay, at the mouth of which was an island with strong currents flowing about it. They laid their course into the bay, and, being pleased with the country thereabouts, decided to remain there the first winter, which proved to be a severe one. In the following year, Karlsefni, with the greater portion of his company, continued the advance southward, halting finally at a river, which flowed down from the land into, a lake and thence into

[p. xix]

the sea. About the month of this river was shoal water, and it could only be entered at flood-tide; they proceeded up the river with their ship, and established themselves not far from the sea, and remained here throughout the second winter. There were woods here, and in low-lands fields of wild "wheat," and on the ridges grapes growing wild. Here for the first time they encountered the inhabitants of the country, to whom they gave the name of Skrellings, a name which seems to bear evidence of their opprobrium. In the spring after their arrival at this spot, they were visited for the second time by the Skrellings, with whom they now engaged in barter; their visitors, however, becoming alarmed at the bellowing of a bull, which Karlsefni had brought with him, fled to their skin-canoes and rowed away. For three weeks after this, nothing was seen of the natives; but, at the end of this interval, they returned in great numbers and gave battle to Karlsefni and his companions. The Skrellings filially withdrew, having lost several of their number, while two of Karlsefni's men had fallen in the affray. The explorers, although they were well content with the country, decided, after this experience, that it would be unwise for them to attempt to remain in that region longer, and they accordingly returned to the neighbourhood in which they had passed the first winter, where they remained throughout the third winter, and in the following spring set sail for Greenland.

In a manuscript written probably between 1370 and 1390, but certainly before the close of the fourteenth century, are two detached narratives which, considered together,

[p. xx]

form another version of the history of the discovery and exploration of Wineland. In this account the discovery is ascribed to one Biarni Heriulfsson, and the date assigned to this event is fixed several years anterior to that of Leif Ericsson's voyage; indeed, according to this account, Leif's voyage to Wineland is not treated as accidental, but as the direct result of Biarni's description of the land which he had found. This version differs further, from that already described, in recounting three voyages besides that undertaken by Leif, making in all four voyages of exploration--the first headed by Leif, the second by Leif's brother, Thorvald, the third by Karlsefni, and the fourth and last led by Freydis, a natural daughter of Eric the Red. This account of the discovery is treated at length, and certain of its inconsistencies pointed out in another place, and it is, therefore, not necessary to examine it more particularly here. The statement concerning the discovery of Wineland by Biarni Heriulfsson is not confirmed by any existing collateral evidence, while that which would assign the honour to Leif Ericsson is; moreover, beyond the testimony of this, the Flatey Book, version, there is no reason to believe that more than a single voyage of exploration took place, namely, that of Thorfinn Karlsefni. So far as the statements of this second version coincide with that of the first, there seems to be no good reason for calling them in question; where they do not, they may well receive more particular scrutiny than has been directed to them, hitherto, since the Flatey Book narrative is that which has generally been treated as the more important, and

[p. xxi]

its details have, in consequence, received the greater publicity.

Especially has one of the statements, which appears in this second version, claimed the attention of writers, who have sought to determine from it the site of Wineland. Rafn, by the ingenious application of a subtile theory, succeeded in computing from this statement the exact latitude, to the second, of the southernmost winter-quarters of the explorers, and for nearly fifty years after its publication Rafn's method of interpretation remained essentially unassailed. In 1883, however, Professor Gustav Storm, of Christiana, propounded a novel, but withal a simple and scientific interpretation of this passage, which can hardly fail to appeal to the discernment of any reader who may not in advance have formed his conclusions as to where Wineland ought to have been. Professor Storm's method of interpretation does not seek to determine, from the passage the exact spot which the explorers reached (for which, it may be remarked, the passage does not afford sufficiently accurate data), but he is enabled by his process of reasoning to determine a limit, north of which Wineland could not have been, and this limit is approximately A90. A region not far removed to the southward of this latitude conforms sufficiently well to the description of the country, given in the narratives of the exploration, to serve to confirm Professor Storm's result, and also the relative accuracy of the mooted passage itself. It will be apparent from an examination of this author's treatise that it is not necessarily proven that Wineland may not have been situated to the

[p. xxii]

southward of latitude 49 degrees, but it would seem to be well-nigh certain that thus far south it must have been.

There is no suggestion in Icelandic writings of a permanent occupation of the country, and after the exploration at the beginning of the eleventh century, it is not known that Wineland was ever again visited by Icelanders, although it would appear that a voyage thither was attempted in the year 1121, but with what result is not known. That portion of the discovery known as Markland was revisited however, in 1347, by certain seamen from the Icelandic colony in Greenland.

It will be seen from this summary that the Wineland history is of the briefest, but brief as it is, it has been put in jeopardy no less by those who would prove too much, than by those who would deny all. It may not be unprofitable in the present aspect of the question to appeal to the records themselves.

ARTHUR M. REEVES.

 

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

ARGUMENTS AND PROOFS

 

THAT SUPPORT THE CLAIM OF NORSE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA
 BY ARTHUR M. REEVES.

 

CHAPTER I.

 

EARLY FRAGMENTARY REFERENCES TO WINELAND.

WINELAND the Good is first mentioned in Icelandic literature by the Priest Ari Thorgilsson, in a passage contained in his so-called Islendingabok [Icelanders' Book]. Ari, commonly called the Learned, an agnomen which he received after his death, was born in Iceland in the year 1067, and lived to the ripe age of eighty-one, acquiring a positive claim to the appellation "hinn gamli" [the Old, the Elder], which is once given him; in this instance, however, to distinguish him from another of the same name. Of Ari, the father of Icelandic historiography, the author of Heimskringla, the most comprehensive of Icelandic histories, says in the prologue to his work:

"The Priest Ari Thorgilsson the Learned, Gelli's grandson, was the first of men here in the land [Iceland] to write ancient and modern lore in the Northern tongue; he wrote chiefly in the beginning of his book concerning Iceland's colonization and legislation, then of the law-speakers ( ), how long each was in office, down to the introduction of Christianity into Iceland, and then on to his own day. Therein he also treats of much other old lore, both of the lives of the kings of Norway and Denmark, as well as of those of England, as likewise of the

[p. 2]

important events, which have befallen here in the land, and all of his narrations seem to me most trustworthy. . . . It is not strange that Ari should have been well-informed in the ancient lore, both here and abroad, since he had both acquired it from old men and wise, and was himself eager to learn and gifted with a good memory."

In the introduction to the Islendingabok, Ari says:

"I first composed an Islendingabok for our Bishops Thorlak [Thorlakr] and Ketil [Ketill], and showed it to them, as well as to Saemund (Saemundr) the Priest. And forasmuch as they were pleased [either] to have it thus, or augmented, I accordingly wrote this, similar in character, with the exception of the genealogy and lives of the kings, and have added that of which I have since acquired closer knowledge, and which is now more accurately set forth in this [the 'libellus'] than in that."

These words conjoined with the quoted statement concerning the character of the historian's work, and supplemented by references to Ari in other Icelandic writings, have given rise to a controversy as to the probable scope of Ari's literary activity. Whether the conclusion be reached that Ari was the author of several books, as has been claimed, or that the Islendingabok, which has perished, to which he refers in the words above quoted, was a much larger and more comprehensive work than the so-called Islendingabok which has been preserved to us, there seems to be abundant reason for the belief that all of Ari's historical material was by no means comprised in the only book of his now existing, about whose authorship there can be no room for dispute. Of this book, the

[p. 3]

so-called Islendingabok, the oldest manuscripts are two paper copies, of a lost parchment manuscript, belonging to the Arna-Magnaean Collection in the University Library of Copenhagen, which are known as 113a and 113b fol. At the end of 113a, the scribe has written as follows:

"These 'Schedae' and narratives of the priest Ari the Learned are copied from a vellum in his own hand, as men believe, at Villingaholt, by the priest John Ellindsson [Jon Erlendsson], Anno domini 1651, the next Monday after the third Sunday after Easter."

This John Erlendsson is known to have made transcripts of many of the sagas for Bryniolf [Brynjolfr] Sveinsson, Bishop of Skalholt. To this worthy bishop's literary ardour, and zeal in collecting the neglected treasures of his language, we owe the preservation of many manuscripts, which would, but for him, doubtless, have perished before the coming of the indefatigable collector, Arni Magnusson.

Bishop Bryniolf, unfortunately, left no heir interested in the preservation of his library, and his books were soon scattered. When Arni Magnusson visited Iceland, thirty years after the Bishop's death and ransacked the island for surviving manuscripts, the vellum of the Islendingabok, doubtless one of the oldest of Icelandic manuscripts, had entirely disappeared. Concerning the two paper copies of this vellum, which he succeeded in obtaining. Arni has inserted the following memorandum in the manuscript described at 113b fol.:

"The various different readings noted here throughout in my hand, are taken from another copy [113a,. fol.]

[p. 4]

written by the Rev. John Erlendsson in 1651. This was formerly the property of the Rev. Torfi Jonsson [Jons-son] of Baer, who inherited it from Bishop Bryniolf Sveinsson; I obtained it, however, from Thorlak, son of Bishop Thord [Thorlakr Pordarson]; it formed originally a portion of a large book, which I took apart, separating the treatises. This copy I have called "Codex B," signifying either "Baiensis," or the second., from the order of the letters of the alphabet. Concerning 'Codex B,' it is my conjecture that the Rev. John copied it first from the vellum; that Bishop Bryniolf did not like the copy [for this Codex is less exact than Codex A, as may be seen by comparing them] . . . wherefore the Rev. John made a new copy of the parchment manuscript, taking greater care to follow the original literally, whence it is probable that this Codex A was both the later and the better copy.

Both of the paper manuscripts "A" and "B" were written, it is believed, within the same year, and in each of them the paragraphs containing the reference to. Wineland are almost identical; the Icelandic name in 'W' being spelt Winland, in "B" Vinland, a clerical variation, devoid of significance. This paragraph, which is the sixth in Ari's history, is as follows:

"That country which is called Greenland, was discovered and colonized from Iceland. Eric the Red [Eirekr enn Rauthi] was the name of the man, an inhabitant of Breidafirth, who went out thither from here, and settled at that place, which has since been called Ericsfirth [Eiriksfiorthr]. He gave a name to the country, and

[p. 5]

called it Greenland, and said that it must persuade men to go thither, if the land had a good name. They found there, both east and west in the country, the dwellings of men, and fragments of boats, and stone implements, such that it may be perceived from these that that manner of people had been there who have inhabited Wineland, and whom the Greenlanders call Skrellings. And this, when he set about the colonization of the country, was XIV or XV winters before the introduction of Christianity here in Iceland, according to that which a certain man [lit. he], who himself accompanied Eric the Red thither, informed Thorkel Gellisson."

This mention of Wineland, which in itself may appear to be of little importance, acquires its greatest value from that which it leaves unsaid; for had Ari not known that his reference to Wineland and its inhabitants would be entirely intelligible to his readers, he would hardly have employed it, as he does, to inform his Greenland chronicle. This passing notice, therefore, indicates a general diffusion of the knowledge of the Wineland discoveries among Ari's contemporaries at the time when the paragraph was composed. The "libellus" [Islendingabok] was probably written about the year 1134, and we are accordingly apprised that at that time the facts concerning the Wineland discovery, upon an acquaintance with which Ari seems to rely, were notorious. It is impossible, however, to determine whether Ari presumed upon a knowledge derived from particulars, which he had himself previously published, or upon a prevalent acquaintance with the accounts of the explorers themselves. It

[p. 6]

is, at least, questionable whether Ari would have been content to presuppose such local historical knowledge if he had not already scaled it with his own authority elsewhere. Nor is the importance which he may have assigned to the Wineland discovery material to this view. He had set about writing a chronicle of his fatherland, and his passing allusion to Wineland, without a word of explanation, appears incompatible with the duty which he had assumed, unless, indeed, he had already dealt with the subject of the Wineland discovery in a previous work. Be this as it may, however, certain it is that Wineland has found further mention in two Icelandic works, which in their primitive form have been very generally accredited to Ari, namely the Landnamabok [Book of Sentiment] and the Kristni-Saga [the Narrative of the Introduction of Christianity into Iceland]. The first of these, in a passage already cited, expressly acknowledges Ari's share in the authorship. One manuscript of this work, from which the passage is taken [No. 371, 4to, in the Arna-Magnaean Collection], while it is the oldest extant manuscript containing the Landnamabok [now in an incomplete state] presents this in a later review of the original work, than that which is contained in the much more modern manuscript, AM. 107, fol. This latter manuscript, like the copy of Islendingabok, was written by the Rev. John Erlendsson for Bishop Bryniolf Sveinsson. Both of the references to Wineland in the Landnamabok occur incidentally in the course of the history, and are of the briefest. The first of these treats of the adventure of Ari Marsson [Mars-son];

[p. 7]

it is to be found in Chapter 22, of the second part of the book, and is as follows:

". . . their son was Ari. He was driven out of his course at sea to White-men's-land [Hvitramanna-land], which is called by some persons Ireland the Great ( ); it lies westward in the sea near Wineland the Good; it is said to he six "doegra" sail west of Ireland; Ari could not depart thence, and was baptized there." The first account of this was given by Rafn who sailed to Limerick ( ) [Hlimreksfari], and who remained for a long time at Limerick in Ireland. So Thorkel Geitisson states that Icelanders report, who have heard Thorfirm, Earl of the Orkneys ( ) say, that Ari had been recognized there, and was not permitted to leave [lit. could not leave], but was treated with great respect there.

The names of Ari Marsson's wife, and of his three sons are given in the same passage from which the quotation is made, and additional concurrent evidence is not wanting to serve to establish the existence of this man; any particulars, however, which might serve to enlighten this narrative, or aid in determining whence Rain and Earl Thorfirm derived their intelligence, are lacking. Without free conjectural emendation to aid in its interpretation, this description of Ari Marsson's visit to Ireland the Great is of the same doubtful historical value as a later account of another visit to an unknown land, to be considered hereafter.

The second reference to Wineland in the Landnamabok is contained in a list of the descendants of Snorri Head-Thord's son.

[p. 8]

"Their son was Thord Horse-head, father of Karlsefni, who found Wineland the Good, Snorri's father," etc. A genealogy which entirely coincides with that of the histories of the discovery of Wineland, as well as with that of the episcopal genealogy appended to the Islendingabok. The Landnamabok contained no other mention of Wineland, but a more extended notice is contained in the work already named, which, in its present form, is supposed to retain evidence of the learned Ari's pen.

The Kristni-Saga, which is supplementary, historically, to the Landnamabok, is given in its entirety in AM. 105, fol. This is a paper copy of an earlier manuscript made by the same industrious cleric, John Erlendsson, for Bishop Bryniolf. A portion of the same history has also been preserved along with the detached leaves of the Landnamabok now deposited in the Arna-Magnaean Collection, No. 371, 4to. These fragments of the two, histories originally belonged to one work, the so called Hauk's Book, a vellum manuscript of the fourteenth century, hereafter to be more fully described. The history of the Wineland discovery is contained in the eleventh chapter of the printed edition of the Kristni-Saga, in the following words:

"That summer ( ) King Olaf [Tryggvason] went from the country southward to Vindland [the land of the Wends]; then, moreover, he sent Leif Ericsson [Leifr Eiriksson] to Greenland, to proclaim the faith there. On this voyage [lit. then] Leif found Wineland the Good; he also found men on a wreck at sea, wherefore he was called Leif the Lucky."

[p. 9]

Of the same tenor as this brief paragraph of the Kristni-Saga, is a chapter in the Codex Frisianus [Frissbok], number 45, fol., of the Arna-Magnaean manuscripts. This Codex Frisianus, or, as it has been more appropriately called, the Book of Kings, is a beautifully written and well-preserved parchment manuscript of 124 leaves; it obtains its name from a former owner, Otto Friis, of Salling; it subsequently became the property of one Jens Rosenkranz, and next passed into the possession of Arni Magnusson. Friis' Book was, in all probabilities, written about the beginning of the fourteenth century; and if the conjectures as to its age are correct, it is, perhaps, the oldest extant Icelandic manuscript containing all account of the Wineland discovery. It is believed, from internal evidence, that the greater part of the Codex was written by an Icelander, in Norway, possibly for a Norwegian, and that the manuscript was never in Iceland. The early history of the Codex is not known. Certain marginal notes appear to have been inserted in the manuscript about the year 1550 by Lawman Laurents Hansson, and it is conjectured that the book was then owned in Bergen; fifty years later we find it in Denmark; for about the year 1600 a Dane, by the name of Slangerup, inserted his name upon a fly-leaf in the book, which leaf, Arni Magnusson tells us, was removed when he had the manuscript bound. This "Book of Kings," the saga of Olaf Tryggvason, in which the history of the discovery of Wineland occurs, follows closely the same saga as it was written in the two lost parchment manuscripts of the "Heimskringla," as

[p. 10]

we are enabled to determine from the copies of these lost vellums made by the Icelander, Asgeir Jonsson. It is not known whether the author of the "Heimskringla" had access; to the history of the Wineland discovery in some such extended form as that contained in Hauk's Book; indeed it has been suggested that he may only have been acquainted with the brief narrative of the Kristni-Saga; but certain it is, that his account of the discovery was not influenced by the version presented in the Flatey Book, which narrative appears in the first printed edition of the "Heimskringla," where it was interpolated by the editor, Johann Peringskiold. Similarly, any trace of the Flatey Book version of the discovery is lacking from Friis' Book, although the author of the saga of Olaf Tryggvason, therein contained, appears to have been acquainted with a somewhat more detailed account of Leif Ericssons' life than that afforded by the Kristni-Saga, if we may judge from his own language, as we find it in column 136, page 34b, of the manuscript:

 

"WINELAND THE GOOD FOUND.

"Leif, a son of Eric the Red, passed this same winter, in good repute, with King Olaf, and accepted Christianity. And that summer, when Gizur went to Iceland, King Olaf sent Leif to Greenland to proclaim Christianity there. He sailed that summer to Greenland. He found men upon a wreck at sea and succoured them. Then, likewise, he discovered Wineland the Good, and arrived in Greenland in the autumn. He took with him thither a priest and other spiritual teachers, and went to Brattahlid

[p. 11]

to make his home with his father, Eric. People afterwards called him Leif the Lucky. But his father, Eric, said that one account should balance the other, that Leif had rescued the ship's crew, and that he had brought the trickster to Greenland. This was the priest."

Almost identical with the history of the discovery contained in Friis' Book is that of the so-called longer saga of Olaf Tryggvason. This saga, in its printed form, has been compiled from several manuscripts of the Arna-Magnaean collection, the most important of which is No. 61, fol., a codex dating from about the year 1400. This account is contained in the 231st chapter of the printed version as follows:

"King Olaf then sent Leif to Greenland to proclaim Christianity there. The king sent a priest and other holy men with him, to baptize the people there, and to instruct them in the true faith. Leif sailed to Greenland that summer, and rescued at sea the men of a ship's crew, who were in great peril and were clinging to [lit. lay upon] the shattered wreckage of a ship; and on this same voyage be found Wineland the Good, and at the end of the summer arrived in Greenland, and betook himself to Brattahlid, to make his home with his father, Eric. People afterwards called him Leif the Lucky, but his father, Eric, said that the one [deed] offset the other, in that Leif had on the one hand rescued and restored the men of the ship's crew to life, while on the other he had brought the trickster to Greenland, for thus he called the priest."

In composition, doubtless, much more recent than the

[p. 12]

notices already cited, is a passage in the collectanea of Middle-age wisdom of the Arna-Magnaean Library. This manuscript contains fifty-two pages, part of which are in Icelandic and part in Latin, written between the years 1400-1450. From a slip in Arni Magnusson's hand, inserted in the collection, it appears that Arni obtained it from the Rev. Thorvald Stephensson in the year 1707. Whatever its condition may have been at that time, the parchment upon which it is written is now in a sad state of decay. In this respect page 10 of the vellum, upon the back of which the Wineland chirography is written, is Icelandic, is no exception; fortunately, however, the lacunae are so inconsiderable in this page that they may be readily supplied from that which survives, and the Wineland passage appears as follows:

"Southward from Greenland is Helluland, then comes [lit. is] Markland; thence it is not far to Wineland the Good, which some men believe extends from Africa, and, if this be so, then there is an open sea flowing in between Wineland and Markland. It is said, that Thorfinn Karlsefni hewed a "house-neat-timber" ( ) and then went to seek Wineland the Good, and came to where they believed this land to be, but they did not succeed in exploring it, or in obtaining any of its products ( ). Leif the Lucky first found Wineland, and he then found merchants in evil plight at sea, and restored them to life by God's mercy; and he introduced Christianity into Greenland, which waxed there so that an episcopal seat was established there, at the place called Gardar. England and Scotland are one island, although each of them is a kingdom.

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Ireland is a great island. Iceland is also a great island [to the north of] Ireland. These countries are all in that part of the world which is called Europe."

In a fascicle of detached vellum fragments, brought together in AM. No. 736, 4to, there are two leaves containing, besides certain astronomical material, a concise geographical compilation. In this Wineland is assigned a location identical with that in the codex from which the quotation has just been made, and the notice of Wineland is limited to this brief statement:

"From Greenland to the southward lies Helluland, then Markland; thence it is not far to Wineland, which some men believe extends from Africa. England and Scotland are one island," etc.

While the reference to Wineland omits the account of Thorfin's visit and Leif's discovery, the language in which the location of the land is given, as well as the language of the context, has so great a likeness to that of 194, 8vo), that, although it was perhaps written a few years earlier, there seems to be a strong probability that each of the scribes of these manuscripts derived his material from a common source.

Somewhat similar in character to the above notices is the brief reference written in the vellum fragment contained in AM. 764, 4to,. This fragment comprises a so called "totius orbis brevis descriptio," written probably about the year 1400. Upon the second page of this "brief description" is the passage:

"From Biarmaland uninhabited regions extend from the north, until Greenland joins them. South from

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] Greenland lies Helluland, then Markland. Thence it is not so far to Wineland. Iceland is a great island," etc.

Differing in nature from these geographical notices [but of even greater interest and historical value by reason of the corroborative evidence which it affords of certain particulars set forth in the leading narrative of the Wineland discovery] is the mention of Wineland contained in a chapter of the Eyrbyggja Saga [Saga of the People of Eyrr]. No complete vellum manuscript of this saga has been preserved. The eldest manuscript remnant of the saga consists of two leaves written about 1300; these leaves do not, however, contain that portion of the saga, with which we are concerned. Of another vellum codex containing this saga, which has entirely perished, we have certain knowledge. This was the so-called Vatnshyrna or Vatnshorn's Book, a manuscript which at one time belonged to the eminent Danish scholar, Peder Hans Resen, from whom it received the name by which it is sometimes cited, Codex Resenianus. It was bequeathed by Resen to the University Library of Copenhagen, where it was deposited after his death in 1688. It perished in the great fire of October, 1728, but fortunately paper copies, which had been made from it, survived the conflagration. The Vatnshorn Codex, it has been conjectured, was prepared for the same John Haconsson, to whom we are indebted for the great Flatey Book, and was, apparently, written about the year 1400, or, possibly, toward the close of the fourteenth century. The most complete vellum manuscript of the Eyrbyggja Saga now extant

[p. 15]

forms a part of the Ducal Library of Wolfenbuttel, purchased in the seventeenth century at a public sale in Holstein. This manuscript was probably written about the middle of the fourteenth century, and although the first third of the Eyrbyggja Saga has been lost from the codex, that portion of the history which contains the chapter referring to Wineland has been preserved, and is as follows:

"After the reconciliation between Steinthor and the people of Alpta-firth, Thorbrand's sons, Snorri and Thorleif Kimbi, went to Greenland. From him Kimbafirth (in Greenland), gets its name. Thorleif Kimbi lived in Greenland to old age. But Snorri went to Wineland the Good with Karlsefni; and when they were fighting with the Skrellings there in Wineland, Thorbrand Snorrason, a most valiant man, was killed."

The foregoing brief notices of Wineland, scattered through so many Icelandic writings, yield no very great amount of information concerning that country. They do afford, however, a clear insight into the wide diffusion of the intelligence of the discovery in the earlier saga period, and in every instance confirm the Wineland history as unfolded in the leading narrative of the discovery, now to be considered.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

 

CHAPTER II.

 

THE SAGA OF ERIC THE RED

THE clearest and most complete narrative of the discovery of Wineland, preserved in the ancient Icelandic literature, is that presented in the Saga of Eric the Red. Of this narrative two complete vellum texts have survived. The eldest of these texts is contained in the Arna-Magnaean Codex, No. 544, 4to, which is commonly known as Hauk's Book [Hauksbok]. This manuscript has derived its name from its first owner, for whom the work was doubtless written, and who himself participated in the labour of its preparation. This man, to whom the manuscript traces its origin, has, happily, left, not only in the manuscript itself, but in the history of his time, a record which enables us to determine, with exceptional accuracy, many dates in his life, and from these it is possible to assign approximate dates to that portion of the vellum which contains the narrative of the discovery. This fact possesses the greater interest since of no one of those who participated in the conservation of the elder sagas, have we data so precise as those which have been preserved to us of Hank Erlendsson, to whose care, actual and potential, this manuscript owes its existence.

We know that Jorunn, the mother of this man, was the direct descendant of a famous Icelander. His paternal ancestry is not so clearly established. It has been conjectured that his father, Erlend Olafsson, surnamed the

[p. 17]

[paragraph continues] Stout [Erlendr sterki Olafsson], was the son of a man of humble parentage, and by birth a Norwegian. This View has been discredited, however, and the fact pretty clearly established that Erlend's father, Olaf, was no other than a certain Icelander called Olaf Tot. Hauk's father, Erlend, was probably the "Ellindr bondi" of a letter addressed by certain Icelanders to the Norwegian king, Magnus Law-Amender, in the year 1275. In the year 1283 we find indubitable mention of him in Icelandic annals as "legifer," he having in that year "come out" to Iceland from Norway vested with the dignity of "lawman." It is as the incumbent of a similar office, to which he appears to have been appointed in 1294, that we first find Hank Erlendsson mentioned. It is not unlikely that Hauk had visited Norway prior to 1301; there can be no doubt that he was in that country in the latter part of that year, for he was a "lawman" in Oslo [the modern Christiania] upon the 28th of January, 1302, since upon that date he published an autographic letter, which is still in existence. Whether the rank of knighthood, which carried with it the title of "herra" (Earl), had already been conferred upon him at this time is not certain. He is first mentioned with this title, in Icelandic annals, in 1306, elsewhere in 1305, although it has been claimed that he had probably then enjoyed this distinction for some years, but upon what authority is not clear. While Hauk revisited Iceland upon more than one occasion after the year 1302, much of the remainder of his life appears to have been spent in Norway, where he died in the year 1334.

[p. 18]

On the back of page 21 of Hauk's Book Arni Magnusson has written, probably with a view to preserve a fading entry upon the same page, the words: "This book belongs to Teit Paulsson [Teitr Palsson], if he be not robbed." It is not known who this Teit Paulsson was, but it is recorded that a man of this name sailed from Iceland to Norway in the year 1344. He may have been the one-time owner of the book, and, if the manuscript was then in Norway, may have carried it back to Iceland with him. Apart from this conjecture, the fact remains that the early history of Hauk's Book is shrouded in obscurity. It is first mentioned in the beginning of the seventeenth century by John the Learned, possibly about 1600, and a few years later by Arngrim Jonsson; it was subsequently loaned to Bishop Bryniolf Sveinsson, who caused the transcripts of the Landnamabok and the Kristni Saga to be made from it, as has already been related. This part of the codex the Bishop may have returned to the owner, himself retaining the remainder, for, with the exception of the two sagas named, Arni Magnusson obtained the codex from Gualveriaboer in the south of Iceland, and subsequently the remaining leaves of the missing sagas from the Rev. Olaf Jonsson, who was the clergyman at Stad in Grunnavik, in north-western Iceland, between the years 1703 and 1707.

Hauk's Book originally contained about 200 leaves, with widely varied contents. Certain leaves of the original manuscript have been detached from the main body of the book, and are now to be found in the Arna-Magnaean Collection; a portion has been lost, but 107 leaves of the

[p. 19]

original codex are preserved. With the exception of those portions just referred to, that part of the manuscript which treats of the Wineland discovery is to be found in this last mentioned volume, from leaves 93 to 101 [back] inclusive. The saga therein contained has no title contemporary with the text, but Arni Magnusson has inserted, in the space left vacant for the title, the words: "Here begins the Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefni and Snorri Thorbrandsson," although it is not apparent whether he himself invented this title, or derived it from some now unknown source.

The Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefni was written by three different persons; the first portion is in a hand commonly ascribed to Hauk's so-called "first Icelandic secretary." On p. 99, l. 14, the ink and the hand change, and beginning with the words Eirikr svarar vel, the chirography is Hauk's own, as is readily apparent from a comparison with the autographic letter of 1302, already referred to. Hauk's own work continues throughout this and the following page, ceasing at the end of the second line on p. 100, with the words kolludu i Hopi, where he gives place to a new scribe, his so-called "second Icelandic secretary." Hauk, however, again resumes the pen on the back of p. 101, and himself concludes the saga. Two of the leaves upon which the saga is written are of an irregular shape, and there are holes in two other leaves; these defects were, however, present in the vellum from the beginning, so that they in no wise affect the integrity of the text; on the other hand the lower right-hand corner of p. 99 has become badly blackened, and is, in consequence,

[p. 20]

partially illegible, as is also the left-hand corner of p. 101; similarly pp. 100 and 101 [back] are somewhat indistinct, but, in the original, still not undecipherable. Initial letters are inserted in red and blue, and the subtitles in red ink, which has sadly faded. There are three paginations, of which the latest, in red, is the one here adopted.

The genealogy appended to the saga has been brought down to Hank's own time, and Hank therein traces his ancestry to Karlsefni's Wineland-born son. By means of this genealogical list, we are enabled to determine, approximately, the date of this transcript of the original saga, for we read in this list of Hallbera, "Abbess of Reyniness," and since we know that Hallbera was not consecrated abbess until the year 1299, it becomes at once apparent that the saga could not have been completed before that year. This conclusion is corroborated by additional evidence furnished by this ancestral list, for in this list Hauk has given himself his title "herra," (earl). As has been stated, Hauk is first accorded this title in 1305, he is last mentioned without the title in 1304; which fact not only confirms the conclusion already reached, but enables us to advance the date, prior to which the transcript of the saga could not have been concluded, to 1304. It is not so easy to determine positively when the saga was finished. As Hank's own hand brings the saga to a conclusion, it is evident that it must have been completed before, or not later than, the year 1334, the year of his death. If we accept the words of the genealogical list literally, it would appear that Hauk wrote this

[p. 21]

list not many years before his death, for it is there stated that Fru Ingigerd's daughter "was" Fru Hallbera, the Abbess. But Hallbera lived until 1330, and the strict construction of Hauk's language might point to the conclusion that the reference to Hallbera was made after her death, and therefore after 1330. Hauk was in Iceland in the years 1330 and 1331, doubtless for the last time. One of the scribes who aided him in writing the codex was probably an Icelander, as may be gleaned from his orthography, and as it is highly probable that the contents of the codex were for the most part copied from originals owned in Iceland; it may be that the transcript of this saga, as well as the book itself, was completed during this last visit. It has been claimed that a portion of Hank's book, preceding the Saga of Thorfinn, was written prior to Hank's acquirement of his title, a view founded upon the fact that his name is there cited without the addition of his title, and this view is supported by the corresponding usage of the Annals. If this be true, then, upon the above hypothesis, a period of more than twenty-five years must have elapsed between the inception of the work and the completion of the "Thorfinn's Saga." Doubtless a considerable time was consumed in the compilation and transcription of the contents of this manuscript; but it seems scarcely probable that so, long a time should have intervened between the preparation of the different portions of the work. Wherefore, if the reference to the Abbess Hallbera be accepted literally, the Conjecture that the earlier portion of the codex was written prior to 1299 would appear to be doubtful, and it

[p. 22]

may be necessary either to advance the date of this portion of the manuscript or place the date of the Saga of Thorfinn anterior to that suggested. However this may be, two facts seem to be clearly established, first, that this saga was not written before 1299, and second, that this eldest surviving detailed narrative of the discovery of Wineland was written not later than the year 1334.

In the vellum codex, known as Number 557, 4to, of the Arna-Magnaean Collection, is an account of the Wineland discovery, so strikingly similar to that of Hauk's Book that there can be no doubt that both histories were derived from the same source. The history of the discovery contained in the above codex is called the "Saga of Eric the Red." This may well have been the primitive title of the saga of Hauk's Book, which, as has been noted, obtains its modern name, "Thorfinns Saga Karlsefnis," from the entry made by Arni Magnusson, early in the eighteenth century. That both sagas were copied from the same vellum is by no means certain; if both transcripts be judged strictly by their contents it becomes at once apparent that this could not have been the fact, and such a conjecture is only tenable upon the theory that the scribes of Hauk's Book edited the saga which they copied. This, while it is very doubtful in the case of the body of the text of the Hauk's Book Saga of Thorfinn, may not even be conjectured of the Saga of Eric the Red. The latter saga was undoubtedly a literal copy from the original, for there are certain minor confusions of the text, which indicate, unmistakably, either the heedlessness of the copyist, or that the scribe was working from a

[p. 23]

somewhat illegible original whose defects he was not at pains to supply. If both sagas were copied from different early vellums, the simpler language of the Saga of Eric the Red would seem to indicate that it was a transcript of a somewhat earlier form of the saga than that from which the saga of Hauk's Book was derived. This, however, is entirely conjectural, for the codex containing the Saga of Eric the Red was not written for many years after Hauk's Book, and probably not until the following century. So much the orthography and hand of 557, 4to, indicate, and, from the application of this test, the codex bas been determined to date from the fifteenth century, and has been ascribed by very eminent authority to ca. 1400.

The Saga of Eric the Red begins with the thirteenth line of page 27 of the codex [the title appears at the top of this page], and concludes in the fifth line on the back of page 35, the hand being the same throughout. Spaces were left for initial letters, but these were not inserted, except in one case by a different and indifferent penman. With the exception of a very few words, or portions of words, upon page 30 [back] and page 31, the manuscript of the saga is clearly legible throughout. Certain slight defects in the vellum have existed from the beginning, and there is, therefore, no material hiatus in the entire text, for the sense of the few indistinct words is either clearly apparent from the context, or may be supplied from the sister text of Hauk's Book.

In his catalogue of parchment manuscripts, Arni Magnusson states that he obtained this manuscript from

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] Bishop John Vidalin and adds the conjecture, that it had either belonged to the Skaholt Church, or came thither from among Bishop Bryniolf's books. This conjecture, that the book belonged to the Church of Skaholt, has, however, been disputed, and the place of its compilation, at the same time, assigned to the north of Iceland.

The Saga of Eric the Red [and both texts are included under this title] presents a clear and graphic account of the discovery and exploration of Wineland the Good. In this narrative the discovery is ascribed to Leif, the son of Eric the Red, who hit upon the land, by chance, during a voyage from Norway to Greenland. This voyage, as has already been stated, probably took place in the year 1000.

After his return to Greenland, Leif's account of the land which he had discovered seems to have persuaded his brother, Thorstein, and possibly his father, to undertake an expedition to the strange country. This voyage, which was not destined to meet with a successful issue, may well have fallen in the year following Leif's return, and therefore, it may be conjectured, in the year 1001. About this time there had arrived in Greenland an Icelander of considerable prominence, an old friend of Eric's, named Thorbiorn Vifilsson, who had brought with him his daughter, Gudrid, or, as she is also called, Thurid. He must have arrived before Thorstein Ericsson's voyage, for we are told that it was in Thorbiorn's ship that this voyage was undertaken. It seems probable that Thorbiorn arrived at Brattahlid [Eric's home] during Leif's absence from Greenland, and if this be true it follows

[p. 25]

that Thorbiorn and Gudrid must have been converted to Christianity before its acceptance in Iceland as the legalized religion of the land; for very soon after their arrival in Greenland Gudrid alludes to the fact of her being a Christian, and, from the language of the saga, there can be no question that her father had likewise embraced the new faith. The presence of these companions in the faith may have materially aided Leif in the work of proselytism, in which he engaged upon his return to Greenland. We are told that Thorbiorn did not arrive at Brattahlid until the second year after his departure from Iceland, wherefore, if the assumption that he arrived during Leif's absence be sound, it becomes apparent that he must have left Iceland in the summer of the year 998 or 999.

Eric's son, Thorstein, wooed and married Gudrid, and the wedding was celebrated at Brattahlid in the autumn. It is recorded in the saga that Gudrid was regarded as a most desirable match. Thorstein may have promptly recognized her worth, and his marriage may have occurred in the autumn of the same year in which he returned from his unlucky voyage. It could not well have been celebrated in the previous year, for Thorstein's allusions on his death-bed to the religion of Greenland, indicate that Christianity must have been for a longer time the accepted faith of the land than it could have been at the close of the year 1000.

In the winter after his marriage, Thorstein died, and in the spring, Gudrid returned to Brattahlid. Thorfinn Karlsefni arrived at Brattahlid about this time, possibly

[p. 26]

the next autumn after Thorstein's death, and in his company came Snorri Thorbrandsson. Karlsefni was married to Gudrid shortly after the Yule-tide following his arrival. If he arrived in Greenland in the autumn of the year 1002, this wedding may, accordingly, have taken place about the beginning of the year 1003. In the summer following his marriage, Thorfirm appears to have undertaken his voyage of exploration to Wienland, that is to say in the summer of the year 1003. A longer time may well have elapsed after Gudrid's arrival before her marriage with Thorstein, and similarly it is even more probable that a longer interval elapsed between Thorstein's death and Gudrid's second marriage. The purpose of this conjectural chronology is to determine, if possible, a date prior to which Thorfinn Karlsefni's voyage to Wineland could not have been undertaken. While therefore it is altogether probable that this voyage was made after the year 1003, it does not appear to be possible, for the reasons presented, that it could have taken place before that year.

Problems suggested by the text of another version of the history of the discovery and exploration, namely, that contained in the Flatey Book, are considered elsewhere, as are also points of difference between that narrative and the history as set forth in the Saga of Eric the Red. It remains to be said, that the text of this saga does not present such difficulties as those which are suggested by a critical examination of the narrative of the Flatey Book. This version of the history of the discovery does contain, however, one statement which is not

[p. 27]

altogether intelligible and which is not susceptible of very satisfactory explanation, namely, that "there came no snow" in the land which the Wineland explorers had found. This assertion does not agree with our present knowledge of the winter climate of the eastern coast of that portion of North America situated within the latitude which was probably reached by the explorers. The observation may, perhaps, be best explained upon the theory that the original verbal statement of the explorers was, that there was no snow in Wineland, such as that to which they were accustomed in the countries with which they were more familiar. With this single exception there appears to be no statement in the Saga of Eric the Red which is not lucid, and which is not reasonably consistent with our present knowledge of the probable regions visited. The incident of the adventure with the Uniped may be passed without especial mention in this connection; it gives evidence of the prevalent superstition of the time, it is true, but it in no way reflects upon the keenness of observation or relative credibility of the explorers. It follows, therefore, that the accounts of the discovery contained in Hauk's Book and AM. 557, 4to, whether they present the eldest form of the narrative of the Wineland explorers or not, do afford the most graphic and succinct exposition of the discovery, and, supported as they are throughout by contemporaneous history, appear in every respect most worthy of credence.

[p. 28]

 

THE SAGA OF ERIC THE RED, ALSO CALLED THE SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNI AND SNORRI THORBRANDSSON.

Olaf was the name of a warrior-king, who was called Olaf the White. He was the son of King Ingiald, Helgi's son, the son of Olaf, Gudraud's son, son of Halfdan Whiteleg, king of the Uplands-men ( ). Olaf engaged in a Western freebooting expedition and captured Dublin in Ireland and the Shire of Dublin, over which he became king ( ). He married Aud the Wealthy, daughter of Ketil Flatnose, soil of Biorn Buna, a famous man of Norway. Their son was called Thorstein the Red. Olaf was killed in battle in Ireland, and Aud ( ) and Thorstein went then to the Hebrides ( ); there Thorstein married Thurid, daughter of Eyvind Easterling, sister of Helgi the Lean; they had many children. Thorstein became a warrior-king, and entered into fellowship with Earl Sigurd the Mighty, son of Eystein the Rattler. They conquered Caithness and Sutherland, Ross and Moray, and more than the half of Scotland. Over these Thorstein became king, ere he was betrayed by the Scots, and was slain there in battle. Aud was at Caithness when she heard of Thorstein's death; she thereupon caused a ship ( ) to be secretly built in the forest, and when she was ready, she sailed out to the Orkneys. There she bestowed Groa, Thorstein the Red's daughter, in marriage: she was the mother of Grelad, whom Earl Thorfinn, Skull-cleaver, married. After this Aud set out to seek Iceland, and had on board her ship twenty freemen ( ). Aud arrived in Iceland, and

[p. 29]

passed the first winter at Biarnarhofn with her brother, Biorn. Aud afterwards took possession of all the Dale country ( ) between Dogurdar river and Skraumuhlaups river. She lived at Hvamm, and held her orisons at Krossholar, where she caused crosses to be erected, for she had been baptized and was a devout believer. With her there came out [to Iceland] many distinguished men, who had been captured in the Western freebooting expedition, and were called slaves. Vifil was the name of one of these; he was a highborn man, who had been taken captive in the Western sea, and was called a slave before Aud freed him; now when Aud gave homesteads to the members of her crew, Vifil asked wherefore she gave him no homestead, as to the other men. Aud replied, that this should make no difference to him, saying that he would be regarded as a distinguished man wherever he was. She gave him Vifilsdal ( ) and there he dwelt. He married a woman whose name was . . . their sons were Thorbiorn and Thorgeir. They were men of promise, and grew up with their father.

 

ERIC THE RED FINDS GREENLAND.

There was a man named Thorvald; he was a son of Asvald, Ulf's son, Eyxna-Thori's son. His son's name was Eric. He and his father went from Jaederen ( ) to Iceland, on account of manslaughter, and settled on Hornstrandir, and dwelt at Drangar ( ). There Thorvald died, and Eric then married Thorhild, a daughter of Jorund, Atli's son, and Thorbiorg the Ship-chested who had been married before to Thorbiorn of the Haukadal

[p. 30]

family. Eric then removed from the North, and cleared land in Haukadal, and dwelt at Ericsstadir by Vatnshorn. Then Eric's thralls caused a land-slide on Valthiof's farm, Valthiofsstadir. Eyiolf the Foul, Valthiof's kinsman, slew the thralls near Skeidsbrekkur above Vatnshorn. For this Eric killed Eyiolf the Foul, and he also killed Duelling-Hrafn, at Leikskalar. Geirstein and Odd of Jorva, Eyiolf's kinsmen, conducted the prosecution for the slaying of their kinsmen, and Eric was, in consequence, banished from Haukadal. He then took possession of Brokey and Eyxney, and dwelt at Tradir on Sudrey, the first winter ( ). It was at this time that he loaned Thorgest his outer dais-boards ( ); Eric afterwards went to Eyxney, and dwelt at Ericsstad. He then demanded his outer dais-boards, but did not obtain them. Eric then carried the outer dais-boards away from Breidabolstad, and Thorgest gave chase. They came to blows a short distance from the farm of Drangar ( ). There two of Thorgest's sons were killed and certain other men besides. After this each of them retained a considerable body of men with him at his home. Styr gave Eric his support, as did also Eyiolf of Sviney, Thorbiorn, Vifil's son, and the sons of Thorbrand of Alptafirth; while Thorgest was backed by the sons of Thord the Yeller, and Thorgeir of Hitardal, Aslak of Langadal and his son, Illugi. Eric and his people were condemned to outlawry at Thorsness-thing ( ). He equipped his ship for a voyage, in Ericsvag; while Eyiolf concealed him in Dimunarvag ( ), when Thorgest and his people were searching for him among the islands.

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] He said to them, that it was his intention to go in search of that land which Gunnbiorn ( ), son of Ulf the Crow, saw when he was driven out of his course, westward across the main, and discovered Gurmbiornsskerries. He told them that he would return again to his friends, if he should succeed in finding that country. Thorbiorn, and Eyiolf, and Styr accompanied Eric out beyond the islands, and they parted with the greatest friendliness; Eric said to them that he would render them similar aid, so far as it might lie within his power, if they should ever stand in need of his help. Eric sailed out to sea from Snaefells-iokul, and arrived at that ice-mountain ( ) which is called Blacksark. Thence he sailed to the southward, that he might ascertain whether there was habitable country in that direction. He passed the first winter at Ericsey, near the middle of the Western-settlement. In the following spring he proceeded to Ericsfirth, and selected a site there for his homestead. That summer he explored the western uninhabited region, remaining there for a long time, and assigning many local names there. The second winter he spent at Ericsholms beyond Hvarfsgnipa. But the third summer he sailed northward to Snaefell, and into Hrafnsfirth. He believed then that he had reached the head of Ericsfirth; he turned back then, and remained the third winter at Ericsey at the mouth of Ericsfirth ( ). The following summer he sailed to Iceland, and landed in Breidafirth. He remained that winter with Ingolf ( ) at Holmlatr. In the spring he and Thorgest fought together, and Eric was defeated; after this a reconciliation

[p. 32]

was effected between them. That summer Eric set out to colonize the land which he had discovered, and which he called Greenland, because, he said, men would be the more readily persuaded thither if the land had a good name.

 

CONCERNING THORBIORN.

Thorgeir, Vifil's son, married, and took to wife Arnora, daughter of Einar of Laugarbrekka, Sigmund's son, son of Ketil Thistil, who settled Thistilsfirth. Einar had another daughter named Hallveig; she was married to Thorbiorn, Vifil's son ( ), who got with her Laugarbrekka-land on Hellisvellir. Thorbiorn moved thither, and became a very distinguished man. He was an excellent husbandman, and had a great estate. Gudrid was the name of Thorbiorn's daughter. She was the most beautiful of her sex, and in every respect a very superior woman. There dwelt at Arnarstapi a man named Orm, whose wife's name was Halldis. Orm was a good husbandman, and a great friend of Thorbiorn, and Gudrid lived with him for a long time as a foster-daughter. There was a man named Thorgeir, who lived at Thorgeirsfell ( ); he was very wealthy and had been manumitted; he had a son named Einar, who was a handsome, well-bred man, and very showy in his dress. Einar was engaged in trading-voyages from one country to the other, and had prospered in this. He always spent his winter alternately either in Iceland or in Norway.

Now it is to be told that one autumn, when Einar was in Iceland, he went with his wares out along Snaefellsness,

[p. 33]

with the intention of selling them. He came to Arnarstapi, and Orm invited him to remain with him, and Einar accepted this invitation, for there was a strong friendship [between Orm and himself]. Einar's wares were carried into a store-house, where he unpacked them, and displayed them to Orm and the men of his household, and asked Orm to take such of them as he liked. Orm accepted this offer, and said that Einar was a good merchant, and was greatly favoured by fortune. Now, while they were busied about the wares, a woman passed before the door of the store-house. Einar enquired of Orm: "Who was that handsome woman who passed before the door? I have never seen her here before." Orm replies: "That is Gudrid, my foster-child, the daughter of Thorbiorn of Laugarbrekka." "She must be a good match," said Einar; "has she had any suitors?" Orm replies: "In good sooth she has been courted, friend, nor is she easily to be won, for it is believed that both she and her father will be very particular in their choice of a husband." "Be that as it may," quoth Einar, "she is the woman to whom I mean to pay my addresses, and I would have thee present this matter to her father in my behalf, and use every exertion to bring it to a favourable issue, and I shall reward thee to the full of my friendship, if I am successful. It may be that Thorbiorn will regard the connection as being to our mutual advantage, for [while] he is a most honourable man and has a goodly home, his personal effects, I am told, are somewhat on the wane; but neither I nor my father are lacking in lands or chattels, and Thorbiorn would be greatly aided

[p. 34]

thereby, if this match should be brought about." "Surely I believe myself to be thy friend," replies Orm, "and yet I am by no means disposed to act in this matter, for Thorbiorn hath a very haughty spirit, and is moreover a most ambitious man." Einar replied that he wished for nought else than that his suit should be broached; Orm replied that he should have his will. Einar fared again to the South until he reached his home. Sometime after this, Thorbiorn had an autumn feast, as was his custom, for he was a man of high position. Hither came Orm of Arnarstapi, and many other of Thorbiorn's friends. Orm came to speech with Thorbiorn, and said that Einar of Thorgeirsfell had visited him not long before, and that he was become a very promising man. Orm now makes known the proposal of marriage in Einar's behalf, and added that for some persons and for some reasons it might be regarded as a very appropriate match: "thou mayest greatly strengthen thyself thereby, master, by reason of the property." Thorbiorn answers: "Little did I expect to hear such words from thee, that I should marry my daughter to the son of a thrall ( ); and that, because it seems to thee that my means are diminishing, wherefore she shall not remain longer with thee since thou deemest so mean a match as this suitable for her." Orm afterward returned to his home, and all of the invited guests to their respective households, while Gudrid remained behind with her father, and tarried at home that winter. But in the spring Thorbiorn gave an entertainment to his friends, to which many came, and it was a noble feast, and at the banquet Thorbiorn called for silence,

[p. 35]

and spoke: "Here have I passed a goodly lifetime, and have experienced the good-will of men toward me, and their affection; and, methinks, our relations together have been pleasant; but now I begin to find myself in straitened circumstances, although my estate has hitherto been accounted a respectable one. Now will I rather abandon my farming than lose my honour, and rather leave the country than bring disgrace upon my family; wherefore I have now concluded to put that promise to the test, which my friend Eric the Red made, when we parted company in Breidafirth. It is my present design to go to Greenland this summer, if matters fare as I wish." The folk were greatly astonished at this plan of Thorbiorn's, for he was blessed with many friends, but they were convinced that he was so firmly fixed in his purpose that it would not avail to endeavour to dissuade him from it. Thorbiorn bestowed gifts upon his guests, after which the feast came to an end, and the folk returned to their homes. Thorbiorn sells his lands and buys a ship, which was laid up at the mouth of Hraunhofn ( ). Thirty persons joined him in the voyage; among these were Orm of Arnarstapi, and his wife, and other of Thorbiorn's friends, who would not part from him. Then they put to sea. When they sailed the weather was favourable, but after they came out upon the high seas the fair wind failed, and there came great gales, and they lost their way, and had a very tedious voyage that summer. Then illness appeared among their people, and Orm and his wife Halldis died, and the half of their company. The sea began to run high, and

[p. 36]

they had a very wearisome and wretched voyage in many ways, but arrived, nevertheless, at Heriolfsness in Greenland, on the very eve of winter. At Heriolfsness lived a man named Thorkel. He was a man of ability and an excellent husbandman. He received Thorbiorn and all of his ship's company, and entertained them well during the winter. At that time there was a season of great dearth in Greenland; those who had been at the fisheries had had poor hauls, and some had not returned. There was a certain woman there in the settlement, whose name was Thorbiorg. She was a prophetess, and was called Little Sibyl ( ). She had had nine sisters, all of whom were prophetesses, but she was the only one left alive. It was Thorbiorg's custom in the winters to go to entertainments, and she was especially sought after at the homes of those who were curious to know their fate, or what manner of season might be in store for them; and inasmuch as Thorkel was the chief yeoman in the neighbourhood it was thought to devolve upon him to find out when the evil time, which was upon them, would cease. Thorkel invited the prophetess to his home, and careful preparations were made for her reception, according to the custom which prevailed, when women of her kind were to be entertained. A high seat was prepared for her, in which a cushion filled with poultry feathers was placed. When she came in the evening, with the man who had been sent to meet her, she was clad in a dark-blue cloak, fastened with a strap, and set with stones quite down to the hem. She wore glass beads around her neck, and upon her head a black lamb-skin hood,

[p. 37]

lined with white cat-skin. In her hands she carried a staff, upon which there was a knob, which was ornamented with brass, and set with stones up about the knob. Circling her waist she wore a girdle of touch-wood, and attached to it a great skin pouch, in which she kept the charms which she used when she was practising her sorcery. She wore upon her feet shaggy calf-skin shoes, with long, tough latchets, upon the ends of which there were large brass buttons. She had cat-skin gloves upon her hands, which were white inside and lined with fur. When she entered, all of the folk felt it to be their duty to offer her becoming greetings. She received the salutations of each individual according as he pleased her. Yeoman Thorkel took the sibyl by the hand, and led her to the seat which had been made ready for her. Thorkel bade her run her eyes over man and beast and home. She had little to say concerning all these. The tables were brought forth in the evening, and it remains to be told what manner of food was prepared for the prophetess. A porridge of goat's beestings was made for her, and for meat there were dressed the hearts of every kind of beast, which could be obtained there. She had a brass spoon, and a knife with a handle of walrus tusk, with a double hasp of brass around the haft, and from this the point was broken. And when the tables were removed Yeoman Thorkel approached Thorbiorg, and asked how she was pleased with the home, and the character of the folk, and how speedily she would he likely to become aware of that concerning which he had questioned her, and which the people were anxious to know. She replied

[p. 38]

that she could not give an opinion in this matter before the morrow, after that she had slept there through the night. And on the morrow, when the day was far spent, such preparations were made as were necessary to enable her to accomplish her soothsaying. She bade them bring her those women, who knew the incantation, which she required to work her spells, and which she called Warlocks; but such women were not to be found. Thereupon a search was made throughout the house, to see whether any one knew this [incantation]. Then said Gudrid: "Although I am neither skilled in the black art nor a sibyl, yet my foster-mother, Halldis, taught me in Iceland that spell-song, which she called Warlocks." Thorbiorg answered: "Then are thou wise in season!" Gudrid replied: "This is an incantation and ceremony of such a kind, that I do not mean to lend it any aid, for that I am a Christian woman." Thorbiorg answered: "It might so be that thou couldst give thy help to the company here, and still be no worse woman than before; however I leave it with Thorkel to provide for my needs." Thorkel now so urged Gudrid, that she said she must needs comply with his wishes. The women then made a ring round about, while Thorbiorg sat up on the spell-dais. Gudrid then sang the song, so sweet and well that no one remembered ever before to have heard the melody sung with so fair a voice as this. The sorceress thanked her for the song, and said: "She has indeed lured many spirits hither, who think it pleasant to hear this song, those who were wont to forsake us hitherto and refuse to submit themselves to us. Many things are now revealed to me which

[p. 39]

hitherto have been hidden, both, from me and from others. And I am able to announce that this period of famine will not endure longer, but the season will mend as spring approaches. The visitation of disease, which has been so long upon you, will disappear sooner than expected. And thee, Gudrid, I shall reward out of hand for the assistance which thou hast vouchsafed us, since the fate in store for thee is now all made manifest to me. Thou shalt make a most worthy match here in Greenland, but it shall not be of long duration for thee, for thy future path leads out to Iceland, and a lineage both great and goodly shall spring from thee, and above thy line brighter rays of light shall shine than I have power clearly to unfold. And now fare well and health to thee, my daughter!" After this the folk advanced to the sibyl, and each besought information concerning that about which he was most serious. She was very ready in her responses, and little of that which she foretold failed of fulfillment. After this they came for her from a neighbouring farmstead, and she thereupon set out thither. Thorbiorn was then sent for, since he had not been willing to remain at home while such heathen rites were practising. The weather improved speedily when the spring opened, even as Thorbiorg had prophesied. Thorbiorn equipped his ship and sailed away, until he arrived at Brattahlid. Eric received him with open arms, and said that it was well that he had come thither. Thorbiorn and his household remained with him during the winter, while quarters were provided for the crew among the farmers. And the following spring Eric gave Thorbiorn

[p. 40]

land on Stokkaness, where a goodly farmstead was founded, and there he lived thenceforward.

 

CONCERNING LIEF THE LUCKY AND THE INTRODUCTION OP CHRISTIANITY INTO GREENLAND.

Eric was married to a woman named Thorhild, and had two sons; one of these was named Thorstein, and the other Leif. They were both promising men. Thorstein lived at home with his father, and there was not at that time a man in Greenland who was accounted of so great promise as he. Leif had sailed ( ) to Norway, where he was at the court of King Olaf Tryggvason. When Leif sailed from Greenland, in the summer, they were driven out of their course to the Hebrides. It was late before they got fair winds thence, and they remained there far into the summer. Leif became enamored of a certain woman, whose name was Thorgunna. She was a woman of fine family, and Leif observed that she was possessed of rare intelligence ( ): When Leif was preparing for his departure Thorgunna ( ) asked to be permitted to accompany him. Leif enquired whether she had in this the approval of her kinsmen. She replied that she did not care for it. Leif responded that he did not deem it the part of wisdom to abduct so high-born a woman in a strange country, "and we so few in number." "It is by no means certain that thou shalt find this to be the better decision," said Thorgunna. "I shall put it to the proof, notwithstanding," said Leif. "Then I tell thee," said Thorgunna, "that I am no longer a lone woman, for I am pregnant, and upon thee I charge it. I

[p. 41]

foresee that I shall give birth to a male child. And though thou give this no heed, yet will I rear the boy, and send him to thee in Greenland, when he shall be fit to take his place with other men. And I foresee that thou wilt get as much profit of this son as is thy due from this our parting; moreover, I mean to come to Greenland myself before the end comes." Leif gave her a gold finger-ring, a Greenland wadmal mantle, and a belt of walrus-tusk. This boy came to Greenland, and was called Thorgils. Leif acknowledged his paternity, and some men will have it that this Thorgils came to Iceland in the summer before the Froda-wonder ( ). However, this Thorgils was afterwards in Greenland, and there seemed to be something not altogether natural about him before the end came. Leif and his companions sailed away from the Hebrides, and arrived in Norway in the autumn. Leif went to the court of King Olaf Tryggvason. He was well received by the king, who felt that he could see that Leif was a man of great accomplishments. Upon one occasion the king came to speech with Leif, and asked him, "Is it thy purpose to sail to Greenland in the summer?" "It is my purpose," said Leif, "if it be your will." "I believe it will be well," answers the king, "and thither thou shalt go upon my errand, to, proclaim Christianity there." Leif replied that the king should decide, but gave it as his belief that it would be difficult to carry this mission to a successful issue in Greenland. The king replied that he knew of no man who would be better fitted for this undertaking, "and in thy hands the cause will surely prosper." "This can only be," said Leif, "if I enjoy the

[p. 42]

grace of your protection." Leif put to sea when his ship was ready for the voyage. For a long time he was tossed about upon the ocean, and came upon lands of which he had previously had no knowledge. There were self-sown wheat fields and vines growing there. There were also those trees there which are called "mausur" ( ), and of all these they took specimens. Some of the timbers were so large that they were used in building. Leif found men upon a wreck, and took them home with him, and procured quarters for them all during the winter. In this wise be showed his nobleness and goodness, since he introduced Christianity into the country, and saved the men from the wreck; and be was called Leif the Lucky ever after. Leif landed in Ericsfirth, and then went home to Brattahlid; he was well received by every one. He soon proclaimed Christianity throughout the land, and the Catholic faith, and announced King Olaf Tryggvason's messages to the people, telling them how much excellence and how great glory accompanied this faith. Eric was slow in forming the determination to forsake his old belief, but Thiodhild ( ) embraced the faith promptly, and caused a church to be built at some distance from the house. This building was called Thiodhild's Church, and there she and those persons who had accepted Christianity, and they were many, were wont to offer their prayers. Thiodhild would not have intercourse with Eric after that she had received the faith, whereat he was sorely vexed.

At this time there began to be much talk about a voyage of exploration to that country which Leif had discovered.

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] The leader of this expedition was Thorstein Ericsson, who was a good man and an intelligent, and blessed with many friends. Eric was likewise invited to join them, for the men believed that his luck and foresight would be of great furtherance. He was slow in deciding, but did not say nay, when his friends besought him to go. They thereupon equipped that ship in which Thorbiorn had come out, and twenty men were selected for the expedition. They took little cargo with them, nought else save their weapons and provisions. On that morning when Eric set out from his home he took with him a little chest containing gold and silver; he hid this treasure, and then went his way. He had proceeded but a short distance, however, when he fell from his horse and broke his ribs and dislocated his shoulder, whereat he cried, "Ai, ai!" By reason of this accident he sent his wife word that she should procure the treasure which he had concealed, for to the hiding of the treasure he attributed his misfortune ( ). Thereafter they sailed cheerily out of Ericsfirth in high spirits over their plan. They were long tossed about upon the ocean, and could not lay the course they wished. They came in sight of Iceland, and likewise saw birds from the Irish coast. Their ship was, in sooth, driven hither and thither over the sea. In the autumn they turned back, worn out by toil, and exposure to the elements, and exhausted by their labours, and arrived at Ericsfirth at the very beginning of winter. Then said Eric, "More cheerful were we in the summer, when we put out of the firth, but we still live, and it might have been much worse." Thorstein

[p. 44]

answers, "It will be a princely deed to endeavour to look well after the wants of all these men who are now in need, and to make provision for them during the winter." Eric answers, "It is ever true, as it is said, that 'it is never clear ere the answer comes,' and so it must be here. We will act now upon thy counsel in this manner." All of the men, who were not otherwise provided for, accompanied the father and son. They landed thereupon, and went home to Brattahlid, where they remained throughout the winter.

 

THORSTEIN ERICSSON WEDS GUDRID; APPARITIONS.

Now it is to be told that Thorstein Ericsson sought Gudrid, Thorbiorn's daughter, in wedlock. His suit was favourably received both by herself and by her father, and it was decided that Thorstein should marry Gudrid, and the wedding was held at Brattahlid in the autumn. The entertainment sped well, and was very numerously attended. Thorstein had a home in the Western-settlement at a certain farmstead, which is called Lysufirth. A half interest in this property belonged to a man named Thorstein, whose wife's name was Sigrid. Thorstein went to Lysufirth, in the autumn, to his namesake, and Gudrid bore him company. They were well received, and remained there during the winter. It came to pass that sickness appeared in their home early in the winter. Gard was the name of the overseer there; he had few friends; he took sick first and died. It was not long before one after another took sick and died. Then Thorstein, Eric's son, fell sick, and Sigrid, the wife of Thorstein, his name-sake;

[p. 45]

and one evening Sigrid wished to go to the house, which stood over against the outer-door, and Gudrid accompanied her; they were facing the outer-door when Sigrid uttered a loud cry. "We have acted thoughtlessly," exclaimed Gudrid, "yet thou needest not cry, though the cold strikes thee; let us go in again as speedily as possible." Sigrid answered, "This may not be in this present plight. All of the dead folk are drawn up here before the door now; among them I see thy husband, Thorstein, and I can see myself there, and it is distressful to look upon." But directly this had passed she exclaimed, "Let us go now, Gudrid; I no longer see the band!" The overseer had vanished from her sight, whereas it had seemed to her before that he stood with a whip in his hand and made as if he would scourge the flock. So they went in, and ere the morning came she was dead, and a coffin was made ready for the corpse; and that same day the men planned to row out to fish, and Thorstein accompanied them to the landing-place, and in the twilight he went down to see their catch. Thorstein, Eric's son, then sent word to his namesake that he should come to him, saying that all was not as it should be there, for the housewife was endeavouring to rise to her feet, and wished to get in under the clothes beside him, and when he entered the room she was come up on the edge of the bed. He thereupon seized her hands and held a pole-axe ( ) before her breast. Thorstein, Eric's son, died before night-fall. Thorstein, the master of the house, bade Gudrid lie down and sleep, saying that he would keep watch over the bodies during the night; thus she did, and

[p. 46]

early in the night Thorstein, Eric's son, sat up and spoke, saying that he desired Gudrid to be called thither, for that it was his wish to speak with her: "It is God's will that this hour be given me for my own and for the betterment of my condition." Thornstein, the master, went in search of Gudrid, and waked her, and bade her cross herself, and pray God to help her; "Thorstein, Eric's son, has said to me that he wishes to see thee; thou must take counsel with thyself now, what thou wilt do, for I have no advice to give thee." She replied, "It may be that this is intended to be one of those incidents which shall afterward be held in remembrance, this strange event, and it is my trust that God will keep watch over me; wherefore, under God's mercy, I shall venture to go to him, and learn what it is that he would say, for I may not escape this if it be designed to bring me harm. I will do this, lest he go further, for it is my belief that the matter is a grave one." So Gudrid went and drew near to Thorstein, and he seemed to her to be weeping. He spoke a few words in her ear, in a low tone, so that she alone could hear them; but this he said so that all could hear, that those persons would be blessed who kept well the faith, and that it carried with it all help and consolation, and yet many there were, said he, who kept it but ill. "This is no proper usage, which has obtained here in Greenland since Christianity was introduced here, to inter men in unconsecrated earth, with nought but a brief funeral service. It is my wish that I be conveyed to the church, together with the others who have died here; Gard, however, I would have, you burn upon a pyre, as speedily as possible,

[p. 47]

since he has been the cause of all of the apparitions which have been seen here during the winter." He spoke to her also of her own destiny, and said that she had a notable future in store for her, but he bade her beware of marrying any Greenlander; he directed her also to give their property to the church and to the poor, and then sank down again a second time. It had been the custom in Greenland, after Christianity was introduced there, to bury persons on the farmsteads where they died, in unconsecrated earth; a pole was erected in the ground, touching the breast of the dead, and subsequently, when the priests came thither, the pole was withdrawn and holy water poured in [the orifice], and the funeral service held there, although it might be long thereafter. The bodies of the dead were conveyed to the church at Ericsfirth, and the funeral services held there by the clergy. Thorbiorn died soon after this, and all of his property then passed into Gudrid's possession. Eric took her to his home and carefully looked after her affairs.

 

CONCERNING THORD OF HOFDI.

There was a man named Thord, who lived at Hofdi on Hofdi-strands. He married Fridgerd, daughter of Thori the Loiterer and Fridgerd, daughter of Kiarval the King of the Irish. Thord was a son of Biorn Chestbutter, son of Thorvald Spine, Asleik's son, the son of Biorn Iron-side, the son of Ragnar Shaggy-breeks. They had a son named Snorri. He married Thorhild Ptarmigan, daughter of Thord the Yeller. Their son was Thord Horse head. Thorfinn Karlsefni [*1] was the name of

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] Thord's son ( ). Thorfinn's mother's name was Thorunn. Thorfinn was engaged in trading voyages, and was reputed to be a successful merchant. One summer Karlsefni equipped his ship, with the intention of sailing to Greenland. Snorri, Thorbrand's son, of Alptafirth ( ) accompanied him, and there were forty men on board the ship with them. There was a man named Biarni, Grimolf's son, a man from Briedafirth, and another named Thorhall, Gamli's son ( ), an East-firth man. They equipped their ship, the same summer as Karlsefni, with the intention of making a voyage to Greenland; they had also forty men in their ship. When they were ready to sail, the two ships put to sea together. It has not been recorded how long a voyage they had; but it is to be told that both of the ships arrived at Ericsfirth in the autumn. Eric and other of the inhabitants of the country rode to the ships, and a goodly trade was soon established between them. Gudrid was requested by the skippers to take such of their wares as she wished, while Eric, on his part, showed great munificence in return, in that he extended an invitation to both crews to accompany him home for winter quarters at Brattahlid. The merchants accepted this invitation, and went with Eric. Their wares were then conveyed to Brattahlid; nor was there lack there of good and commodious storehouses, in which to keep them; nor was there wanting much of that which they needed, and the merchants were well pleased with their entertainment at Eric's home during that winter. Now as it drew toward Yule Eric became very taciturn, and less cheerful than had

[p. 49]

been his wont. On one occasion Karlsefni entered into conversation with Eric, and said: "Hast thou aught weighing upon thee, Eric? The folk have remarked, that thou are somewhat more silent than thou hast been hitherto. Thou hast entertained us with great liberality, and it behooves us to make such return as may lie within our power. Do thou now but make known the cause of thy melancholy." Eric answers: "Ye accept hospitality gracefully, and in manly wise, and I am not pleased that ye should be the sufferers by reason of our intercourse; rather am I troubled at the thought, that it should he given out elsewhere, that ye have never passed a worse Yule than this, now drawing nigh, when Eric the Red was your host at Brattahlid in Greenland." "There shall be no cause for that," replied Karlsefni, "we have malt, and meal, and corn in our ships, and you are welcome to take of these whatsoever you wish, and to provide as liberal an entertainment as seems fitting to you." Eric accepted this offer, and preparations were made for the Yule feast ( ), and it was so sumptuous, that it seemed to the people they had scarcely ever seen so grand an entertainment before. And after Yule Karlsefni broached the subject of a marriage with Gudrid to Eric, for he assumed that with him rested the right to bestow her hand in marriage. Eric answered favourably, and said that she would accomplish the fate in store for her, adding that he had heard only good reports of him. And not to prolong this the result was that Thorfinn was betrothed to Thurid, and the banquet was augmented, and their wedding was celebrated; and this befell at Brattahlid during the winter.

[p. 50]

 

BEGINNING OF THE WINELAND VOYAGES.

About this time there began to be much talk at Brattahlid, to the effect that Wineland the Good should be explored, for, it was said, that country must be possessed of many goodly qualities. And so it came to pass, that Karlsefni and Snorri fitted out their ship, for the purpose of going in search of that country in the spring. Biarni and Thorhall joined the expedition with their ship, and the men who had borne them company. There was a man named Thorvard; he was wedded to Freydis ( ) a natural daughter of Eric the Red. He also accompanied them, together with Thorvald, Eric's son, and Thorhall, who was called the Huntsman. He had been for a long time with Eric as his hunter and fisherman during the summer, and as his steward during the winter. Thorhall was stout and swarthy, and of giant stature; he was a man of few words, though given to abusive language when he did speak, and he ever incited Eric to evil. He was a poor Christian; he had a wide knowledge of the unsettled regions. He was on the same ship with Thorvard and Thorvald. They had that ship which Thorbiorn had brought out. They had in all one hundred and sixty men, when they sailed to the Western settlement ( ), and thence to Bear Island. Thence they bore away to the southward two "doegr" ( ). Then they saw land, and launched a boat, and explored the land, and found there large flat stones [hellur], and many of these were twelve ells wide; there were many Arctic foxes there. They gave a name to the country, and

[p. 51]

called it Helluland [the land of flat stones]. Then they sailed with northerly winds two "doegr," and land then lay before them, and upon it was a great wood and many wild beasts; an island lay off the land to the southeast, and there they found a bear, and they called this Biarney [Bear Island], while the land where the wood was they called Markland [Forest-land]. Thence they sailed southward along the land for a long time, and came to a cape; the land lay upon the starboard; there were long strands and sandy banks there. They rowed to the land and found upon the cape there the keel of a ship ( ) and they called it there Kialarnes [Keelness]; they also called the strands Furdustrandir [Wonder-strands], because they were so long to sail by. Then the country became indented with bays, and they steered their ships into a bay. It was when Leif was with King Olaf Tryggvason, and he bade him proclaim, Christianity to Greenland, that the king gave him two Gaels ( ); the man's name was Haki, and the woman's Haekia. The king advised Leif to have recourse to these people, if he should stand in need of fleetness, for they were swifter than deer. Eric and Leif had tendered Karlsefni the services of this couple. Now when they had sailed past Wonder-strands they put the Gaels ashore, and directed them to run to the southward, and investigate the nature of the country, and return again before the end of the third half-day. They were each clad in a garment which they called "kiafal," which was so fashioned that it had a hood at the top, was open at the sides, was sleeveless, and was fastened between the legs with buttons and loops,

[p. 52]

while elsewhere they were naked. Karlsefni and his companions cast anchor, and lay there during their absence; and when they came again, one of them carried a bunch of grapes and the other an ear of new-sown wheat. They went on board the ship, whereupon Karlsefni and his followers held on their way, until they came to where the coast was indented with bays. They stood into a bay with their ships. There was an island out at the mouth of the bay, about which there were strong currents, wherefore they called it Straumey [Stream Isle]. There were so many birds there that it was scarcely possible to step between the eggs. They sailed through the firth, and called it Straumfiord [Streamfirth], and carried their cargoes ashore from the ships, and established themselves there. They had brought with them all kinds of live-stock. It was a fine country there. There were mountains thereabouts. They occupied themselves exclusively with the exploration of the country. They remained there during the winter, and they had taken no thought for this during the summer. The fishing began to fail, and they began to fall short of food. Then Thorhall the Huntsman disappeared. They had already prayed to God for food, but it did not come as promptly as their necessities seemed to demand. They searched for Thorhall for three half-days, and found him on a projecting crag. He was lying there and looking up at the sky, with mouth and nostrils agape, and mumbling something. They asked him why he had gone thither; he replied that this did not concern anyone. They asked him then to go home with

[p. 53]

them, and he did so. Soon after this a whale appeared there, and they captured it, and flensed it, and no one could tell what manner of whale it was; and when the cooks had prepared it they ate of it, and were all made ill by it. Then Thorhall, approaching them, said: "Did not the Red-beard ( ) prove more helpful than your Christ? This is my reward for the verses which I composed to Thor, the Trustworthy; seldom has he failed me." When the people heard this they cast the whale down into the sea, and made their appeals to God. The weather then improved, and they could now row out to fish, and thenceforward they had no lack of provisions, for they could hunt game on the land, gather eggs on the island, and catch fish from the sea.

 

CONCERNING KARLSEFNI AND THORHALL

It is said that Thorhall wished to sail to the northward beyond Wonder-strands, in search of Wineland, while Karlsefni desired to proceed to the southward, off the coast. Thorhall prepared for his voyage out below the island, having only nine men in his party, for all the remainder of the company went with Karlsefni. And one day when Thorhall was carrying water aboard his ship, and was drinking, he recited this ditty:

	 
		When I came, these brave men told me,
		   Here the best of drink I'd get,
		 Now with water-pail behold me,--
		   Wine and I are strangers yet.
		 Stooping at the spring, I've tested
		   All the wine this land affords;
		 Of its vaunted charms divested,
		   Poor indeed are its rewards.
		
		 
		
		 [p. 54]

And when they were ready, they hoisted sail; whereupon Thorhall recited this ditty:

	 
		Comrades, let us now be faring
		   Homeward to our own again!
		 Let us try the sea-steed's daring,
		   Give the chafing courser rein.
		 Those who will may bide in quiet,
		   Let them praise their chosen land,
		 Feasting on a whale-steak diet,
		   In their home by Wonder-strand. [*1]
		
		 Then they sailed away to the northward past Wonder-strands and Keelness, intending to cruise to the westward around the cape. They encountered westerly gales, were driven ashore in Ireland, where they were grievously maltreated and thrown into slavery. There Thorhall lost his life, according to that which traders have related.

It is now to be told of Karlsefni, that he cruised southward off the coast, with Snorri and Biarni, and their people. They sailed for a long time, and until they came at last to a river which flowed down from the land into a lake, and so into the sea. There were great bars at the mouth of the river, so that it could only be entered at the height of the flood-tide. Karlsefni and his men sailed into the mouth of the river, and called it there Hop [a small land-locked bay]. They found self-sown wheat-fields on the land there; wherever there were hollows, and wherever there was hilly ground, there were vines ( ). Every brook there was full of fish. They dug

[p. 55]

pits on the shore where the tide rose highest, and when the tide fell there were halibut ( ) in the pits. There were great numbers of wild animals of all kinds in the woods. They remained there half a month, and enjoyed themselves, and kept no watch. They had their livestock with them. Now one morning early when they looked about them they saw a great number of skin-canoes, and staves ( ) were brandished from the boats, with a noise like flails, and they were revolved in the same direction in which the sun moves. Then said Karlsefni: "What may this betoken?" Snorri, Thorbrand's son, answered him: "It may be that this is a signal of peace, wherefore let us take a white shield ( ) and display it." And thus they did. Thereupon the strangers rowed toward them, and went upon the land, marvelling at those whom they saw before them. They were swarthy men and ill-looking, and the hair of their heads was ugly. They had great eyes, and were broad of cheek ( ). They tarried there for a time looking curiously at the people they saw before them, and then rowed away, and to the southward around the point.

Karlsefni and his followers had built their huts above the lake, some of their dwellings being near the lake, and others farther away. Now they remained there that winter. No snow came there, and all of their live-stock lived by grazing ( ). And when spring opened they discovered, early one morning, a great number of skin-canoes rowing from the south past the cape, so numerous that it looked as if coals had been scattered broadcast out before the bay; and on every boat staves were waved.

[p. 56]

Thereupon Karlsefni and his people displayed their shields and when they came together they began to barter with each other. Especially did the strangers wish to buy red cloth, for which they offered in exchange peltries and quite grey skins. They also desired to buy swords and spears, but Karlsefni and Snorri forbade this. In exchange for perfect unsullied skins, the Skrellings would take red stuff a span in length, which they would bind around their heads. So their trade went on for a time, until Karlsefni and his people began to grow short of cloth, when they divided it into such narrow pieces that it was not more than a finger's breadth wide, but the Skrellings still continued to give just as much for this as before, or more.

It so happened that a bull, belonging to Karlsefni and his people, ran out from the woods, bellowing loudly. This so terrified the Skrellings, that they sped out to their canoes, and then rowed away to the southward along the coast. For three entire weeks nothing more was seen of them. At the end of this time, however, a great multitude of Skrelling boats was discovered approaching from the south, as if a stream were pouring down, and all of their staves were waved in a direction contrary to the course of the sun, and the Skrellings were all tittering loud cries. Thereupon Karlsefni and his men took red shields ( ) and displayed them. The Skrellings sprang from their boats, and they met then, and fought together. There was a fierce shower of missiles, for the Skrellings had war-slings. Karlsefni and Snorri observed that the Skrellings raised up on a pole a great

[p. 57]

ball-shaped body, almost the size of a sheep's belly, and nearly black in colour, and this they hurled from the pole upon the land above Karlsefni's followers, and it made a frightful noise where it fell. Whereat a great fear seized upon Karlsefni and all his men, so that they could think of nought but flight, and of making their escape up along the river bank, for it seemed to them that the troop of the Skrellings was rushing towards them from every side, and they did not pause until they came to certain jutting crags, where they offered a stout resistance. Freydis came out, and seeing that Karlsefni and his men were fleeing, she cried: "Why do ye flee from these wretches, such worthy men as ye, when, meseems, ye might slaughter them like cattle. Had I but a weapon, methinks, I would fight better than any one of you!" They gave no heed to her words. Freydis sought to join them, but lagged behind, for she was not hale; she followed them, however, into the forest, while the Skrellings pursued her; she found a dead man in front of her; this was Thorbrand, Snorri's son, his skull cleft by a flat stone; his naked sword lay beside him; she took it up, and prepared to defend herself with it. The Skrellings then approached her, whereupon she stripped down her shift, and slapped her breast with the naked sword. At this the Skrellings were terrified and ran down to their boats, and rowed away. Karlsefni and his companions, however, joined her and praised her valour. Two of Karlsefni's men had fallen and a great number of the Skrellings. Karlsefni's party had been overpowered by dint of superior numbers. They now returned to. their

[p. 58]

dwellings, and bound up their wounds, and weighed carefully what throng of men that could have been, which had seemed to descend upon them from the land; it now seemed to them that there could have been but the one party, that which came from the boats, and that the other troop must have been an ocular delusion. The Skrellings, however, found a dead man, and an axe lay beside him. One of their number picked up the axe, and struck at a tree with it, and one after another [they tested it], and it seemed to them to be a treasure, and to cut well; then one of their number seized it, and hewed at a stone with it, so that the axe broke, whereat they concluded that it could be of no use, since it would not withstand stone, and they cast it away.

It now seemed clear to Karlsefni and his people that although the country thereabouts was attractive, their life would be one of constant dread and turmoil by reason of the [hostility of the] inhabitants of the country, so they forthwith prepared to leave, and determined to return to their own country. They sailed to the northward off the coast, and found five Skrellings, clad in skin-doublets, lying asleep near the sea. There were vessels beside them containing animal marrow, mixed with blood. Karlsefni and his company concluded that they must have been banished from their own land. They put them to death. They afterwards found a cape, upon which there was a great number of animals, and this cape looked as if it were one cake of dung, by reason of the animals which lay there at night. They now arrived again at Streamfirth, where they found great abundance of all those things

 

Click to enlarge
DEATH OF THORVALD ERIKSON

(From a drawing by Kendrick.)

THORVALD, a son of Eric the Red, was a man cast in a mould as heroic as that from which issued his historically better known brother, Leif Erikson. To him the credit is due of having been with Karlsefni, the first white man to explore the American coast south of what is now Massachusetts. His death from an arrow wound, received at the hands of the Skrellings (Indians), was the first tragedy enacted in the settlement of the New World, and his dying words were prophetic of the greatness which the country would some day attain because of its fruitfulness.

[p. 59]

of which they stood in need. Some men say that Biarni and Freydis remained behind here with a hundred men, and went no further; while Karlsefni and Snorri proceeded to the southward with forty men, tarrying at Hop barely two months, and returning again the same summer. Karlsefni then set out with one ship in search of Thorhall the Huntsman, but the greater part of the company remained behind. They sailed to the northward around Keelness, and then bore to the westward, having land to the larboard. The country there was a wooded wilderness, as far as they could see, with scarcely an open space; and when they had journeyed a considerable distance, a river flowed down from the east toward the west. They sailed into the mouth of the river, and lay to by the southern bank.

 

THE SLAYING OF THORVALD, ERIC'S SON

It happened one morning that Karlsefni and his companions discovered in an open space in the woods above them, a speck, which seemed to shine toward them, and they shouted at it; it stirred and it was a Uniped ( ), who skipped down to the bank of the river by which they were lying. Thorvald, a son of Eric the Red, was sitting at the helm, and the Uniped shot an arrow into his inwards. Thorvald drew out the arrow, and exclaimed: "There is fat around my paunch; we have hit upon a fruitful country, and yet we are not like to get much profit of it." Thorvald died soon after from this wound. Then the Uniped ran away back toward the north. Karlsefni and his men pursued him, and saw him from time

[p. 60]

to time. The last they saw of him, he ran down into a creek. Then they turned back; whereupon one of the men recited this ditty:

	 
		Eager, our men, up hill, down dell,
		   Hunted a Uniped;
		 Hearken, Karlsefni, while they tell
		   How swift the quarry fled!
		
		 [paragraph continues] Then they sailed away back toward the north, and believed they had got sight of the land of the Unipeds; nor were they disposed to risk the lives of their men any longer. They concluded that the mountains of Hop, and those which they had now found, formed one chain, and this appeared to be so because they were about an equal distance removed from Streamfirth, in either direction. They sailed back, and passed the third winter at Streamfirth. Then the men began to divide into factions, of which the women were the cause; and those who were without wives endeavoured to  upon the wives of those who were married, whence the greatest trouble arose. Snorri, Karlsefni's son, was born the first autumn, and he was three winters' old when they took their departure. When they sailed away from Wineland, they had a southerly wind, and so came upon Markland, where they found five Skrellings, of whom one was bearded, two were women, and two were children. Karlsefni and his people took the boys, but the others escaped, and these Skrellings sank down into the earth. They bore the lads away with them, and taught them to speak, and they were baptized. They said that their mother's name was Vaetilldi, and their

[p. 61]

father's Uvaegi. They said that kings governed the Skrellings, one of whom was called Avalldamon, and the other Valldidida ( ). They stated, that there were no houses there, and that the people lived in caves or holes. They said that there was a land on the other side over against their country, which was inhabited by people who wore white garments, and yelled loudly, and carried poles before them, to which rags were attached; and people believe that this must have been Hvitramannaland [White-men's-land], or Ireland the Great ( ). Now they arrived in Greenland, and remained during the winter with Eric the Red.

Biarni, Grimolf's son, and his companions were driven out into the Atlantic, and came into a sea, which was filled with worms, [*1] and their ship began to sink beneath them. They had a boat which had been coated with seal-tar; this the sea-worm does not penetrate. They took their places in this boat, and then discovered that it would not hold them all. Then said Biarni: "Since the boat will not hold more than half of our men, it is my advice, that the men who are to go in the boat be chosen by lot, for this selection must not he made according to rank." This seemed to them all such a manly offer that no one opposed it. So they adopted this plan, the men casting lots; and it fell to Biarni to go in the boat, and half of the men with him, for it would not hold more. But when the men were come into the boat an Icelander, who was in the ship, and who had accompanied Biarni

[p. 62]

from Iceland, said: "Dost thou intend, Biarni, to forsake me here?" "It must be even so," answers Biarni. "Not such was the promise thou gavest my father," he answers, "when I left Iceland with thee, that thou wouldst thus part with me, when thou saidst that we should both share the same fate." "So be it, it shall not rest thus," answered Biarni; "do thou come hither, and I will go to the ship, for I see that thou art eager for life." Biarni thereupon boarded the ship, and this man entered the boat, and they went their way, until they came to Dublin in Ireland, and there they told this tale; now it is the belief of most people that Biarni and his companions perished in the maggot-sea, for they were never heard of afterward.

 

KARLSEFNI AND HIS WIFE THURID'S ISSUE.

The following summer Karlsefni sailed to Iceland and Gudrid with him, and he went home to Reyniness ( ). His mother believed that he had made a poor match, and she was not at home the first winter. However, when she became convinced that Gudrid was a very superior woman, she returned to her home, and they lived happily together. Hallfrid was a daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son, she was the mother of Bishop Thorlak, Runolf's son ( ). They had a son named Thorbiorn, whose daughter's name was Thorunn [she was] Bishop Biorn's mother. Thorgeir was the name of a son of Snorri, Karlsefni's son, [he was] the father of Ingveld, mother of Bishop Brand the Elder. Steinunn was a daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son, who married Einar, a son of

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] Grundar-Ketil, a son of Thorvald Crook, a son of Thori of Espihol. Their son was Thorstein the Unjust, he was the father of Gudrun, who married Jorund of Keldur. Their daughter was Halla, the mother of Flosi, the father of Valgerd, the mother of Herra Erlend, the Stout, the father of Herra Hauk the Lawman. Another daughter of Flosi was Thordis, the mother of Fru Ingigerd the Mighty. Her daughter was Fru Hallbera, Abbess of Reyniness at Stad ( ). Many other great people in Iceland are descended from Karlsefni and Thurid, who are not mentioned here. God be with us, Amen!

Footnotes

^47:1 Karlsefni, one who gives promise of becoming a man.

^54:1 The prose sense of the verse is: Let us return to our countrymen, leaving those, who like the country here, to cook their whale on Wonder-strands.

^61:1 This reference is to the toredo, or ship worm, that bores into wood and is often a source of danger to unsheathed vessels.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER III.

 

THE WINELAND HISTORY OF THE FLATEY BOOK

THE Flatey Book [Flateyjarbok] is the most extensive and most perfect of Icelandic manuscripts. It is in itself a comprehensive historical library of the era with which it deals, and so considerable are its contents that they fill upwards of 1700 large octavo pages of printed text. On the title-page of the manuscript we are informed, that it belonged originally to John Haconsson for whom it was written by the priests John Thordsson and Magnus Thorhallsson. We have no information concerning the date when the book was commenced by John Thordsson; but the most important portion of the work appears to have been completed in the year 1387, although additions were made to the body of the work by one of the original scribes, and the annals appended to the books, brought

[p. 64]

them down to the year 1394. Toward the close of the fifteenth century, the then owner of the book, whose name is unknown, inserted three quaternions of additional historical matter in the manuscript, to fill a hiatus in the historical sequence of the work, not, however, in that part of the manuscript which treats of Wineland.

It has been conjectured that the manuscript was written in the north of Iceland, but according to the editors of the printed text the facts are that the manuscript was owned in the west of Iceland as far back as we possess any knowledge of it, and there is no positive evidence where it was written. We have, indeed, no. further particulars concerning the manuscript before the seventeenth century, when we find that it was in the possession of John Finsson, who dwelt in Flatey in Breidafirth as had his father, and his father's father before him. That the book had been a family heirloom is evident from an entry made in the manuscript by this same John Finsson:

"This book I, John Finsson, own; the gift of my deceased father's father, John Biarnsson," etc.

From John Finsson the book descended to his nephew, John Torfason, from whom that worthy bibliophile, Bishop Bryniolf of Skalholt, sought in vain to purchase it, as is related in an anecdote in the bishop's biography:

"Farmer John of Flatey, son of the Rev. Torfi Finsson, owned a large and massive parchment-book in ancient monachal writing, containing sagas of the Kings of Norway, and many others: and it is, therefore, commonly called Flatey Book. This Bishop Bryniolf endeavored to purchase, first for money, and then for five  of

[p. 65]

land. But he nevertheless failed to obtain it; however, when John bore him company, as he was leaving the island, he presented him the book; and it is said that the Bishop rewarded him liberally for it."

The Flatey Book was among a collection of vellum manuscripts intrusted to the care of Thormod Torfaeus, in 1662, as a present from Bishop Bryniolf to King Frederick the Third of Denmark, and thus luckily escaped the fate of others of the bishop's literary treasures. In the Royal Library of Copenhagen it has ever since remained, where it is known as No. 1005, fol. of the Old Royal Collection.

Interpolated in the Saga of Olaf Tryggvason in the Flatey Book are two minor historical narratives. The first of these, in the order in which they appear in the manuscript, is called, a Short Story of Eric the Red, the second, a Short Story of the Greenlanders. Although these short histories are not connected in any way in the manuscript, being indeed separated by over fifty columns of extraneous historical matter, they form, if brought together, what may be called, the Flatey Book version of history of the Wineland discovery,--a version which varies materially from the accounts of the discovery, as they have been preserved elsewhere. Before considering these points of difference, it may be stated that, as we have no certain knowledge where the Flatey Book was written, neither have we any definite information concerning the original material from which the transcripts of these two narratives were made. The original manuscripts of these narratives would appear to have shared a

[p. 66]

common fate with the other original forms from which the scribes of the Flatey Book compiled their work;--all of this vast congeries of early manuscripts has entirely disappeared. This is the conclusion reached by that eminent authority, the late Dr. Vigfusson, whose profound knowledge of the written literature of the North was supplemented in the present instance by that close acquaintance which he had gained with the Flatey Book, by reason of his having transcribed the entire manuscript for publication.

This total disappearance of all trace of the archetypes of the Flatey Book, although it is by no means the only case of the kind in the history of Icelandic paleography, is especially to be deplored in connection with the Wineland narrative, since it leaves us without a clue, which might aid us in arriving at a solution of certain enigmas which this narrative presents.

In the Flatey Book version of the discovery it is stated that Biarni Heriulfsson, during a voyage from Iceland to Greenland, having been driven to the southward out of his course, came upon unknown lands; that, following upon this, and as the direct result of Biarni's reports of his discoveries, Leif Ericsson was moved to go in search of the strange lands which Biarni had seen but not explored; that he found these in due course, "first that land which Biarni had seen last," and finally the southernmost land, to which, "after its products," he gave the name of Wineland. This account differs entirely from the history contained in the other manuscripts which deal with this subject, all of which agree in ascribing the discovery to

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] Leif Ericsson, and unite in the statement that he found Wineland accidentally, during a voyage from Norway to Greenland, which he had undertaken at the instance of King Olaf Tryggvasson, for the purpose of introducing Christianity to his fellow-countrymen in Greenland. Not only is Biarni's discovery unknown to any other Icelandic writing now existing, but the man himself, as well as his daring voyage, have failed to find a chronicler elsewhere, although his father was "a most distinguished man," the grandson of a "settler," and a kinsman of the first Icelandic colonist.

The first portion of the Flatey Book version, the "Short Story of Eric the Red," concludes with the words, "Biarni now went to his father, gave up his voyaging, and remained with his father during Heriulf's lifetime, and continued to dwell there after his father." The second portion of this version of the Wineland history, the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," begins with the words "It is now next to this, that Biarni Heriulfsson came out from Greenland on a visit to Earl Eric," etc. As has already been stated, the two portions of the history of the Wineland discovery, as they appear in the Flatey Book, are not in any way connected with each other. The first narrative occupies its appropriate place in the account of the life of King Olaf Tryggvason, as do, the other narratives, similar in character, which are introduced into this as into the other sagas in the manuscript, and there appears to be no reason why the second narrative, "A Short Story of the Greenlanders," should be regarded as having received treatment different, in this respect, from other interpolated

[p. 68]

narratives of the same class. If, therefore, we interpret the opening words of this story of the Greenlanders, "It is now next to this," to mean that the incident which follows is related next in chronological order after that part of the saga which has immediately preceded it, it becomes apparent that Biarni's visit must have taken place after the battle of Svoldr in which King Olaf Tryggvason fell, and Earl Eric was victorious. This battle took place on the 9th of September, in the year 1000. As it is not probable that Biarni would have undertaken his voyage to Norway before the summer following, the earliest date which could reasonably be assigned for Biarni's sojourn at the Earl's court would appear to be the winter of the years 1001-1002. We are told in the same place that Biarni returned to Greenland the following summer, and that subsequent to his return Leif purchased his ship, and went in search of the land which Biarni had seen, but had failed to explore, in the year 985, according to the chronology of the "Short Story."

Leif's voyage of exploration, as described in the Flatey Book, could, therefore, scarcely have taken place before the year 1002. But, according to the other historical data already cited, Leif discovered Wineland during a voyage to Greenland, undertaken at the request, and during the lifetime, of King Olaf Tryggvason, hence obviously not later than the year 1000. The Flatey Book refers to this voyage in the following words: "That same summer be [King Olaf Tryggvason] sent Gizur and Hialti to Iceland, as has already been written. At that time King Olaf sent Leif to Greenland to preach

 

Click to enlarge
Reproduced page of the Flatey manuscript

 

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Christianity there. The King sent with him a priest and certain other holy men to baptize the folk, and teach them the true faith. Leif went to Greenland that summer and took [on board his vessel] a ship's crew of men, who were at the time in great peril upon a rock. He arrived in Greenland late in the summer, and went home to his father, Eric, at Brattahlid. The people afterwards called him Leif the Lucky, but his father, Eric, said that Leif's having rescued the crew and restored the men to life, might be balanced against the fact that he had brought the impostor to Greenland, so he called the priest. Nevertheless, through Leif's advice and persuasion, Eric was baptized, and all of the people of Greenland.

It will be observed, that in this record of Leif's missionary voyage no allusion is made to the discovery of Wineland, as in the other accounts of the same voyage, with which, in other respects, this passage agrees. By this variation a conflict with Biarni's claim to the priority of discovery, previously promulgated in the "Short Story of Eric the Red," is avoided. A portion of this passage may not, however, be so happily reconciled. It is said that, through Leif's advice and persuasion, Eric the Red was baptized, while we find in the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," the statement that "Eric the Red died before Christianity." Moreover, we have, in the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," in addition to this direct conflict of statement, an apparent repetition of the incident of the rescue of the shipwrecked mariners, when we are told that Leif effected a rescue of castaways on his return from a voyage of exploration to Wineland, and was

[p. 70]

therefore called Leif the Lucky. If this be not a repetition of the same incident, then we must conclude that Leif upon two different voyages saved the lives of a crew of shipwrecked mariners, for which he twice received the same title from the same people! In the description of the rescue, contained in the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," we read that the leader of the castaways was one Thori Easterling, whose wife, Gudrid, Thorbiorn's daughter, seems to have been among the rescued. This Thori is mentioned nowhere save in the Flatey Book. His wife was so famous a personage in Icelandic annals that it seems passing strange this spouse should have been so completely ignored by other Icelandic chronicles, which have not failed to record Gudrid's marriage to Thorstein Ericsson, and subsequently to Thorfinn Karlsefni. Indeed, according to the biography of this "most noble lady," as written in the Saga of Eric the Red, there is no place for Thori, for Gudrid is said to have come to Greenland in much less romantic fashion, namely, as an unmarried woman, in the same ship with, and under the protection of her father Thorbiorn.

Another chronological error occurs in that paragraph of the "Short Story of Eric the Red," wherein it is stated that, "after sixteen winters had lapsed from the time when Eric the Red went to colonize Greenland, Leif, Eric's son, sailed out from Greenland to Norway. He arrived in Drontheim in the autumn when King Olaf Tryggvason was come down from the North out of Halogaland." It has previously been stated hi this same chronicle that Eric set out to colonize Greenland fifteen

[p. 71]

years before Christianity was legally adopted in Iceland, that is to say in the year 985. Whence it follows, from this chronology, that Leif's voyage must have been undertaken in the year 1001, but since Olaf Tryggvason was killed in the autumn of the year 1000, this is, from the context, manifestly impossible. If we may suppose that the scribe of the Flatey Book, by a careless verbal substitution wrote "for at byggja" [went to colonize], instead of "for at leita" [went in search of], the chronology of the narrative becomes reconcilable.

In the "Short Story of the Greenlanders" inaccuracies of lesser import occur, one of which, at least, appears to owe its origin to a clerical blunder. In the narrative of Freydis' voyage, we are told that she waited upon the brothers Helgi and Finnbogi, and persuaded them to join her in an expedition to Wineland; according to the text, however, she enters into an agreement governing the manning of their ships, not with them, but with Karlsefni. Yet it is obvious, from the context, that Karlsefni did not participate in the enterprise, nor does it appear that he had any interest whatsoever in the undertaking. The substitution of Karlsefni's name for that of Helgi or Finnbogi, by a careless scribe, may have given rise to this lack of sequence. A blunder, which has crept into the genealogical list, at the conclusion of the history, may, perhaps, owe its origin to a somewhat similar cause. In this list, it will be noted, Bishop Thorlak is called the grandson of Hallfrid, Snorri's daughter; in the words of the manuscript, "Hallfrid was the name of the daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son; she was the mother of Runolf,

[p. 72]

the father of Bishop Thorlak." Now Runolf was, indeed, the father of Bishop Thorlak, but he was the husband and not the son of Hallfrid. If we may suppose the heedless insertion of the word "mother" in the place of "wife," the palpable error, as the text now stands, would be removed.

It has been conjectured that the Wineland History of the Flatey Book has been drawn from a more primitive source than the narrative of the discovery which has been preserved in the two manuscripts, Hauk's Book and AM. 557, 4to. Two passages in the Flatey Book narrative lend a certain measure of plausibility to this conjecture. In the "Short Story of Eric the Red" it is stated, that Eric called his land-fall in Greenland Midioikul, in the words of the history; "this is now called Blacksark." In Hauk's Book this mountain is also called Blacksark; in AM. 557, 4to, it is called Whitesark; neither of these manuscripts, however, recalls the earlier name. Again, in the list of the descendants of Snorri, Karlsefni's Wineland-born son, appended to the "Short Story of the Greenlanders," Bishop Brand is so called without qualification, while in both texts of the Saga of Eric the Red he is referred to as Bishop Brand the Elder [hin fyrri]. The second Bishop Brand was ordained in 1263. This fact, while it would, without the other evidence which we possess, establish a date prior to which neither Hauk's Book nor AM. 557, 4to, could have been written, seems at the same time to afford negative evidence in support of the claim for the riper antiquity of the source from which the Flatey Book narrative was drawn. However this may

[p. 73]

be the lapses already noted, together with the introduction of such incidents as that of the apparition of the big-eyed Gudrid to her namesake, Karlsefni's spouse; the narrative of Freydis' unpalliated treachery; the account of Wineland grapes which produced intoxication, and which apparently ripened at all seasons of the year, of honeydew grass, and the like, all seem to point either to a deliberate or careless corruption of the primitive history. Nevertheless, despite the discrepancies existing between the account of the Wineland discovery, as it has been preserved in the Flatey Book and as it is given elsewhere, so striking a parallelism is apparent in these different versions of this history, in the chief points of historical interest, as to point conclusively to their common origin.

The two disjoined "accounts" of the Flatey Book, which relate to the Wineland discovery, are brought together in the translation which follows.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

 

CHAPTER IV.

 

A BRIEF HISTORY OF ERIC THE RED.

There was a man named Thorvald, a son of Osvald, Ulf's son, Eyxna-Thori's son. Thorvald and Eric the Red, his son, left Jaederen [in Norway], on account of manslaughter, and went to Iceland. At that time Iceland was extensively colonized. They first lived at Drangar on Horn-strands, and there Thorvald died. Eric then married Thorhild, the daughter of Jorund and Thorbiorg the Ship-chested, who was then married to Thorbiorn of the Haukadal family. Eric then removed from the north, and made his home at Ericsstadir by Vatnshorn. Eric and Thorhild's son was called Leif.

After the killing of Eyiulf the Foul, and Duelling-Hrafn, Eric was banished from Haukadal, and betook himself westward to Breidafirth, settling in Eyxney at Ericsstadir. He loaned his outer dais-boards to Thorgest, and could not get these again when he demanded them. This gave rise to broils and battles between himself and Thorgest, as Eric's Saga relates. Eric was backed in the dispute by Styr Thorgrimsson, Eyiulf of Sviney, the sons of Brand of Alptafirth and Thorbiorn Vifilsson, while the Thorgesters were upheld by the sons of Thord the Yeller, and Thorgeir of Hitardal. Eric was declared an outlaw at Thorsnessthing. He thereupon equipped his ship for a voyage, in Ericsvag, and when he was ready to sail Styr and the others accompanied

[p. 75]

him out beyond the islands. Eric told them that it was his purpose to go in search of that country which Gunnbiorn, son of Ulf the Crow, had seen, when he was driven westward across the main, at the time when he discovered Gunnbiorns-skerries; he added, that he would return to his friends, if he should succeed in finding this country. Eric sailed out from Snaefellsiokul, and found the land. He gave the name of Midiokul to his landfall; this is now called Blacksark. From thence he proceeded southward along the coast, in search of habitable land. He passed the first winter at Ericsey, near the middle of the Eastern-settlement, and the following spring he went to Ericsfirth, where he selected a dwelling-place. In the summer he visited the western uninhabited country, and assigned names to many of the localities. The second winter he remained at Holmar by Hrafnsgnipa, and the third summer he sailed northward to Snaefell, and all the way into Hrafnsfirth; then he said he had reached the head of Ericsfirth. He then returned and passed the third winter in Ericsey at the mouth of Ericsfirth. The next summer he sailed to Iceland, landing in Breidafirth. He called the country, which he had discovered, Greenland, because, he said, people would be attracted thither if the country had a good name. Eric spent the winter in Iceland, and the following summer set out to colonize the country. He settled at Brattahlid in Ericsfirth, and learned men say that in this same summer, in which Eric set out to settle Greenland, thirty-five ships sailed out of Breidafirth and Gorgarfirth; fourteen of these arrived safely, some were driven back and some were

[p. 76]

lost. This was fifteen years before Christianity was legally adopted in Iceland. During the same summer Bishop Frederick and Thorvald Kodransson ( ) went abroad [from Iceland] Of those men, who accompanied Eric to Greenland, the following took possession of land there: Heriulf, Heriulfsfirth, he dwelt at Heriulfsness; Ketil, Ketilsfirth, Hrafn, Hrafnsfirth, Solvi, Solvadal; Helgi Thorbrandsson, Alptafirth; Thorbiorn Gleamer, Siglufirth; Einar, Einarsfirth; Hafgrim, Hafgrimsfirth and Vatnahverfi; Arnlaugsfirth; while some went to the Western settlement.

 

LEIF THE LUCKY BAPTIZED.

After that sixteen winters had lapsed, from the time when Eric the Red went to colonize Greenland, Leif, Eric's son, sailed out from Greenland to Norway. He arrived in Drontheirn in the autumn, when King Olaf Tryggvasson was come down from the north, out of Halagoland. Leif put in to Nidaros with his ship, and set out at once to visit the king. King Olaf expounded the faith to him, as he did to other heathen men who came to visit him. It proved easy for the king to persuade Leif, and he was accordingly baptized, together with all of his shipmates. Leif remained throughout the winter with the king, by whom he was well entertained.

 

BIARNI GOES IN QUEST OP GREENLAND.

Heriulf ( ) was a son of Bard Heriulfsson. He was a kinsman of Ingolf, the first colonist. Ingolf allotted land to Heriulf between Vag and Reykianess, and he

[p. 77]

dwelt at first at Drepstok. Heriulf's wife's name was Thorgerd, and their son, whose name was Biarni, was a most promising man. He formed an inclination for voyaging while he was still young, and he prospered both in property and public esteem. It was his custom to pass his winters alternately abroad and with his father. Biarni soon became the owner of a trading-ship, and during the last winter that he spent in Norway, [his father] Heriulf determined to accompany Eric on his voyage to Greenland, and made his preparation to give up his farm. Upon the ship with Heriulf was a Christian man from the Hebrides, he it was who composed the Sea-Rollers' Song ( ). Heriulf settled at Heriulfsness, and was a most distinguished man. Eric the Red dwelt at Bratahlid, where he was held in the highest esteem, and all men paid him homage. These were Eric's children: Leif, Thorvald, and Thorstein, and a daughter whose name was Freydis; she was wedded to a man named Thorvard, and they dwelt at Gardar, where the episcopal seat now is. She was a very haughty woman, while Thorvard was a man of little force of character, and Freydis had been wedded to him chiefly because of his wealth. At that time the people of Greenland were heathen.

Biarni arrived with his ship at Eyrar [in Iceland] in the summer of the same year, in the spring of which his father had sailed away. Biarni was much surprised when he heard this news, and would not discharge his cargo. His shipmates enquired of him what he intended to do, and he replied that it was his purpose to keep to his

[p. 78]

custom, and make his home for the winter with his father; "and I will take the ship to Greenland, if you will bear me company." They all replied that they would abide by his decision. Then said Biarni, "Our voyage must be regarded as foolhardy, seeing that no one of us has ever been in the Greenland Sea." Nevertheless they put out to sea when they were equipped for the voyage, and sailed for three days, until the land was hidden by the water, and then the fair wind died out, and north winds arose, and fogs, and they knew not whither they were drifting and thus it lasted for many "doegr." Then they saw the sun again, and were able to determine the quarters of the heavens; they hoisted sail, and sailed that "doegr" through before they saw land. They discussed among themselves what land it could be, and Biarni said that he did not believe that it could be Greenland. They asked whether he wished to sail to this land or not. "It is my counsel" [said he], "to sail close to the land." They did so, and soon saw that the land was level, and covered with woods, and that there were small hillocks upon it. They left the land on their larboard, and let the sheet turn toward the land. They sailed for two "doegr" before they saw another land. They asked whether Biarni thought this was Greenland yet. He replied that he did not think this any more like Greenland than the former, "because in Greenland there are said to be many great ice-mountains." They soon approached this land, and saw that it was a flat and wooded country. The fair wind failed them then, and the crew took counsel together, and concluded that it would be wise to land there,

[p. 79]

but Biarni would not consent to this. They alleged that they were in need of both wood and water. "Ye have no lack of either of these," says Biarni--a course, forsooth, which won him blame among his shipmates. He bade them hoist sail, which they did, and turning the prow from the land they sailed out upon the high seas, with southwesterly gales, for three "doegr," when they saw the third land; this land was high and mountainous, with ice-mountains upon it ( ). They asked Biarni then whether he would land there, and he replied that he was not disposed to do so, "because this land does not appear to me to offer any attractions." Nor did they lower their sail, but held their course off the land, and saw that it was an island. They left this land astern, and held out to sea with the same fair wind. The wind waxed amain, and Biarni directed them to reef, and not to sail at a speed unbefitting their ship and rigging. They sailed now for four "doegr," when they saw the fourth land. Again they asked Biarni whether he thought this could be Greenland or not. Biarni answers, "This is likest Greenland, according to that which has been reported to me concerning it, and here we will steer to the land." They directed their course thither, and landed in the evening, below a cape upon which there was a boat, and there, upon this cape, dwelt Heriulf ( ), Biarni's father, whence the cape took its name, and was afterwards called Heriulfsness. Biarni now went to, his father, gave up his voyaging, and remained with his father while Heriulf lived, and continued to live there after his father.

[p. 80]

 

HERE BEGINS THE BRIEF HISTORY OF THE GREENLANDERS

Next to this is now to be told how Biarni Heriulfsson came out from Greenland on a visit to Earl Eric, by whom he was well received. Biarni gave an account of his travels [upon the occasion] when he saw the lands, and the people thought that he had been lacking in enterprise, since he had no report to give concerning these countries, and the fact brought him reproach. Biarni was appointed one of the Earl's men, and went out to Greenland the following summer. There was now much talk about voyages of discovery. Leif, the son of Eric the Red, of Brattahlid, visited Biarni Heriulfsson and bought a ship of him, and collected a crew, until they formed altogether a company of thirty-five men. Leif invited his father, Eric, to become the leader of the expedition, but Eric declined, saying that he was then stricken in years, and adding that he was less able to endure the exposure of sea-life than he had been. Leif replied that he would nevertheless be the one who would be most apt to bring good luck, and Eric yielded to Leif's solicitations, and rode from home when they were ready to sail. When he was but a short distance from the ship, the horse which Eric was riding stumbled, and he was thrown from his back and wounded his foot, whereupon he exclaimed, "It is not designed for me to discover more lands than the one in which we are now living, nor can we now continue longer together." Eric returned home to Brattahlid, and Leif pursued his way to the ship with his companions, thirty-five men; one of the company was a German named

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] Tyrker. They put the ship in order, and when they were ready, they sailed out to sea, and found first that land which Biarni and his ship-mates found last. They sailed up to the land and cast anchor, and launched a boat and went ashore, and saw no grass there; great ice mountains lay inland back from the sea, and it was as a [table-land of] flat rock all the way from the sea to the ice mountains, and the country seemed to them to be entirely devoid of good qualities. Then said Leif, "It has not come to pass with us in regard to this land as with Biarni, that we have not gone upon it. To this country I will now give a name, and call it Helluland." They returned to the ship, put out to sea, and found a second land. They sailed again to the land, and came to anchor, and launched the boat, and went ashore. This was a level wooded land, and there were broad stretches of white sand, where they went, and the land was level by the sea. Then said Leif, "This land shall have a name after its nature, and we will call it Markland." They returned to the ship forthwith, and sailed away upon the main with north-east winds, and were out two "doegr" before they sighted land. They sailed toward this land, and came to an island which lay to the northward off the land. There they went ashore and looked about them, the weather being fine, and they observed that there was dew upon the grass, and it so happened that they touched the dew with their hands, and touched their hands to their mouths, and it seemed to them that they had never before tasted anything so sweet as this. They went aboard their ship again and sailed into a certain sound, which lay between the island and a

[p. 82]

cape, which jutted out from the land on the north, and they stood in westering past the cape. At ebb-tide there were broad reaches of shallow water there, and they ran their ship around there, and it was a long distance from the ship to the ocean; yet were they so anxious to go ashore that they could not wait until the tide should rise under their ship, but hastened to the land, where a certain river flows out from a lake. As soon as the tide rose beneath their ship, however, they took the boat and rowed to the ship, which they conveyed up the river, and so into the lake, where they cast anchor and carried their hammocks ashore from the ship, and built themselves booths there. They afterwards determined to establish themselves there for the winter, and they accordingly built a large house. There was no lack of salmon there either in the river or in the lake, and larger salmon than they had ever seen before. The country thereabouts seemed to be possessed of such good qualities that cattle would need no fodder there during the winters. There was no frost there in the winters, and the grass withered but little. The days and nights there were of more nearly equal length than in Greenland or Iceland. On the shortest day of winter the sun was up between "eyktarstad" and "dagmalastad ( )." When they had completed their house Leif said to his companions, "I propose now to divide our company into two groups, and to set about an exploration of the country; one half of our party shall remain at home at the house, while the other half shall investigate the land, and they must not go beyond a point from which they can return home the same evening,

[p. 83]

and are not to separate [from each other]." Thus they did for a time; Leif himself, by turns, joined the exploring party or remained behind at the house. Leif was a large and powerful man, and of a most imposing bearing, a man of sagacity, and a very just man in all things.

 

LIEF THE LUCKY FINDS MEN UPON A SKERRY A SEA

It was discovered one evening that one of their company was missing, and this proved to be Tyrker, the German. Leif was sorely troubled by this, for Tyrker had lived with Leif and his father for a long time, and had been very devoted to Leif, when he was a child. Leif severely reprimanded his companions, and prepared to go in search of him, taking twelve men with him. They had proceeded but a short distance from the house when they were met by Tyrker, whom they received most cordially. Leif observed at once that his foster-father was in lively spirits. Tyrker had a prominent forehead, restless eyes, small features, was diminutive in stature, and rather a sorry-looking individual withal, but was, nevertheless, a most capable handicraftsman. Leif addressed him, and asked: "Wherefore art thou so belated, foster-father mine, and astray from the others?" In the beginning Tyrker spoke for some time in German, rolling his eyes, and grinning, and they could not understand him; but after a time he addressed them in the Northern tongue: "I did not go much further [than you] and yet I have something of novelty to relate. I have found vines and grapes." "Is this indeed true, foster-father?"

[p. 84]

said Leif. "Of a certainty it is true," quoth he, "for I was born where there is no lack of either grapes or vines." They slept the night through, and on the morrow Leif said to his shipmates: "We will now divide our labours, and each day will either gather grapes or cut vines and fell trees, so as to obtain a cargo of these for my ship."' They acted upon this advice, and it is said that their after-boat was filled with grapes. A cargo sufficient for the ship was cut, and when the spring came they made their ship ready, and sailed away; and from its products Leif gave the land a name, and called it Wineland. They sailed out to sea, and had fair winds until they sighted Greenland, and the fells below the glaciers, then one of the men spoke up, and said, "Why do you steer the ship so much into the wind?" Leif answers: "I have my mind upon my steering, but on other matters as well. Do ye not see anything out of the common?" They replied that they saw nothing strange. "I do not know," says Leif, "whether it is a ship or a skerry that I see." Now they saw it, and said that it must be a skerry; but he was so much keener of sight then they that he was able to discern men upon the skerry. "I think it best to tack," says Leif, "so that we may draw near to them, that we may be able to render them assistance, if they should stand in need of it; and if they should not be peaceably disposed, we shall still have better command of the situation than they." They approached the skerry, and lowered their sail cast anchor and launched a second small boat, which they had brought with them. Tyrker inquired who was the elder of the party? He

[p. 85]

replied that his name was Thori, and that he was a Norseman; "but what is thy name?" Leif gave his name, "Art thou a son of Eric the Red of Brattahlid?" says he. Leif responded that he was. "It is now my wish," says Leif, "to take you all into my ship, and likewise so much of your possessions as the ship will hold." This offer was accepted, and [with their ship] thus laden, they held away to Ericsfirth, and sailed until they arrived at Brattahlid. Having discharged the cargo, Leif invited Thori, with his wife, Gudrid, and three others, to make their home with him, and procured quarters for the other members of the crew, both for his own and Thori's men. Leif rescued fifteen persons from the skerry. He was afterward called Leif the Lucky. Leif had now goodly store both of property and honour. There was serious illness that winter in Thori's party, and Thori and a great number of his people died. Eric the Red also died that winter. There was now much talk about Leif's Wineland journey, and his brother, Thorvald, held that the country had not been sufficiently explored. Thereupon Leif said to Thorvald: "If it be thy will, brother, thou mayest go to Wineland with my ship, but I wish the ship first to fetch the wood, which Thori had upon the skerry." And so it was done.

 

THORVALD GOES TO WINELAND.

Now Thorvald, with the advice of his brother, Leif, prepared to make this voyage with thirty men. They put their ship in order, and sailed out to sea; and there is no account of their voyage before their arrival at Leif's

[p. 86]

booths in Wineland. They laid up their ship there, and remained there quietly during the winter, supplying themselves with food by fishing. In the spring, however, Thorvald said that they should put their ship in order, and that a few men should take the after-boat and proceed along the western coast, and explore [the region] thereabouts during the summer. They found it a fair, well-wooded country; it was but a short distance from the woods to the sea, and [there were] white sands, as well as great numbers of islands and shallows. They found neither dwelling of man nor lair of beast; but in one of the westerly islands they found a wooden building for the shelter of grain ( ). They found no other trace of human handiwork, and they turned back, and arrived at Leif's-booth in the autumn. The following summer Thorvald set out toward the east with the ship, and along the northern coast. They were met by a high wind off a certain promontory, and were driven ashore there, and damaged the keel of their ship, and were compelled to remain there for a long time and repair the injury to their vessel. Then said Thorvald to his companions: "I propose that we raise the keel upon this cape, and call it Keelness," and so they did. Then they sailed away, to the eastward off the land, and into the mouth of the adjoining firth, and to a headland, which projected into the sea there, and which was entirely covered with woods. They found an anchorage for their ship and put out the gangway to the land, and Thorvald and all of his companions went ashore. "It is a fair region here," said he, "and here I should like to make my home." They then

[p. 87]

returned to the ship and discovered on the sands, in beyond the headland, three mounds; they went up to these, and saw that they were three skin-canoes, with three men under each. They thereupon divided their party, and succeeded in seizing all of the men but one, who escaped with his canoe. They killed the eight men, and then ascended the headland again and looked about them and discovered with the firth certain hillocks, which they concluded must be habitations. They were then so overpowered with sleep that they could not keep awake, and all fell into a [heavy] slumber, from which they were awakened by the sound of a cry uttered above them; and the words of the cry were these: "Awake, Thorvald, thou and all thy company, if thou wouldst save thy life; and board thy ship with all thy men, and sail with all speed from the land!" A countless number of skin-canoes then advanced toward them from the inner part of the firth, whereupon Thorvald exclaimed: "We must put out the war-boards ( ), on both sides of the ship, and defend ourselves to the best of our ability, but offer little attack." This they did, and the Skrellings, after they had shot at them for a time, fled precipitately, each as best he could. Thorvald then inquired of his men whether any of them had been wounded, and they informed him that no one of them had received a wound. "I have been wounded in my arm-pit," says he; "an arrow flew in between the gunwale and the shield, below my arm. Here is the shaft, and it will bring me to my end! I counsel you now to retrace your way with the utmost speed. But me ye shall convey to that headland

[p. 88]

which seemed to me to offer so pleasant a dwelling-place; thus it may be fulfilled, that the truth sprang to my lips, when I expressed the wish to abide there for a time. Ye shall bury me there, and place a cross at my head, and another at my feet, and call it Crossness for ever after." At that time Christianity had obtained in Greenland; Eric the Red died, however, before [the introduction of] Christianity.

Thorvald died, and when they had carried out his injunctions, they took their departure, and rejoined their companions, and they told each other of the experiences which had befallen them. They remained there during the winter, and gathered grapes and wood with which to freight the ship. In the following spring they returned to Greenland, and arrived with their ship in Ericsfirth, where they were able to recount great tidings to Leif.

 

THORSTEIN ERICSSON DIES IN THE WESTERN SETTLEMENT

In the meantime it had come to pass in Greenland that Thorstein of Ericsfirth had married, and taken to wife Gudrid, Thorbiorn's daughter, [she] who had been the spouse of Thori Eastman ( ), as has been already related. Now Thorstein Ericsson, being minded to make the voyage to Wineland after the body of his brother, Thorvald, equipped the same ship, and selected a crew of twenty-five men of good size and strength, and taking with him his wife, Gudrid, when all was in readiness, They sailed out into the open ocean, and out of sight of land. They were driven hither and thither over the sea all that summer, and lost all reckoning, and at the end of

[p. 89]

the first week of winter they made the land at Lysufirth in Greenland, in the Western settlement. Thorstein set out in search of quarters for his crew, and succeeded in procuring homes for all of his shipmates; but he and his wife were unprovided for, and remained together upon the ship for two or more days. At this time Christianity was still in its infancy in Greenland. It befell, early one morning, that men came to their tent, and the leader inquired who the people were within the tent. Thorstein replies: "We are twain," says he; "but who is it who asks?" "My name is Thorstein, and I am known as Thorstein the Swarthy, and my errand hither is to offer you two, husband and wife, a home with me." Thorstein replied that he would consult with his wife, and she bidding him decide, he accepted the invitation. "I will come after you on the morrow with a sumpter-horse; for I am not lacking in means wherewith to provide for you both, although it will be lonely living with me, since there are but two of us, my wife and myself, for I, forsooth, am a very hard man to get on with; moreover, my faith is not the same as yours, albeit methinks that is the better to which you hold." He returned for them on the morrow, with the beast, and they took up their home with Thorstein the Swarthy, and were well treated by him. Gudrid was a woman of fine presence, and a clever woman and very happy in adapting herself to strangers.

Early in the winter Thorstein Ericsson's party was visited by sickness, and many of his companions died. He caused coffins to be made for the bodies of the dead, and had them conveyed to the ship, and bestowed there; "for

[p. 90]

it is my purpose to have all the bodies taken to Ericsfirth in the summer." It was not long before illness appeared in Thorstein's home, and his wife, whose name was Grimhild, was first taken sick. She was a very vigorous woman, and as strong as a man, but the sickness mastered her; and soon thereafter Thorstein Ericsson was seized with the illness, and they both lay ill at the same time; and Grimhild, Thorstein the Swarthy's wife, died, and when she was dead Thorstein went out of the room to procure a deal, upon which to lay the corpse. Thereupon Gudrid spoke. "Do not be absent long, Thorstein mine!" says she. He replied that so it should be. Thorstein Ericsson then exclaimed: "Our housewife is acting now in a marvellous fashion, for she is raising herself up on her elbow, and stretching out her feet from the side of the bed, and groping after her shoes." At that moment Thorstein, the master of the house, entered, and Grimhild laid herself down, wherewithal every timber in the room creaked. Thorstein now fashioned a coffin for Grimhild's body, and bore it away, and cared for it. He was a big man, and strong, but it called for all [his strength], to enable him to remove the corpse from the house. The illness grew upon Thorstein Ericsson and he died, whereat his wife, Gudrid, was sorely grieved. They were all in the room at the time, and Gudrid was seated upon a chair before the bench, upon which her husband, Thorstein was lying. Thorstein, the master of the house, then taking Gudrid in his arms, [carried her] from the chair, and seated himself, with her, upon another bench, over against her husband's body, and exerted himself in

[p. 91]

divers ways to console her, and endeavoured to reassure her, and promised her that he would accompany her to Ericsfirth with the body of her husband, Thorstein, and those of his companions. "I will likewise summon other persons hither," says he "to attend upon thee and entertain thee." She thanked him. Then Thorstein Ericsson sat up, and exclaimed: "Where is Gudrid?" Thrice he repeated the question, but Gudrid made no response. She then asked Thorstein, the master, "Shall I give answer to his question or not?" Thorstein, the master, bade her make no reply, and he then crossed the floor, and seated himself upon the chair, with Gudrid in his lap, and spoke, saying: "What dost thou wish, namesake?" After a little while, Thorstein replies: "I desire to tell Gudrid of the fate which is in store for her, to the end that she may he better reconciled to my death, for I am indeed come to a goodly resting place. This I have to tell thee, Gudrid, that thou art to marry an Icelander, and that ye are to have a long wedded life together, and a numerous and noble progeny, illustrious, and famous, of good odour and sweet virtues. Ye shall go from Greenland to Norway, and thence to Iceland, where ye shall build your home. There ye shall dwell together for a long time, but thou shalt outlive him, and shalt then go abroad and to the South, and shalt return to Iceland again, to thy home, and there a church shall then be raised, and thou shalt abide there and take the veil, and there thou shalt die." When he had thus spoken, Thorstein sank back again, and his body was laid out for burial, and borne to the ship. Thorstein, the master, faithfully performed all

[p. 92]

his promises to Gudrid. He sold his lands and live-stock in the spring, and accompanied Gudrid to the ship, with all his possessions. He put the ship in order, procured a crew, and then sailed to Ericsfirth. The bodies of the dead were now buried at the church, and Gudrid then went home to Leif at Brattahlid, while Thorstein the Swarthy made a home for himself on Ericsfirth, and remained there as long as he lived, and was looked upon as a very superior man.

 

OF THE WINELAND VOYAGES OF THORFINN AND HIS COMPANIONS.

That same summer a ship came from Norway to Greenland. The skipper's name was Thorfinn Karlsefni; he was a son of Thord Horsehead, and a grandson of Snorri, the son of Thord of Hofdi. Thorfin Karlsefni, who was a very wealthy man, passed the winter at Brattahlid with Leif Ericsson. He very soon set his heart upon Gudrid, and sought her hand in marriage; she referred him to Leif for her answer, and was subsequently betrothed to him, and their marriage was celebrated that same winter. A renewed discussion arose concerning a Wineland voyage, and the folk urged Karselfni to make the venture, Gudrid joining with the others. He determined to undertake the voyage, and assembled a company of sixty men and five women, and entered into an agreement with his shipmates that they should each share equally in all the spoils of the enterprise. They took with them all kinds of cattle, as it was their intention to settle the country, if they could. Karlsefni asked Leif for the

Click to enlarge
KARLSEFNI'S EXPEDITION ASCENDING CHARLES RIVER.

IT appears most probable from the text that when Karlsefni sailed from Iceland to visit the New World, in about the year 1003, his expedition comprised more than two ships. The saga mentions two ships, and also relates that on one ship were forty men. Considering that there was a total of 160 men in the company, while the character of the vessels used scarcely allowed for provisions and accommodation, for more than fifty men each, it is almost certain that three or more ships were included in the expedition. That the vessels were small or of very light draft is proved by their ability to navigate in rivers. as related in the saga. From the nature of the country described it is believed that the stream ascended was the Charles River that issues near Boston.

[p. 93]

house in Wineland, and he replied, that he would lend it but not give it. They sailed out to sea with the ship, and arrived safe and sound at Leifs-booths, and carried their hammocks ashore there. They were soon provided with an abundant and goodly supply of food, for a whale of good size and quality was driven ashore there, and they secured it, and flensed it, and had then no lack of provisions. The cattle were turned out upon the land, and the males soon became very restless and vicious; they had brought a bull with them. Karlsefni caused trees to be felled, and to be hewed into timbers, wherewith to load his ship, and the wood was placed upon a cliff to dry. They gathered somewhat of all of the valuable products of the land, grapes, and all kinds of game and fish, and other good things. In the summer succeeding the first winter, Skrellings were discovered. A great troop of men came forth from out the woods. The cattle were hard by, and the bull began to bellow and roar with a great noise, whereat the Skrellings were frightened, and ran away, with their packs wherein were grey furs, sables and all kinds of peltries. They fled towards Karlsefni's dwelling, and sought to effect an entrance into the house, but Karselfni caused the doors to be defended [against them]. Neither [people] could understand the other's language. The Skrellings put down their bundles then, and loosed them, and offered their wares [for barter], and were especially anxious to exchange these for weapons, but Karlsefni forbade his men to sell their weapons, and taking counsel with himself, he bade the women carry out milk to the Skrellings, which they no

[p. 94]

sooner saw than they wanted to buy it, and nothing else. Now the outcome of the Skrelling's trading was, that they carried their wares away in their stomachs, while they left their packs and peltries behind with Karlsefni and his companions, and having accomplished this [exchange] they went away. Now it is to be told that Karlsefni caused a strong wooden palisade to be constructed and set up around the house. It was at this time that Gudrid, Karlsefni's wife, gave birth to a male child, and the boy was called Snorri. In the early part of the second winter the Skrellings came to them again, and these were now much more numerous than before, and brought with them the same wares as at first. Then said Karlsefni to the women: "Do ye carry out now the same food, which proved so profitable before, and nought else." When they saw this they cast their packs in over the palisade. Gudrid was sitting within, in the doorway, beside the cradle of her infant son, Snorri when a shadow fell upon the door, and a woman in a black namkirtle ( ) entered. She was short in stature, and wore a fillet about her head; her hair was of a light chestnut colour, and she was pale of hue, and so big-eyed that never before had eyes so large been seen in a human skull. She went up to where Gudrid was seated, and said: "What is thy name?" "My name is Gudrid; but what is thy name?" "My name is Gudrid," says she. The housewife, Gudrid, motioned her with her hand to a seat beside her; but it so happened, that at that very instant Gudrid heard a great crash, whereupon the woman vanished, and at that same moment one of the Skrellings,

[p. 95]

who had tried to seize their weapons, was killed by one of Karlsefni's followers. At this the Skrellings fled precipitately, leaving their garments and wares behind them; and not a soul, save Gudrid alone, beheld this woman. "Now we must needs take counsel together," says Karlsefni, "for that I believe they will visit us a third time, in great numbers, and attack us. Let us now adopt this plan: ten of our number shall go out upon the cape, and show themselves there, while the remainder of our company shall go into the woods and hew a clearing for our cattle, when the troop approaches from the forest. We will also take our bull, and let him go in advance of us." The lay of the land was such that the proposed meeting-place had the lake upon the one side and the forest upon the other. Karlsefni's advice was now carried into execution. The Skrellings advanced to the spot which Karlsefni had selected for the encounter, and a battle was fought there, in which great numbers of the band of the Skrellings were slain. There was one man among the Skrellings, of large size and fine bearing, whom Karlsefni concluded must be their chief. One of the Skrellings picked up an axe, and having looked at it for a time, he brandished it about one of his companions, and hewed at him, and on the instant the man fell dead. Thereupon the big man seized the axe and after examining it for a moment he hurled it as far as he could, out into the sea; then they fled helter-skelter into the woods, and thus their intercourse came to an end. Karlsefni and his party remained there throughout the winter, but in the spring Karlsefni announced that he was not minded

[p. 96]

to remain there longer, but would return to Greenland. They now made ready for the voyage, and carried away with them much booty in vines and grapes and peltries. They sailed out upon the high seas, and brought their ship safely to Ericsfirth, where they remained during the winter.

 

FREYDIS CAUSES THE BROTHERS TO BE PUT TO DEATH

There was now much talk anew, about a Wineland-voyage, for this was reckoned both a profitable and an honourable enterprise. The same summer that Karlsefni arrived from Wineland, a ship from Norway arrived in Greenland. This ship was commanded by two brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, who passed the winter in Greenland. They were descended from an Icelandic family of the East-firths. It is now to be added that Freydis, Eric's daughter, set out from her home at Gardar, and waited upon the brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, and invited them to sail with their vessel to Wineland, and to share with her equally all of the good things which they might succeed in obtaining there. To this they agreed, and she departed thence to visit her brother, Leif, and ask him to give her the house which he had caused to be erected in Wineland, but he made her the same answer [as that which he had given Karlsefni], saying that he would lend the house, but not give it. It was stipulated between Karlsefni and Freydis, that each should have on ship-board thirty able-bodied men, besides the women; but Freydis immediately violated this compact, by concealing five men more [than this number], and this the

[p. 97]

brothers did not discover before they arrived in Wineland. They now put out to sea, having agreed beforehand that they would sail in company, if possible, and although they were not far apart from each other, the brothers arrived somewhat in advance, and carried their belongings up to Leif's house. Now when Freydis arrived, her ship was discharged, and the baggage carried up to the house, whereupon Freydis exclaimed: "Why did you carry your baggage in here?" "Since we believed," said they, "that all promises made to us would be kept." "It was to me that Leif loaned the house," says she, "and not to you." Whereupon Helgi exclaimed: "We brothers cannot hope to rival thee in wrong-dealing." They thereupon carried their baggage forth, and built a hut, above the sea, on the bank of the lake, and put all in order about it; while Freydis caused wood to be felled, with which to load her ship. The winter now set in, and the brothers suggested that they should amuse themselves by playing games. This they did for a time, until the folk began to disagree, when dissensions arose between them, and the games came to an end, and the visits between the houses ceased; and thus it continued far into the winter. One morning early, Freydis arose from her bed, and dressed herself, but did not put on her shoes and stockings. A heavy dew had fallen, and she took her husband's cloak, and wrapped it about her, and then walked to the brothers' house, and up to the door, which had been only partly closed by one of the men, who had gone out a short time before. She pushed the door open, and stood silently in the doorway for a

[p. 98]

time. Finnbogi, who was lying on the innermost side of the room, was awake, and said: "What dost thou wish here, Freydis?" She answers: "I wish thee to rise, and go out with me, for I would speak with thee." He did so, and they walked to a tree, which lay close by the wall of the house, and seated themselves upon it. "How art thou pleased here?" says she. He answered: "I am well pleased with the fruitfulness of the land, but I am ill-content with the breach which has come between us, for, methinks, there has been no cause for it." "It is even as thou sayest," said she, "and so it seems to me; but my errand to thee is, that I wish to exchange ships with you brothers, for that ye have a larger ship than I, and I wish to depart from here." "To this I must accede," said he, "if it is thy pleasure." Therewith they parted, and she returned home, and Finnbogi to his bed. She climbed up into bed, and awakened Thorvard with her cold feet, and he asked her why she was so cold and wet. She answered, with great passion: "I have been to the brothers," said she, "to try to buy their ship, for I wish to have a larger vessel, but they received my overtures so ill, that they struck me, and handled me very roughly; what time thou, poor wretch, will neither avenge my shame nor thy own, and I find, perforce, that I am no longer in Greenland; moreover I shall part from thee unless thou wreakest vengeance for this." And now he could stand her taunts no longer, and ordered the men to rise at once, and take their weapons, and this thy did, and they then proceeded directly to the house of the brothers, and entered it while the folk were asleep, and 

[p. 99]

seized and bound them, and led each one out when he was bound; and as they came out, Freydis caused each one to be slain. In this wise all of the men were put to death, and only the women were left, and these no one would kill. At this Freydis exclaimed: "Hand me an axe!" This was done, and she fell upon the five women, and left them dead. They returned home, after this dreadful deed, and it was very evident that Freydis was well content with her work. She addressed her companions, saying: "If it be ordained for us to come again to Greenland, I shall contrive the death of any man who shall speak of these events. We must give it out that we left them living here when we came away." Early in the spring they equipped the ship, which had belonged to the brothers and freighted it with all of the products of the land, which they could obtain, and which the ship would carry. Then they put out to sea, and after a prosperous voyage arrived with their ship, in Ericsfirth early in the summer. Karlsefni was there, with his ship all ready to sail, and was awaiting a fair wind; and people say that a ship richer laden than that which he commanded never left Greenland.

 

CONCERNING FREYDIS.

Freydis now went to her home, since it had remained unharmed during her absence. She bestowed liberal gifts upon all of her companions, for she was anxious to screen her guilt. She now established herself at her home; but her companions were not all so close-mouthed, concerning their misdeeds and wickedness, that rumours did not

[p. 100]

get abroad at last. These finally reached her brother, Leif, and he thought it a most shameful story. He thereupon took three of the men, who had been of Freydis' party, and forced them all at the same time to a confession of the affair, and their stories entirely agreed. "I have no heart," says Leif, "to punish my sister, Freydis, as she deserves, but this I predict of them, that there is little prosperity in store for their offspring." Hence it came to pass that no one from that time forward thought them worthy of aught but evil. It now remains to take up the story from the time when Karlsefni made his ship ready, and sailed out to sea. He had a successful voyage, and arrived in Norway safe and sound. He remained there during the winter, and sold his wares, and both he and his wife were received with great favour by the most distinguished men of Norway. The following spring he put his ship in order for the voyage to Iceland; and when all his preparations had been made, and his ship was lying at the wharf, awaiting favourable winds, there came to him a Southerner, a native of Bremen in the Saxonland, who wished to buy his "house-neat." "I do not wish to sell it," said he. "I will give the half a 'mork' in gold for it" ( ), says the Southerner. This Karlsefni thought a good offer, and accordingly closed the bargain. The Southerner went his way, with the "house-neat," and Karlsefni knew not what it was, but it was "mosur," come from Wineland.

Karlsefni sailed away, and arrived with his ship in the north of Iceland, in Skagafirth. His vessel was beached there during the winter, and in the spring he bought

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] Glaumboeiar-land ( ), and made his home there, and dwelt there as long as he lived, and was a man of the greatest prominence. Prom him and his wife, Gudrid, a numerous and goodly lineage is descended. After Karlsefni's death, Gudrid, together with her son, Snorri, who was born in Wineland, took charge of the farmstead; and when Snorri was married Gudrid went abroad and made a pilgrimage to the South, after which she returned again to the home of her son, Snorri, who had caused a church to be built at Glaumboer. Gudrid then took the veil and became an anchorite, and lived there the rest of her days. Snorri had a son, named Thorgeir, who was the father of Ingveld, the mother of Bishop Brand. Hallfrid was the name of the daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son; she was the mother of Runolf, Bishop Thorlak's father. Biorn was the name of [another] son of Karlsefni and Gudrid; he was the father of Thorunn, the mother of Bishop Biorn. Many men are descended from Karlsefni, and he has been blessed with a numerous and famous posterity; and of all men Karlsefni has given the most exact accounts of all these voyages, of which something has now been recounted.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

 

CHAPTER V.

 

WINELAND IN THE ICELANDIC ANNALS.

IN addition to the longer sagas of the discovery of Wineland, and the scattered references in other Icelandic historical literature, already adduced, the country finds mention in still another class of Icelandic records. These records are the chronological lists of notable events, in and out of Iceland, which are known as the Icelandic Annals. It has been conjectured that the archetype of these Annals was compiled either by the learned Ari, the father of Icelandic historiography, or in the century in which he lived. Although there is the best of reasons for the belief, that the first writer of Icelandic Annals was greatly indebted to Ari the Learned for the knowledge of many of the events which he records, such written evidence as we have from the century in which Ari lived would seem to indicate that this kind of literature had not then sprung into being,

A recent writer in an able disquisition upon this subject arrives at the conclusion, that the first book of Annals was written in the south of Iceland about the year 1280. While this theory is apparently well grounded, it is, nevertheless true that the first writer of Icelandic Annals of whom we have definite knowledge, was an Icelandic priest named Einar Haflidason, who was born in 1307, and died in 1393. The fact that Einar was the compiler of such a book is gleaned from his own work, through an

Click to enlarge
LETTER OF POPE INNOCENT III TO NORWAY BISHOPS.

PERHAPS the greatest literary discovery of a century are encyclical letters addressed to the bishops of Norway by Popes Innocent III, IV, V, John XXI, Martin IV, Nicholas III, Clement IV, Innocent VIII, and Martin V, in which reference are made to interests of the church in Greenland. The earliest of these documents thus far found is one from Innocent III, hearing date of February 13, 1206, and the mention therein of Greenland sets at rest, finally and absolutely, the long disputed question of the discovery of America by Norsemen several centuries before the time of Columbus. These manuscript letters were resurrected from their, ancient repository in the Vatican in the year 1903, and by special authorization of Cardinal Merry del Val, Papal Secretary of State, they are reproduced, with English translations, and appear in print for the first time in the Flatey book volume of this Norroena series. A part of Pope Innocent III's letter is shown on the accompanying page.

[p. 103]

entry under the year 1304, in which his birth is recorded in such wise as to point unmistakably to his authorship. This collection of Annals is contained in the parchment manuscript AM. 420 b, 4to, which has received the name, "Lewman's Annals" probably from the office held by some one of its former owners. Under the year 1121, we find in these Annals the entry: "Bishop Eric Uppsi sought Wineland."

The next considerable collection of Annals, the date of which we are enabled to determine with tolerable accuracy, is that appended to the Flatey Book, the manuscript of which has already been described. These Annals were written by the priest Magnus Thorhallsson, and doubtless completed before the year 1395, for all entries cease in the previous year. Among the recorded events of the year 1121 it is stated that "Eric, the Bishop of Greenland, went in search of Wineland."

Of a riper antiquity than either of the foregoing works are, in all likelihood, the so-called Annales Reseniani, the original vellum manuscript of which was destroyed by the fire of 1728. A paper copy from this original, written by Arni Magnusson, is preserved in AM. 424, 4to, The dates included in these Annals extend from the year 228 to 1295 inclusive, and it has been conjectured that these records were compiled before the year 1319. Here, under the year 1121, occurs the statement: "Bishop Eric sought Wineland."

A parchment manuscript is preserved in the Royal Library of Copenhagen, No. 2087, 4to, old collection, which contains the annals known as Annales regii. These are

[p. 104]

written in various hands, and are brought down to the year 1341. From the first entry down to the year 1306 the hand is the same, and from this fact the conclusion has been drawn that this portion of the manuscript was completed not later than 1307. Against the year 1121 we find the entry: "Bishop Eric of Greenland went in search of Wineland."

Similar entries to these occur in two other collections of Icelandic Annals, which may be mentioned here, for while these are, in their present form, of much more recent creation than those already noticed, they still seem to have drawn their material from elder lost vellums. One of these, Henrik Hoyer's Annals, derives its name from its first owner, who died in Bergen in the year 1615. It is a paper manuscript contained in AM. 22, fol., and bears strong internal evidence of having been copied from an Icelandic original, which has since disappeared. The entry in this manuscript under the year 1121 is: "Bishop Eric sought Wineland."

The other modern collection, known as Gottskalk's Annals, is contained in a parchment manuscript in the Royal Library of Stockholm, No. 5, 8vo., which it is believed was chiefly written by one Gottskalk Jonsson, a priest, who lived in the north of Iceland in the sixteenth century, and it has been conjectured, from internal evidence, that the portion of the compilation prior to the year 1391 was copied from a lost manuscript. The entry under the year 1121 corresponds with those already quoted: "Eric, the Greenlanders' bishop, sought Wineland."

Prom these different records, varying slightly in phraseology,

[p. 105]

but all of the same purport, we may safely conclude that, in the year 1121, a certain Bishop of Greenland, called Eric Uppsi, went upon a voyage in search of Wineland. It is the sum of information which the Annals have to give concerning that country, and is meagre enough, for we are not only left unenlightened as to why the voyage was undertaken, but we are not even informed whether the bishop succeeded in finding the country of which he went in search. It is not possible to obtain much additional knowledge concerning this Bishop Eric elsewhere. It seems altogether probable that he was the "Greenlanders' Bishop Eric Gnup's son," mentioned in a genealogical list in Landnama, and it is clear that if this be the same Eric, he was by birth an Icelander. This view is in a slight measure confirmed by an entry in the Lawman's Annals under the year 1112 [in the Annals of the Flatey Book under the year 1113] wherein the journey of Bishop Eric is recorded, a "journey" presumably undertaken away from Iceland, and probably to Greenland. In the ancient Icelandic scientific work called Rimbegla, in a list of those men who had been bishops at Gardar, the episcopal seat in Greenland, Eric heads the list, while in a similar list of Greenland bishops in the Flatey Book, Eric's name is mentioned third. No record of Bishop Eric's ordination has been preserved, and none of his fate, unless indeed it be written in the brief memorial of his Wineland voyage. It has been conjectured that this voyage to Wineland was undertaken as a missionary enterprise, a speculation which seems to have been suggested solely by the ecclesiastical office of the

[p. 106]

chief participant. It has been further conjectured, since we read in the Annals of the ordination of a new bishop for Greenland in 1124, that Eric must have perished in the undertaking. The date of his death is nowhere given and it is possible that the entry in the Annals, under the year 1121, is a species of necrological record. It is, in any event, the last surviving mention of Wineland the Good in the elder Icelandic literature.

Although no subsequent visit to Wineland is recorded a portion of the American coastland, seen by the original explorers, does appear to have been visited by certain of the Greenland colonists, more than a hundred years after Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage.

A parchment manuscript, AM. 420 a, 4to, contains a collection of Annals, known as the Elder Skalholt Annals not heretofore cited because of a lacuna covering the year 1121. This manuscript, which Arni Magnusson obtained from Skalholt, in the south of Iceland, and which he conjectures may have belonged to Skaholt church, or to Bishop Bryniolf's private library, is believed to have been written about the year 1362. We find in this, against the year 1347, the following record: "There came also a ship from Greenland, less in size than small Icelandic trading vessels. It came into the outer Stream-firth. It was without an anchor. There were seventeen men on board, and they had sailed to Markland, but had afterwards been driven hither by storms at sea." The Annals of Gottskalk record the simple fact in the same year: "A ship from Greenland came into the mouth of Streamfirth." On the other hand the Annals of the Flatey

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Book, under the year 1347, have the following more particular record: "A ship came then from Greenland, which had sailed to Markland, and there were eighteen men on board."

This scanty record is the last historical mention of a voyage undertaken by Leif's fellow-countrymen to a part of the land which he had discovered three hundred years before. The nature of the information indicates that the knowledge of the discovery had not altogether faded from the memories of the Icelanders settled in Greenland. It seems further to lend a measure of plausibility to a theory that people from the Greenland colony may, from time to time, have visited the coast to the southwest of their home for supplies of wood, or for some kindred purpose. The visitors in this case had evidently intended to return directly from Markland to Greenland, and had they not been driven out of their course to Iceland, the probability is that this voyage would never have found mention in Icelandic chronicles, and all knowledge of it must have vanished as completely as did the colony to which the Markland visitors belonged.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108]

 

CHAPTER VI.

 

NOTICES OF DOUBTFUL VALUE; FICTIONS.

IT will be remembered that a passage in the Book of Settlement [Landnamabok] recites the discovery, by one Ari Marsson, of a country lying westward from Ireland, called White-men's-land, or Ireland the Great. This White-men's-land is also mentioned in the Saga of Eric the Red, and in both places is assigned a location in the vicinity of Wineland the Good. Many writers have regarded this White-men's-land as identical with a strange country, the discovery of which is recounted in the Eyrbyggja Saga, having been led to this conclusion, apparently, from the fact that both unknown lands lay to the "westward," and that there is a certain remote resemblance between the brief particulars Of the Eric's Saga and the more detailed narrative of Eyrbyggja.

It is related in the Eyrbyggja Saga that a certain Biorn Asbrandsson became involved in an intrigue with a married woman named Thurid, which resulted in his wounding the affronted husband and slaying two of the husband's friends, for which he was banished from Iceland for the term of three years. Biorn went abroad, led an adventurous life, and received the name of "kappi" [champion, hero] on account of his valorous deeds. He subsequently returned to Iceland, where he was afterwards known as the Broadwickers'-champion. He brought with him on his return not only increase of fame,

[p. 109]

but the added graces of bearing due to his long fellowship with foreign chieftains, and he soon renewed his attentions to his former mistress. The husband, fearing to cope alone with so powerful a rival, invoked the aid of one skilled in the black art to raise a storm, which should overwhelm the object of his enmity. The hero, however, after three days of exposure to the preternaturally-agitated elements, returned exhausted, but in safety, to his home. The husband then prevailed upon his powerful brother-in-law, the godi ( ) Snorri, to come to his assistance, and as a result of Snorri's intervention, Biorn agreed to leave the country. He accordingly rode "south, to a ship in Laga-haven, in which he took passage that same summer, but they were rather late in putting to sea. They sailed away with a north-east wind, which prevailed far into the summer, but nothing was heard of this ship for a long time afterwards."

Further on in the same saga we read of the fortuitous discovery of this same Biorn by certain of his fellow-countrymen, and as the account of their strange meeting contains the sole description of this unknown land, it may best be given in the words of the saga. "It was in the latter days of Olaf the Saint that Gudleif engaged in a trading voyage westward to Dublin, and when he sailed from the west it was his intention to proceed to Iceland. He sailed to the westward of Ireland, and had easterly gales and winds from the northeast, and was driven far to the westward over the sea and toward the southwest, so that they had lost all track of land. The summer was then far spent, and they uttered many prayers that they

[p. 110]

might be permitted to escape from the sea, and it befell thereupon that they became aware of land. It was a great country, but they did not know what country it was. Gudleif and his companions determined to sail to the land, for they were weary with battling with the tempestuous sea. They found a good harbour there, and they had been alongside the land but a short time when men came toward them. They did not recognize a single man, but it rather seemed to them that they were speaking Irish; soon so great a throng of men had drawn about them that they amounted to several hundreds. These people thereupon seized them all and bound them, and then drove them up upon the land. They were then taken to a meeting, at which their case was considered. It was their understanding that some [of their captors] wished them to be slain, while others would have them distributed among the people and thrown into bondage. While this was being argued they descried a body of men riding, and a banner was carried in their midst, from which they concluded that some manner of chieftain must be in the company; and when this band drew near they saw a tall and warlike man riding beneath the banner; he was far advanced in years, however, and his hair was white. All of the people assembled bowed before this man and received him as he had been their lord; they soon observed that all questions and matters for decision were submitted to him. This man then summoned Gudleif and his fellows, and when they came before him he addressed them in the Northern tongue [i. e., Icelandic], and asked them to what country they belonged. They

[p. 111]

responded that they were, for the most part, Icelanders. This man asked which of them were the Icelanders. Gudlief then advanced before this man, and greeted him worthily, and he received his salutations graciously, and asks from what part of Iceland they came, and Gudleif replied that he came from Borgarfirth. He then enquired from what part of Borgarfirth he came, and Gudleif informs him. After this he asked particularly after every one of the leading men of Borgarfirth and Breidafirth, and in the course of the conversation he asked after Snorri Godi and Thurid, of Froda, his sister, and he enquired especially after all details concerning Froda, and particularly regarding the boy Kiartan, [*1] who was then the master at Froda. The people of the country, on the other hand, demanded that some judgment should be reached concerning the ship's crew. After this the tall man left them, and called about him twelve of his men, and they sat together for a long time in consultation, after which they betook themselves to the [general] meeting. Thereupon the tall man said to Gudleif and his companions: 'We, the people of this country, have somewhat considered your case, and the inhabitants have given your affair into my care, and I will now give you permission to go whither ye list; and even though it may seem to you that the summer is far spent, still I would counsel you to leave here, for the people here are untrustworthy and hard to deal with, and have already formed the belief that their laws have been broken.' Gudleif replied: 'If it be vouchsafed us to reach our native land, what shall we say

[p. 112]

concerning him who has granted us our freedom.' He answered: 'That I may not tell you, for I cannot bear that my relatives and foster-brothers should have such a voyage hither as ye would have had if ye had not had my aid; but now I am so advanced in years,' said he, 'that the hour may come at any time when age shall rise above my head; and even though I should live yet a little longer, still there are those here in the land who are more powerful than I who would offer little mercy to strangers, albeit these are not in this neighbourhood where ye have landed.' Afterward this man aided them in equipping their ship, and remained with them until there came a fair wind, which enabled them to put to sea. But before he and Gudleif parted, this man took a gold ring from his hand and handed it to Gudleif, and with it a goodly sword; and he then said to Gudleif: 'If it be granted thee to come again to thy father-land, then do thou give this sword to Kiartan, the master at Froda, and the ring to his mother.' Gudleif said: 'What shall I reply as to who sends these precious things?' He answered: 'Say that he sends them who was more of a friend of the mistress at Froda than of the Godi at Helgafell, her brother. But if any persons shall think they have discovered from this to whom these treasures belonged, give them my message, that I forbid any man to go in search of me, for it would be a most desperate undertaking, unless he should fare as successfully as ye have in finding a landing-place; for here is an extensive country with few harbours, and over all a disposition to deal harshly with strangers, unless it befall as it has in this case.' After

[p. 113]

this they parted. Gudleif and his men put to sea, and arrived in Ireland late in the autumn, and passed the winter in Dublin; but in the summer they sailed to Iceland, and Gudleif delivered the treasures, and all men held of a verity that this man was Biorn Broadwickers'-champion; but people have no other proof of this, save these particulars, which have now been related."

It will be observed that the narrator of the saga does not in this incident once connect this unknown land with White-men's-land, nor does he offer any suggestion as to its situation. The work of identifying this strange country with White-men's-land, and so with Wineland the Good, has been entirely wrought by the modern commentator. If we accept as credible a meeting so remarkable as the one here described, if we disregard the statements of the narrative showing the existence of horses in this unknown land, which the theorist has not hesitated to do, and, finally, if we assume that there was at this time an Irish colony or one speaking a kindred tongue in North America, we may conclude that Biorn's adopted home was somewhere on the eastern North-American coast. If, however, we read the statements of the saga as we find them, they seem all to tend to deny this postulate, rather than to confirm it. The entire story has a decidedly fabulous appearance, and, as has been suggested by a learned editor of the saga, a romantic cast, which is not consonant with the character of the history in which it appears. A narrative, the truth of which the narrator himself tells us had not been ratified by collateral evidence, and whose details are so vague and indefinite, seems to afford

[p. 114]

historical evidence of a character so equivocal that it may well be dismissed without further consideration.

Of an altogether different nature from the narrative of discovery above recited is the brief notice of the finding of a new land, set down in the Icelandic Annals toward the end of the thirteenth century. In the Annales regii, in the year 1285, the record reads: "Adalbrand and Thorvald, Helgi's sons, found New-land;" in the Annals of the Flatey Book, under the same year, "Land was found to the westward off Iceland;" and again in Gottskalk's Annals an entry exactly similar to that of the Flatey Book. In Hoyer's Annals the entry is of a different character: "Helgi's sons sailed into Greenland's uninhabited regions."

In the parchment manuscript AM. 415, 4to, written, probably, about the beginning of the fourteenth century, is a collection of annals called "Annales vetustissimi," and here, under the year 1285, is an entry similar to that of the Flatey Book: "Land found to the westward off Iceland." In the Skalholt Annals, on the other hand, the only corresponding entry against the year 1285 is: "Down-islands discovered."

It required but the similarity between the names Newland and Newfoundland to arouse the effort to identify the two countries; and the theory thus created was supposed to find confirmation in a passage in a copy of a certain document known as Bishop Gizur Einarsson's Register [brefa-bok], for the years 1540-47, which is contained in a paper manuscript of the seventeenth century, AM. 266, fol. This passage is as follows: "Wise men

[p. 115]

have said that you must sail to the southwest from Krisuvik mountain to Newland." Krisuvik mountain is situated on the  of Reykianess, the southwestern extremity of Iceland, and, as has been recently pointed out, to sail the course suggested by Bishop Gizur would in all probability land the adventurous mariner in southeastern Greenland. The record of the Annals, however, is so explicit, that in determining the site of "Newland" we do not need to orient ourselves by extraneous evidence. We are informed, that, in 1285, Helgi's sons sailed into Greenland's "obygdir," the name by which the Greenland colonists were wont to designate the uninhabited east coast of Greenland; and as it is elsewhere distinctly stated that the "Newland," which these men discovered in the same year, lay to the "westward off Iceland," there can be little room for hesitancy in reaching, the conclusion that "Newland," and the "Down-islands" all lie together, and are probably only different names for, the same discovery. However this may be, it is at least manifest, from the record, that if Newland was not a part of the eastern coast of Greenland, there is nothing to indicate that it was anywhere in the region of Newfoundland.

A few years after this discovery is recorded, namely in 1289, we find the following statement in the Flatey Annals: "King Eric sends Rolf to Iceland to seek Newland;" and again in the next year: "Rolf travelled about Iceland soliciting men for a Newland voyage." No additional information has been preserved touching this enterprise, and it therefore seems probable that if the voyage

[p. 116]

was actually undertaken, it was barren of results. The Flatey Annals note the death of Rolf, Land-Rolf, as he was called, in 1295, and as no subsequent seeker of Newland is named in Icelandic history, it may be assumed that the spirit of exploration died with him.

This brief record of the Annals is unquestionably historically accurate; moreover there may be somewhat of an historical foundation for the adventures of the Broadwickers'-champion recounted in the Eyrbyggja Saga; neither of these notices of discovery, however, appears to have any connection with the discovery of Wineland; they have been considered here chiefly because of the fact that they have been treated in the past as if they had a direct bearing upon the Wineland history.

The historical and quasi-historical material relating to the discovery of Wineland has now been presented. A few brief notices of Helluland, contained in the later Icelandic literature, remain for consideration. These notices necessarily partake of the character of the sagas in which they appear, and as these sagas are in a greater or less degree pure fictions, the references cannot be regarded as possessing much historical value.

First among these unhistorical sagas is the old mythical tale of Arrow-Odd, of which two recensions exist; the more recent and inferior version is that which contains the passages where Helluland is mentioned, as follows: "'But I will tell thee where Ogmund is; he is come into that firth which is called Skuggi, it is in Helluland's deserts . . . .; he has gone thither because he does not wish to meet thee; now thou mayest track him home, if

[p. 117]

thou wishest, and see how it fares.' Odd said thus it should be. Thereupon they sail until they come into Greenland's sea, when they turn south and west around the land . . . They sail now until they come to Helluland, and lay their course into the Skuggi-firth. And when they had reached the land the father and son went ashore, and walked until they saw where there was a fortification, and it seemed to them to be very strongly built."

In the same category with Arrow-Odd's Saga may be placed two other mythical sagas, the Saga of Halfdan Eysteinsson, and the Saga of Halfdan Brana's-fostering; in the first of these the passage containing the mention of Helluland is as follows: "Raknar brought Helluland's deserts under his sway, and destroyed all the giants there." In the second of these last-mentioned sagas the hero is driven out of his course at sea, until he finally succeeds in beaching his ship upon "smooth sands" beside "high cliffs;" "there was much drift-wood on the sands and they set about building a hut, which was soon finished. Halfdan frequently ascended the glaciers, and some of the men bore him company . . . . The men asked Halfdan what country this could be. Halfdan replied that they must be come to Helluland's deserts."

Belonging to a class of fictitious sagas known as "landvaettasogur" [stories of a country's guardian spirits], is the folk-tale of Bard the Snow-fell god. The first chapter of this tale begins: "There was a king named Dumb, who ruled over those gulfs, which extend northward around Helluland and are now called Dumb's sea." Subsequently we find brief mention of a king of Helluland, of

[p. 118]

whom Gest, the son of the hero of the saga, says: "I have never seen him before, but I have been told by my relatives that the king was called Rakin, and from their account I believe I recognize him; he at one time ruled over Helluland and many other countries, and after he had long ruled these lands he caused himself to be buried alive, together with five hundred men, at Raknslodi; he murdered his father and mother, and many other people; it seems to me probable, from the reports of other people, that his burial-mound is northward in Helluland's deserts." Gest goes in quest of this mound, sails to Greenland's deserts, where, having traversed the lava-fields [!] for three days on foot, he at length discovers the burial-mound upon an island near the sea-coast; "some men say that this mound was situated to the northward off Helluland, but wherever it was, there were no settlements in the neighbourhood."

The brief extracts here quoted will suffice to indicate not only the fabulous character of the sagas in which they appear, but they serve further to show how completely the discoveries of Leif, and the exploration of Karlsefni had become distorted in the popular memory of the Icelanders at the time these tales were composed, which was probably in the thirteenth or fourteenth century. The Helluland of these stories is an unknown region, relegated, in the popular superstition, to the trackless wastes of northern Greenland.

Footnotes

^111:1 This Kiartan was Thurid's son.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

 

CHAPTER VII.

 

THE PUBLICATION OF THE DISCOVERY

THE earliest foreign mention of Wineland appears in the work of the prebendary, Adam of Bremen, called Descriptio insularum aquilonis. The material for this work was obtained by its author during a sojourn at the court of the Danish king, Svend Estridsson, after the year 1069, and probably very soon thereafter, for his history appears to have been completed before the year 1076, the date of king Svend's death. The most important manuscript of Adam's longer work, the Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum, is the Codex Vindobonensis deposited in the Imperial Library of Vienna under the number 413. This manuscript, written in the thirteenth century, contains also the complete "description of the Northern islands," which is partially lacking in the fine manuscript of the same century, contained in the Royal Library of Copenhagen. This "description" was first printed in Lindenbruch's edition of Adam's work, published in 1595, and is the first printed reference to Wineland, being as follows: "Moreover he spoke of an island in that ocean discovered by many, which is called Wineland, for the reason that vines grow wild there, which yield the best of wine. Moreover, that grain unsown grows there abundantly is not a fabulous fancy, but from the accounts of the Danes we know to be a fact. Beyond this island, it is said. there is no habitable land in

[p. 120]

that ocean, but all those regions which are beyond are filled with insupportable ice and boundless gloom, to which Martian thus refers: "One day's sail beyond Thile the sea is frozen." This was essayed not long since by that very enterprising Northmen's prince, Harold, who explored the extent of the northern ocean with his ship, but was scarcely able by retreating to escape in safety from the gulf's enormous abyss, where before his eyes the vanishing bounds of earth were hidden in gloom."

The learned cleric, it will be observed, is very careful to give his authority for a narrative which evidently impressed him as bordering sharply upon the fabulous. The situation which he would ascribe to the strange country is inaccurate enough, but the land where vines grow wild and grain self-sown, stripped of the historian's adornments, would accord sufficiently well with the accounts of the discoverers of Wineland to enable us to identify the country, if Adam had not himself given us the name of this land, and thus arrested all uncertainty. It is not strange, however, that with the lapse of time the knowledge of such a land should have been erased from the recollection of the outer world. The author of the so called "Breve Chronicon Norvegiae" is, therefore, constrained to omit all reference to this wonderful land, although his reference to Greenland indicates an acquaintance with that tradition, which in Icelandic geographical notices, already cited, would ascribe Wineland to a more southerly clime, bordering indeed upon Africa. The manuscript of this history, which has been preserved, belongs to the Earl of Dalhousie, and was probably written

[p. 121]

between the years 1443 and 1460. The passage mentioned, while it is not strictly pertinent, in a measure indicates, perhaps, the information accessible at this period to an author who must have been more or less acquainted with the current lore of the land in which the Wineland history was still preserved. Greenland, this author writes, "which country was discovered and settled by the inhabitants of Thule [Telensibus], and strengthened by the Catholic faith, lies at the western boundary of Europe, almost bordering upon the African isles, where the overflowing sea spreads out." No quickening evidence came from Iceland until long afterward, and those who saw Adam's Wineland recital probably regarded it as the artless testimony of a too-credulous historian.

After the publication of Adam of Bremen's work, in 1595, the name of Wineland next recurs in print in a poem written by the Danish clergyman, Claus Christoffersson Lyschander, called the Chronicle of Greenland, which was published in Copenhagen in 1608. Founded, apparently, upon the scantiest of historical material, which material was treated with the broadest of poetic license, the Chronicle is devoid of historical value. Lyschander seems to have derived from Icelandic Annals the knowledge of Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage, and to have elaborated this entry, with the aid of his vivid imagination, into three lines of doggerel in somewhat the following manner:

	 
		And Eric of Greenland did the deed,
		 Planted in Wineland both folk and creed,
		 Which are there e'en now surviving.
		
		 
		
		 [p. 122]

A few years prior to this rhapsody of Lyschander's, the geographer Ortelius had ascribed to the Northmen the credit of the discovery of America. According to Alexander von Humboldt, Ortelius announced this opinion in 1570, and he cites Ortelius' work, "Theatrum orbis terrarum," in the edition of 1601. The edition of 1584 of Ortelius' work does not so credit the discovery, but the English edition of 1606 does explicitly, and clearly sets forth upon what foundation the author rests his statement. Ortelius does not seem to have had, and could not well have had at the time he wrote, any acquaintance with Icelandic records; his opinion, as he himself tells us, was based upon the marvellous relation of the voyages of the brothers Zeni, first published in 1558. It is not pertinent to dwell here upon the authenticity of the Zeni discoveries, and while it is true that Ortelius stated the fact, when he announced that the "New World was entered upon many ages past by certain 'islanders' of Greenland and Iceland," he travelled to it by a circuitous route, and hit upon it, after all, by a happy chance.

The debased taste in Iceland, which followed the age when the greater sagas were committed to writing, found its gratification in the creation of fictitious tales, in recounting the exploits of foreign heroes, and for a time the garnered wealth of their historical literature was disregarded or forgotten by the people of Iceland. With the revival of learning, which came in post-Reformation times, after a long period of comparative literary inactivity, came a reawakening of interest in the elder literature, and the Icelandic scholars of this era heralded abroad

[p. 123]

the great wealth of the discarded treasures which their ancestors had amassed.

The first writer in modern times to glean from Icelandic records, and to publish, as thus established, the discovery made by his countrymen, was Arngrim Jonsson [Arngrimr Jonsson], who was born in Iceland in 1568. His various historical works, published during his life-time, were written in Latin, and all, with the exception of the first edition of a single work, issued from presses on the Continent. His writings were, for the most part, devoted to the history of his fatherland and to its defence, but incidentally two of these, at least, refer to the Wineland discovery. The first of these works, "Crymogoea, sive Rerum Islandicarum," was published in Hamburg in 1610, 1614, 1630. The notice in this book refers to the discovery of "New Land" in 1285, and Land-Rolf's expedition to Iceland [undertaken with a view to the exploration of this land], diverges into a consideration of the Frislanda of the Zeni narrative, which the author regards as Iceland, and concludes: "In truth we believe the country which Land-Rolf sought to be Wineland, formerly so-called by the Icelanders, concerning which island of America, in the region of Greenland, perhaps the modern Estotelandia, elsewhere;" a statement chiefly interesting from the fact that it is the first printed theory as to the location of Wineland.

In a second book, written ca. 1635, but not published until 1643, Arngrim refers at some length to Karlsefni and his Wineland voyage, which information he states he draws from Hauk's history, and also makes mention

[p. 124]

of Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage, noting incidentally Adam of Bremen's reference to that country.

Arngrim died in 1648, leaving behind him an unprinted Latin manuscript, which was subsequently translated into Icelandic and published in Iceland under the title "Gronlandia." In this treatise he deals more minutely with the Wineland discovery, but it is probable that this book failed to obtain as wide a circulation among the scholars of Europe as his earlier works, and even though it had become well known, it was destined to be followed, a few years later, by a much more exhaustive work, which must have supplanted it.

Although the Icelandic discovery had now been published, the chief documents from which the knowledge of the discovery was drawn, remained for many years in Iceland, where they were practically inaccessible to the foreign student. Arngrim Jonsson was himself, probably, the first to set the example, which, actively followed after his death, soon placed the Icelandic manuscripts within comparatively easy reach of the students of the Continent. We have already seen, incidentally, how certain of these codices were exported; it remained for the tireless bibliophile, Arni Magnusson, to complete the deportation of manuscripts from his fatherland, so that early in the eighteenth century all of the more important early vellums containing the Wineland narrations were lodged in the libraries of Copenhagen. The hugest of all these manuscripts, the Flatey Book, had been brought by the talented Icelander, Thormod Torfaeus, from Iceland to Denmark, as a gift to King Frederick the Third.

[p. 125]

In the year 1715 Torfaeus published the first book devoted exclusively to the discovery of Wineland. In this little work the place of priority is assigned to the account of the discovery as unfolded in the Flatey Book; this is followed by a compendium of the Saga of Eric the Red [Thorfinns Saga], with which the author seems to have become acquainted through a transcript of the Hauk's Book Saga, made by Biorn of Skardsa. The interest which Torfaeus' little book elicited was of such a character that the general dissemination of the knowledge of the discovery may almost be said to date from its appearance; the publication of texts of the sagas upon which Torfaeus' book was based was not accomplished, however until the present century.

In 1837 the sumptuous work entitled "Antiquitates Americanae" was published by the Royal Society of Northern Antiquaries of Copenhagen. The book was edited by Carl Christian Rafn, with whom were associated Finn Magnusen and Sveinbiorn Egilsson; the associate editors, however, especially the last-named, seem to have shared to a very limited extent in the preparation of the work; all were scholarly men, well versed in the literature of Iceland. This book was by far the most elaborate which had been published up to that time upon the subject of the Icelandic discovery of America, and in it the texts of the sagas relating to the discovery were first printed, and with these the lesser references bearing upon the discovery, which were scattered through other Icelandic writings. Side by side with the Icelandic texts, Latin and Danish versions of these texts were presented,

[p. 126]

and along with these the interpretations and theories of the gifted editor, Rafn. The book obtained a wide circulation, and upon it have been based almost all of the numerous treatises upon the same subject which have since appeared. Rafn's theories touching the Old Stone Tower at Newport, R. I., and the Dighton Picture Rock near Taunton, Mass., have latterly fallen into disfavour, but others of his errors, less palpable than these, if we may judge by recent publications, still exercise potent sway. While the editor of the "Antiquitates Americanae" deserves great praise for having been the first to publish to the world the original records, he has seriously qualified the credit to which he is entitled by the extravagant theories and hazardous statements to which he gave currency, and which have prejudiced many readers against the credibility of the records themselves.

Since the publication of the "Antiquitates Americanae" the most important and original treatise upon the Wineland discovery which has appeared, is that recently published by Dr. Gustav Storm, Professor of History in the University of Christiania, entitled, "Studies relating to the Wineland voyages, Wineland's Geography and Ethnography." These "Studies" appear to have been the natural sequence of an article upon the vexed question, affecting the site of Wineland, to which reference has already been made. Professor Storm's method of treatment is altogether different from that of Rafn; it is philosophical, logical, and apparently entirely uninfluenced by preconceived theories, being based strictly upon the records. These records of the Icelandic discovery have now

[p. 127]

been presented here. They clearly establish the fact that some portion of the eastern coast of North America was visited by people of Iceland and the Icelandic colony in Greenland early in the eleventh century. In matters of detail, however, the history of the discovery leaves wide the door to conjecture as to the actual site of Wineland. It was apparently not north of the latitude of northern Newfoundland; present climatic conditions indicate that it was situated somewhat south of this latitude, but how far south the records do not show.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

 

NOTES.

(1) It has been claimed that the Icelandic discovery attained a practical result through the imparting of information to those to whom the discovery of America has been generally ascribed, and notably to Columbus and the Cabots. The tendency to qualify Columbus' fame as the original discoverer dates from the time of Ortelius, while the effort to show that his first voyage was influenced by information which he received from Icelandic sources was, perhaps, first formulated in extenso within the present century. The theory that Columbus obtained definite information from Icelandic channels, rests, after all, upon the following vague letter, which is cited by Columbus' son in the biography of his father, as follows:

"In the month of February, of the year 1477, I sailed one hundred leagues beyond the island of Tile, the southern portion of which is seventy-three degrees removed from the equinoctial, and not sixty-three, as some will have it; nor is it situated within the line which includes Ptolemy's west, but is much further to the westward; and to this island, which is as large as England, the English come with their wares, especially those from Bristol. And at the time when I went thither the sea was not frozen, although the tides there are so great that in some places they rose twenty-six fathoms, and fell as much. It is, indeed, the fact that that Tile, of which Ptolemy makes mention, is situated where he describes it, and by the moderns this is called Frislanda."

John and Sebastian Cabot are supposed, by similar theorists, to have derived knowledge of the Icelandic discovery through the English, and especially the Bristol trade with Iceland. These theories do not require further consideration here, since they have no bearing on the primitive history of the Wineland discovery.

(2) Lit. law-saying men, publishers of the laws. The office was introduced into Iceland contemporaneously with the adoption

[p. 129]

of the law code of Ulfliot, and the establishment of the Althing [Popular Assembly] in the year 930, and was, probably, modelled after a similar Norwegian office. It was the duty of the "law-sayer" to give judgment in all causes which were submitted to him, according to the common law established by the Althing. The "law-sayer" appears to have presided at the Althing, where it was his custom to regularly announce the laws. From this last, his most important, function called "law-saying" [logsaga], the office received its name. From the time of its adoption, throughout the continuance of the Commonwealth, the office was elective, the incumbent holding office for a limited period [three years] although he was eligible for reelection.

(3) Rafn was distantly related to Ari Marsson and Leif Ericsson. His ancestor, Steinolf the Short, was the brother of Thorbiorg, Ari Marsson's grandmother, and through the same ancestor, Steinolf, Rafn was remotely connected with Thiodhild, Leif Ericsson's mother.

(4) By this Thorfinn, the second earl of that name, is probably meant, i. e., Thorfinn Sigurd's son. "He was the most powerful of all the Orkney earls. * * * Thorfinn was five years old when the Scotch king, Malcolm, his maternal grandfather, gave him the title of earl, and he continued earl for seventy years. He died in the latter days of Harold Sigurdsson," [ca. A. D. 10641.

(5) It is recorded in Icelandic Annals that King Olaf Tryggvason effected the  of Halogaland in the year 999.

(6) Lit. "house-neat-wood." May be rendered either brown, weather vane, or gable decoration of a house. That the names should have been used interchangeably for the similar object, in both house and ship, is the less remarkable, since we read of a portion of a ship's prow having been removed from a vessel and placed above the principal entrance of a house, that is, in some part of the gable-end of the dwelling.

(7) If the meaning is, as suggested in this passage, that the "house-neat" was hewed to the northward of Hop, the only intelligible interpretation of the following clause would seem to be that although Karlsefni attained the region which corresponded

[p. 130]

with Leif's accounts of Wineland, he did not succeed, on account of the hostility of the natives which compelled him to beat a retreat, in accomplishing a thorough exploration of the country, nor was he able to carry back with him any of the products of the land.

(8) Lit. the Uplanders, i. e., the people of the Norwegian Oplandene; a name given to a district in Norway comprising a part of the eastern inland counties.

(9) Olaf the White is called in the Eyrbyggja Saga "the greatest warrior-king in the western sea." This expedition, in which he effected the capture of Dublin, appears to have been made about the year 852. As the forays of these "warrior-kings" were mainly directed against the people living in and about the British Isles, and hence to the westward of Norway, the expression, "at herja i vestrviking," "to engage in a westerly foray," came to be a general term for a viking descent upon some part of the coast of Great Britain, Ireland, or the adjacent islands. These free-booting expeditions began on the Irish coasts, perhaps as early as 795. In 798 the Norsemen plundered the Hebrides, and in 807 obtained a lodgment upon the mainland of Ireland.

(10) Aud, or as she is also called Unnr, the Enormously-wealthy or Deep-minded, was one of the most famous of the Icelandic colonists. She was one of the few colonists who had accepted the Christian religion before their arrival in Iceland. Her relatives, however, seemed to have lapsed into the old faith soon after her death, for on the same hill on which Aud had erected her cross, they built a heathen altar, and offered sacrifices, believing that, after death, they would pass into the hill.

(11) [Sodor], lit. the southern islands; a name applied specifically, as here, to the Hebrides.

(12) Knorr, a kind of trading-ship. It was in model, doubtless, somewhat similar to the modern typical sailing craft of northern Norway. It was, probably, a clinker-built ship, pointed at both ends, half-decked [fore?] and aft, and these half-decks were in the larger vessels connected by a gangway along the gunwale. The open space between the decks was reserved for

[p. 131]

the storage of the cargo, which, when the ship was laden, was protected by skins or some similar substitute for tarpaulins. The vessel was provided with a single mast, and was propelled by a rude square sail, and was also supplied with oars. The rudder was attached to the side of the ship, upon the starboard quarter, and the anchor, originally of stone, was afterward supplanted by one of iron, somewhat similar in form to those now in use. When the vessel was in harbour a tent was spread over the ship at both ends. The vessel was supplied with a large boat, called the "after-boat," sometimes large enough to hold twenty persons [Egils Saga Skallagrimssonar, ch. 27], which was frequently towed behind the ship; in addition to this, a smaller boat often appears to have been carried upon the ship. Upon Queen Aud's vessel there were twenty freemen, and besides these there were probably as many more women and children, perhaps forty or fifty persons in all. As Aud was going to a new country to make it her permanent home, she took with her, no doubt, a considerable cargo of household utensils, timber, grain, live-stock, etc.

(13) Frjals, a freedman, from fri-hals, i. e., having the neck free; a ring worn about the neck having been a badge of servitude. Slaves were called thralls. The thrall was entirely under the control of his master, and could only obtain his freedom by purchase, with the master's approval. He was occasionally freed by his lord, as a reward for some especial act of devotion, for a long period of faithful service, or, in Christian times, as an act of atonement or propitiation on the part of the master. The early settlers of Iceland brought with them many of their thralls from Norway; others were captured in the westerly forays, or purchased in the British Isles,--indeed the ranks of the slaves would appear, both from actual record and from their names, to have been mainly recruited from the British Isles. The majority of these were probably not serfs by birth, but by conquest, as witness the case of Vifil in this saga. The freeing of thralls was very common in Iceland, and there are frequent references in the saga to men who were themselves, or whose fathers had been freedmen. The master could kill his own thrall without punishment; if he killed the slave of another he was required to pay to the master the value of the slave,

[p. 132]

within three days, or he laid himself liable to condemnation to the lesser outlawry. The thralls were severely punished for their misdeeds, but if one man took into his own hands the punishment of the thralls of another, it was held to be an affront which could be, and usually was, promptly revenged by their master. It was this right of revenge for such an affront which led Eric the Red to kill Eyiolf Saur, who had punished Eric's thralls for a crime committed against Eyiolf's kinsman, Valthiof. The master, however, was made liable for the misdeeds of his thrall, and could be prosecuted for these; the offense in  case was, that he took the execution of the law into his own hands.

(14) Dalalend, lit. the Dale-lands. The region of which Aud took possession is in the western part of Iceland, contiguous to that arm of the Breidafirth [Broad-firth] which is known as Hvamms-firth. Hvammr is on the northern side of this firth at its head, and Krossholar [Cross-hill] is hard by. Both Hvammr and Krossholar still retain their ancient names.

(15) [Vifilsdale] unites with Laugardalr to form the Hordadair, through which the Horda-dale river flows from the south into Hvamms-firth, at the south-eastern bight of that firth.

(16) Jaederen was a district in south-western Norway, in which the modern Stavanger is situated.

(17) Drangar on Horn-strands, where Eric and his father first established themselves, is on the northern shore of the north-west peninsula of Iceland. Erics-stead, to which Eric removed after his father's death and his own marriage to Thorhild, was in Haukadalr, in western Iceland, in Queen Aud's "claim."

(18) Brokey [Brok-island, which receives its name from a kind of grass called "brok"] is the largest of the numerous islands at the mouth of Hvamms-firth, where it opens into Breida-firth. It is claimed that Eric's home was upon the northern side of the island, at the head of a small bay or creek, called Eiriksvagr, and it is stated that low mounds can still be seen on both Oxney and Sudrey, which are supposed to indicate the sites of Eric's dwellings.

[p. 133]

(19) In the skali, which was, perhaps, at the time of which this saga treats, used as a sleeping-room, there was a raised dais or platform, called the "set," on either side of what may be called a nave of the apartment, extending about two-thirds the length of the room. This "set" was used, as a sleeping-place by night.

(20) Drangar [Monoliths] and Broad-homestead were both situated on the mainland, a short distance to the southward of the islands on which Eric had established himself.

(21) One of the famous "settlers" of Iceland, named Thorolf Moster-beard, like many another "settler," because he would not acknowledge the supremacy of king Harold Fairhair, left his home in the island of Moster, in south-western Norway, and sailed to Iceland, where he arrived about the year 884. He was a believer in the "old" or heathen faith, and when he reached the land, he cast the pillars of the "place of honour" of his Norwegian home into the sea; upon these the figure of the god Thor was carved, and where these penates were cast up by the sea, according to the custom of men of his belief, he established himself.

(22) Dimunarvagr [Dimun-inlet] was, probably, in that group of small islets called Dimun, situated north-east of Brokey at the mouth of Hvamms-firth.

(23) Very little information has been preserved concerning Gunnbiorn, or his discovery. His brother, Grimkell, was one of the early Icelandic colonists, and settled on the western coast of Snowfells-ness, his home being at Saxaholl. It is not known whether Gunnbiorn ever lived in Iceland, but it would seem to be probable that it was upon a voyage to western Iceland, that he was driven westward across the sea between Iceland and Greenland, and discovered the islands which received his name, and likewise saw the Greenland coast.

(24) Blacksark and Whitesark may have been either on the eastern or the south-eastern coast of Greenland. It is not possible to determine from the description here given whether Blacksark was directly west of Snaefellsjokull, nor is it clear whether Blacksark and Whitesark are the same mountain, or

[p. 134]

whether there has been a clerical error in one or the other of the manuscripts.

(25) The principal Norse remains [i. e., remains from the Icelandic colony in Greenland] have been found in two considerable groups; one of these is in the vicinity of the modern Godthaab, and the other in the region about the modern Julianehaab [the famous Kakortok church ruin being in the latter group]. It may be, that the first or Godthaab ruins, are upon the site of the Western Settlement, and the second, or Julianehaab group, upon that of the Eastern Settlement.

(26) This Ingolf was called Ingolf the Strong. He was probably a son of the Icelandic colonists, named Thorolf Sparrow. His home was on the southern side of Hvamms-firth.

(27) Thorbiorn's and Thorgeir's father was the same Vifil who came out to Iceland with Queen Aud, and who received from her the land which is settled, Vifilsdale, as has been narrated in this saga.

(28) Thorgeirsfell was upon the southern side of Snowfellsness, to the eastward of Arnarstapi.

(29) The simple fact that Thorgeir was a freedman would seem to have offered no valid reason for Thorbiorn's refusal to consider his son's offer for Gudrid's hand, since Thorbiorn was himself the son of a man who had been a thrall; the ground for his objection was, perhaps, not so much the former thraldom of Einar's father, as the fact that he was a man of humble birth, which Thorbiorn's father, although a slave, evidently was not.

(30) Hraunhofn [Lava-haven] was on the southern side of Snowfells-ness, nearly midway between Laugarbrekka and Thorgeirsfell. It was this harbour from which Biorn Broadwickers'-champion set sail, as narrated in Eyrbyggja.

(31) The word velva signifies a prophetess, pythoness, sibyl, a woman gifted with the power of divination. The characterization of the prophetess, the minute description of her dress, the various articles of which would seem to have had a symbolic meaning, and the account of the manner of working the spell, whereby she was enabled to forecast future events, form

[p. 135]

one of the most complete pictures of a heathen ceremony which has been preserved in the sagas.

(32) The expression "Leif had sailed," would seem to refer to an antecedent condition, possibly to the statement concerning the arrival of Thorbiorn and his daughter at Brattahlid; i. e., "Leif had sailed" when they arrived. If this be indeed the fact, it follows that Thorbiorn and his daughter must have arrived at Brattahlid during Leif's absence in Norway, and obviously before his return to Greenland, in the autumn of the year 1000. Upon this hypothesis, it is clear, that Thorbiorn and Gudrid must have been converted to Christianity before its legal acceptance in Iceland; that is to say, before the year 1000; and further, that Thorstein Ericsson may have been married to Gudrid in the autumn after his return from his unsuccessful voyage, namely, in the autumn of the year 1001; accordingly Karlsefni may have arrived in the following year, have been wedded to Gudrid at the next Yule-tide, 1002-3, and have undertaken his voyage to Wineland in the year 1003. This chronology is suggested with the sole aim of fixing the earliest possible date for Karlsefni's voyage or exploration.

(33) The expression "margkunnig," conveys the impression that Thorgunna was gifted with preternatural wisdom.

(34) It has been suggested, that this Thorgunna is the same woman of whom we read in the Eyrbyggja Saga: "That summer, when Christianity was accepted by law in Iceland, a ship arrived out of Snowfells-ness; this was a Dublin ship. . . . Thorgunna was a large woman, tall, and very stout; with dark brown eyes set close together, and thick brown hair; she was for the most part pleasant in her bearing, attended church every morning before she went to her work, but was not, as a rule, easy of approach nor inclined to be talkative. It was the common opinion that Thorgunna must be in the sixties." In the autumn after her arrival Thorgunna died, and strange events accompanied her last illness. As she approached her end, she called the master of the house to her, and said: "It is my last wish, if I die from this illness, that my body be conveyed to Skalholt, for I foresee that it is destined to be one of the most famous spots in this land, and I know that there must be

[p. 136]

priests there now to chant my funeral service. I have a gold ring, which is to go with my body to the church, but my bed and hangings I wish to have burned, for these will not be of profit to any one; and this I say, not because I would deprive any one of the use of these things, if I believed that they would be useful; but I dwell so particularly upon this," says she, "because I should regret, that so great affliction should be visited upon any one, as I know must be, if my wishes should not be fulfilled."

(35) The Froda-wonder is the name given to the extraordinary occurrences which befell at the farmstead of Froda soon after Thorgunna's death. The "wonder" began with the appearance of a "weird-moon," which was supposed to betoken the death of some member of the family. This baleful prophecy was followed by the death of eighteen members of the household, and subsequently by the nightly apparitions of the dead. The cause of this marvel was attributed to the fact that the Mistress of Froda had prevailed upon her husband to disregard Thorgunna's injunction to burn the drapery of her bed; and not until these hangings were burned was the evil influence exorcised, and the ghostly apparitions laid, the complete restoration of the normal condition of affairs being further facilitated by the timely recommendations of a priest, whose services had been secured to that end.

(36) It is not certain what variety of wood is meant; the generally accepted view has been that it was some species of maple. That the tree called mosurr was also indigenous in Norway is in a manner confirmed by a passage in the Short Story of Helgi Thorisson, contained in Flatey Book (vol. i, p. 359): "One summer these brothers engaged in a trading voyage to Finmark in the north, having butter and pork to sell to the Finns. They had a successful trading expedition, and returned when the summer was far-spent, and came by day to a cape called Vimund. There were very excellent woods here. They went ashore, and obtained some 'mosurr' wood." It is reasonably clear, however, that the wood was rare and, whether it grew in Finmark or not, it was evidently highly prized.

(37) Thiodhild is also called Thorhild, and similarly Gudrid

[p. 137]

is called Thurid. It has been conjectured that Thorhild and Thurid were the earlier names, which were changed by their owners after their conversion to Christianity, because of the suggestion of the heathen god in the first syllable of their original names.

(38) Such a fall as this of Eric's does not seem to have been generally regarded as an evil omen, if we may be guided by the proverb: "A fall bodes a lucky journey from the house but not toward it."

(39) The display of an axe seems to have been peculiarly efficacious in laying such fetiches. From among numerous similar instances the following incident may be cited: "Thorgils heard a knocking outside upon the roof; and one night he arose, and taking an axe in his hand went outside, where he saw a huge malignant spectre standing before the door. Thorgils raised his axe, but the spectre turned away, and directed itself toward the burial-mound, and when they reached it the spectre turned against him, and they began to wrestle with each other, for Thorgils had dropped his axe."

(40) Thorfinn Karlsefni's ancestral line was of rare excellence; it is given in Landnama at rather greater length, but otherwise as here: "Thord was the name of a famous man in Norway, he was a son of Biorn Byrdusmior," etc. His grandmother's father, Thord the Yeller, was one of the most famous men in the first century of Iceland's history; he it was who established the Quarter-courts.

(41) Swan-firth is on the southern side of Hvamms-firth, near its junction with Breida-firth, in western Iceland. It is not improbable that the two ships sailed from Breida-firth, the starting-point for so many of the Greenland colonists.

(42) It has been claimed that this Thorhall, Gamli's son, was no other than the Thorhall Gamli's son, of Grettis Saga. It would appear, however, to be pretty clearly established, that the Thorhall, Gamli's son of Grettis Saga, was called after his father Vindlendingr [Wendlander], and that he was an altogether different man from the Thorhall, Gamli's son, of the Saga of Eric the Red.

[p. 138]

(43) The celebration of Yule was one of the most important festivals of the year, in the North, both in heathen and in Christian times. Before the introduction of Christianity it was the central feast of three, which were annually held. Of the significance of these three heathen ceremonials, we read: "Odin established in his realm those laws which had obtained with the Ases. . . At the beginning of winter a sacrificial banquet was to be held for a good year, in mid-winter they should offer sacrifice for increase, and the third [ceremonial], the sacrifice for victory, was to be held at the beginning of summer."

(44) Freydis also accompanied the expedition, as appears further on in the saga.

(45) This passage is one of the most obscure in the saga. If the conjecture as to the probable site of the Western Settlement in the vicinity of Godthaab is correct, it is not apparent why Karlsefni should have first directed his course to the north-west, when his destination lay to the south-west. It is only possible to explain the passage by somewhat hazardous conjecture. Leif may have first reached the Western Settlement on his return from the voyage of discovery, and Karlsefni, reversing Leif's itinerary, may have been led to make the Western Settlement his point of departure; or there may have been some reason, not mentioned in the saga, which led the voyagers to touch first the Western Settlement.

(46) Doegr is thus defined in the ancient Icelandic work on chronometry called Rimbegla: "In the day there are two 'doegr;' in the 'doegr" twelve hours." This reckoning, as applied to a sea-voyage, is in at least one instance clearly confirmed, namely in the Saga of Olaf the Saint, wherein it is stated that King Olaf sent Thorarin Nefiolfsson to Iceland: "Thorarin sailed out with his ship from Dorntheim, when the King sailed, and accompanied him southward to Moeri. Thorarin then sailed out to sea, and he had a wind which was so powerful and so favorable, that he sailed in eight 'doegr' to Eyrar in Iceland, and went at once to the Althing." The meaning of the word is not so important to enable us to intelligently interpret the saga, as is the determination of the distance, which was reckoned to an average "doegr's" sail; that is to say, the

[p. 139]

distance which we may safely conclude, was traversed, under average conditions, in a single "doegr" by Icelandic sailing craft. Having regard to the probable course sailed from Norway to Iceland, it would appear that a "doegr's" sail was approximately one hundred and eight miles. This result precludes the possibility that any point in Labrador could have been within a sailing distance of two "doegr" from the Western Settlement. The winds appear to have been favorable to the explorers; the sail of seven "doegr" "to the southward," from Greenland with the needful westering, would have brought Karlsefni and his companions off the Labrador coast. Apart from this conjecture, it may be said that the distance sailed in a certain number of "doegr" (especially where such distances were probably not familiar to the scribes of the sagas), seem in many cases to be much greater than is reconcilable with our knowledge of the actual distances traversed, whether we regard the "doegra" sail as representing a distance of one hundred and eight miles or a period of twenty-four hours.

(47) This may well have been the keel of one of the lost ships belonging to the colonists who had sailed for Greenland with Eric the Red a few years before; the wreckage would naturally drift hither with the Polar current.

(48) Lit. Scotch. This word seems to have been applied to both the people of Scotland and Ireland. The names of the man and woman, as well as their dress, appear to have been Gaelic, they are, at least, not known as Icelandic; the minute description of the dress, indeed, points to the fact that it was strange to Icelanders.

(49) i. e. Thor. It has been suggested, that Thorhall's persistent adherence to the heathen faith may have led to his being regarded with ill-concealed disfavor.

(50) There can be little doubt that this "self-sown wheat" was wild rice. The habit of this plant, its growth in low ground as here described, and the head, which has a certain resemblance to that of cultivated small grain, especially oats, seem clearly to confirm this view. The explorers probably had very slight acquaintance with cultivated grain, and might on this account more readily confuse this wild rice with wheat.

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] There is not, however, the slightest foundation for the theory that this "wild wheat" was Indian corn, a view which has been advanced by certain writers. Indian corn was a grain entirely unknown to the explorers, and they could not by any possibility have confused it with wheat, even if they had found this corn growing wild, a conjecture for which there is absolutely no support whatever. The same observation as that made by the Wineland discoverers was recorded by Jacques Cartier five hundred years later, concerning parts of the Canadian territory which he explored. It is no less true that this same explorer found grapes growing wild, in a latitude as far north as that of Nova Scotia, and, as would appear from the record, in considerable abundance. Again, in the following century, we have an account of an exploration of the coast of Nova Scotia, in which the following passage occurs: "All the ground between the two Riuers was without Wood, and was good fat earth hauing seueral sorts of Berries growing thereon, as Gooseberry, Straw-berry, Hyndberry, Rasberry, and a kinde of Red-wine-berry: As also some sorts of Graine, as Pease, some eares of Wheat, Barley, and Rye, growing there wild," etc. [Purchas his Pilgrimes, London, 1625.]

(51) Lit. "holy fish." The origin of the name is not known. Prof. Maurer suggests that it may have been derived from some folk-tale concerning St, Peter, but adds that such a story, if it ever existed, has not been preserved.

(52) It is not clear what the exact nature of these staves may have been. These "staves" may have had a certain likeness to the long oars of the inhabitants of Newfoundland, described in a notice of date July 29th, 1612: "They haue two kinde of Oares, one is about foure foot long of one peece of Firre; the other is about ten foot long made of two peeces, one being as long, big and round as a halfe Pike made of Beech wood, which by likelihood they made of a Biskin Oare, the other is the blade of the Oare, which is let into the end of the long one slit, and whipped very strongly. The short one they use as a Paddle, and the other as in Oare." [Purchas his Pilgrimes, London, 1625.]

(53) The white shield, called the "peace-shield," was displayed by those who wished to indicate to others with whom

[p. 141]

they desired to meet that their intentions were not hostile, as in Magnus Barefoot's Saga, "the barons raised aloft a white peace-shield." The red shield, on the other hand, was the war-shield, a signal of enmity, as Sinfiotli declares in the Helgi song, "Quoth Sinfiotli, hoisting a red shield to the yard, . . . 'tell it this evening. . . . that the Wolfings are coming from the East, lusting for war.'" The use of a white flag-of-truce for a purpose similar to that for which Snorri recommended the white shield, is described in the passage quoted in note  , "Nouember the sixt two Canoas appeared, and one man alone coming towards vs with a Flag in his hand of a Wolfes skin, shaking it and making a loud noise, which we took to be for a parley, whereupon a white Flag was put out, and the Barke and Shallop rowed towards them." [Purchas his Pilgrimes.]

(54) The natives of the country here described were called by the discoverers, as we read, Skraelingjar; since this was the name applied by the Greenland colonists to the Eskimo, it has generally been concluded that the Skraelingjar of Wineland were Eskimo. Prof. Storm has recently pointed out that there may be sufficient reason for caution in hastily accepting this conclusion, and he would identify the inhabitants of Wineland with the Indians, adducing arguments philological and ethnographical to support his theory. The description of the savages of Newfoundland, given in the passage in Purchas' "Pilgrims," already cited, offers certain details which coincide with the description of the Skrellings, contained in the saga. These savages are said by the English explorers to be "full-eyed, of black colour; the colour of their hair was diners, some blacke, some browne, and some yellow, and their faces something flat and broad." Other details, which are given on the same authority, have not been noted by the Icelandic explorers, and one statement, at least, "they haue no beards," is directly at variance with the saga statement concerning the Skrellings seen by the Icelanders on their homeward journey. The similarity of description may be a mere accidental coincidence, and it by no means follows that the English writer and Karlsefni's people saw the same people, or even a kindred tribe.

(55) John Guy, in a letter to Master Slany, the Treasurer and

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] "Counsell" of the New-found-land Plantation writes: "The doubt that haue bin made of the extremity of the winter season in these parts of New-found-land are found by our experience causelesse; and that not onely men may safely inhabit here without any neede of stoue, but Nauigation may be made to and fro from England to these parts at any time of the yeare. . . . Our Goates haue liued here all this winter; and there is one lustie kidde, which was yeaned in the dead of winter." [Purchas his Pilgrimes, vol. iv, p. 1878.]

(56) i. e., a One-footer, a man with one leg or foot. In the Flatey Book Thorvald's death is less romantically described. The mediaeval belief in a country in which there lived a race of one-legged men, was not unknown in Iceland, for mention is made in Rimbegla, of "a people of Africa called One-footers, the soles of whose feet are so large that they shade themselves with these against the heat of the sun when they sleep." It is apparent from the passages from certain Icelandic works already cited, that, at the time these works were written, Wineland was supposed to be in some way connected with Africa. Whether this notice of the finding of a Uniped in the Wineland region may have contributed to the adoption of such a theory, it is, of course, impossible to determine. The reports which the explorers brought back of their having seen a strange man, who, for some reason not now apparent, they believed to have but one leg, may, because Wineland was held to be contiguous to Africa, have given rise to the conclusion that this strange man was indeed a Uniped, and that the explorers had hit upon the African "land of the Unipeds." It has also been suggested that the incident of the appearance of the "One-footer" may have found its way into the saga to lend an additional adornment to the manner of Thorvald's taking-off. It is a singular fact that Jacques Cartier brought back from his Canadian explorations reports not only of a land peopled by a race of one-legged folk, but also of a region in those parts where the people were "as white as those of France."

(57) These words, it has been supposed, might afford a clue to the language of the Skrellings, which would aid in determining their race. In view not only of the fact, that they probably

[p. 143]

passed through many strange mouths before they were committed to writing, but also that the names are not the same in the different manuscripts, they appear to afford very equivocal testimony. Especially is the soft melody of these Skrelling-words altogether different from the harsh gutteral sounds of the Eskimo language. We must therefore refer for the derivation of these words to the Indians, whom we know in this region in later times. The inhabitants, whom the discoverers of the sixteenth century found in Newfoundland, and who called themselves "Beothuk" [i. e., men], received from the Europeans the name of Red Indians, because they smeared themselves with ochre; they have now been exterminated, partly by the Europeans, partly by the Micmac Indians, who in the last century wandered into Newfoundland from New Brunswick. Of their language only a few remnants have been preserved, but still enough to enable us to form a tolerably good idea of it.

"Even as there are on the north-western coast of North America races which seem to me to occupy a place between the Indian and Eskimo, so it appears to me not sufficiently proven, that the now extinct race on America's east coast, the Beothuk, were Indians. Their mode of life and belief have many points of resemblance, by no means unimportant, with the Eskimo and especially with the Angmagsalik. It is not necessary to particularize these here, but I wish to direct attention to the possibility, that in the Beothuk we may perhaps have one of the transition links between the Indian and the Eskimo."

(58) The sum of information which we possess concerning White-men's-land or Ireland the Great, is comprised in this passage and in the quotation from Landnama. It does not seem possible from these very vague notices to arrive at any sound conclusion concerning the location of this country. Rafn concludes that it must have been the southern portion of the eastern coast of North America. Vigfusson and Powell suggest that the inhabitants of this White-men's-land were "Red Indians;" with these, they say, "the Norsemen never came into actual contact, or we should have a far more vivid description than this, and their land would bear a more appropriate title." Storm, in his "Studier over Vinlandsreiserne," would regard

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] "Greater Ireland" as a semi-fabulous land, tracing its quasi-historical origin to the Irish visitation of Iceland prior to the Norse settlement. No one of these theories is entirely satisfactory, and the single fact which seems to be reasonably well established is that "Greater Ireland" was to the Icelandic scribes terra incognita.

(59) The modern Reynistadr is situated in Northern Iceland, a short distance to the southward of Skaga-firth. Glaumboer, as it is still called, is somewhat farther south, but hard by.

(60) Thorlak Runolfsson was the third bishop of Skalholt. He was consecrated bishop in the year 1118, and died 1133. Biorn Gilsson was the third bishop of Holar, the episcopal seat of northern Iceland; he became bishop in 1147, and died in the year 1162. Bishop Biorn's successor was Brand Saemundsson, "Bishop Brand the Elder," who died in the year 1201.

(61) We read concerning the introduction of Christianity into Iceland: "Thorvald [Kodransson] travelled widely through the southern countries; in the Saxon-land [Germany] in the south, he met with a bishop named Frederick, and was by him converted to the true faith and baptised, and remained with him for a season. Thorvald bade the bishop accompany him to Iceland, to baptise his father and mother, and others of his kinsmen, who would abide by his advice; and the bishop consented." According to Icelandic annals, Bishop Frederick arrived in Iceland, on this missionary enterprise, in the year 981; from the same authority we learn that he departed from Iceland in 985.

(62) Heriulf or Heriolf, who accompanied Eric the Red to Greenland, was not, of course, the same man to whom Ingolf allotted land between Vag and Reykianess, for Ingolf set about the colonization of Iceland in 874, more than a century before Eric the Red's voyage to Greenland. The statement of Flatey Book is, therefore, somewhat misleading, and seems to indicate either carelessness or a possible confusion on the part of the scribe. Heriulf, Eric the Red's companion, was a grandson of the "settler" Heriulf, as is clearly set forth in two passages in Landnama.

(63) In the "King's Mirror," an interesting Norwegian work of the thirteenth century, wherein, in the form of a dialogue, a

[p. 145]

father is supposed to be imparting information to his son concerning the physical geography of Greenland, he says: "Now there is another marvel in the Greenland Sea, concerning the nature of which I am not so thoroughly informed; this is that which people call 'Sea-rollers.' This is likest all the sea-storm and all the billows, which are in the sea, gathered together in three places, from which three billows form; these three hedge in the whole sea, so that no break is to be seen, and they are higher than tall fells, are like steep peaks, and few instances are known of persons who, being upon the sea when this phenomenon befell, have escaped therefrom." There can be little question that Heriulf experienced a perilous voyage, since out of the large number of ships, which set sail for Greenland at the same time, so few succeeded in reaching their destination.

(64) This has been assumed by many writers to have been Labrador, but the description does not accord with the appearance which the country now presents.

(65) Certainly a marvellous coincidence, but it is quite in character with the no less surprising accuracy with which the explorers, of this history, succeed in finding "Leif's-booths" in a country which was as strange to them as Greenland to Biarni.

(66) This statement has attracted more attention, perhaps, than any other passage in the account of the Icelandic discovery of America, since it seems to afford data which, if they can be satisfactorily interpreted, enable us to determine approximately the site of the discovery. The observation must have been made within the limits of a region wherein, early in the eleventh century, the sun was visible upon the shortest day of the year between dagmalastadr and eyktarstadr; 'it is, therefore, apparent that if we can arrive at the exact meaning of either dagmalastadr or , or the length of time intervening between these, it should not be difficult to obtain positive information concerning the location of the region in which the observation was made.

The result of the application of Professor Storm's simple and logical treatment to this passage in Flatey Book, "the sun had there Eyktarstad," etc., is summed up in Capt. Pythian's statement,

[p. 146]

"the explorers could not have been, when the record was made, farther north than Lat. [say] 49 degrees;" that is to say, Wineland may have been somewhat further to the south than northern Newfoundland or the corresponding Canadian coast, but, if we may rely upon the accuracy of this astronomical observation, it is clear that thus far south it must have been.

(67) A wooden granary. The word "hjalmr" appears to have a double significance. In the passage in the Saga of King Olaf the Saint: "Wilt thou sell us grain, farmer? I see that there are large 'hjalmar' here,' the word 'hjalmar' may have the meaning of stacks of grain. The use of the word as indicating a house for the storage of grain is, however, clearly indicated in the Jydske Lov of 1241, wherein we read: "But if one build upon the land of another either a 'hialm' or any other house," etc. As there is no suggestion in the saga of the finding of cultivated fields, it is not apparent for what uses a house for the storage of grain could have been intended.

(68) Lit. war-hurdle. This was a protection against the missiles of the enemy raised above the sides of the vessel. In this instance, as perhaps generally on ship-board, this protecting screen would appear to have been formed of shields attached to the bulwarks, between these the arrow, which caused Thorvald's death, doubtless, found its way.

(69) The Landnamabok makes no mention of this Thori; its language would seem to preclude the probability of a marriage between such a man and Gudrid; the passage with reference to Gudrid being as follows: "His son was Thorbiorn, father of Gudrid who married Thorstein, son of Eric the Red, and afterwards Thorfinn Karlsefni; from them are descended bishops Biorn, Thorlak and Brand.

(70) Namkrytill [namkirtle] is thus explained by Dr. Valtyr Gudmundsson, in his unpublished treatise on ancient Icelandic dress: "Different writers are not agreed upon the meaning of 'namkrytill;'" Sveinbjorn Egilsson interprets it as signifying a kirtle made from some kind of material called "nam." In this definition he is followed by Keyser. The Icelandic painter, Sigurdr Gudmundsson has, on the other hand, regarded the word as allied to the expression: "Fitting close to the leg, narrow,"

[p. 147]

and concludes that "namkyrtill" should be translated, "narrow kirtle."

(71) A "Mark" was equal to eight "aurar;" an "eyrir" [plur. "aurar"] of silver was equal to 144 skillings. An "eyrir" would, therefore, have been equal to three crowns [kroner], modern Danish coinage, since sixteen skillings are equal to one-third of a crown [33  1/3 ore], and a half "mark" of silver would accordingly have been equal to twelve crowns, Danish coinage. As the relative value of gold and silver at the time described is not clearly established, it is not possible to determine accurately the value of the half "mark" of gold. It was, doubtless, greater at that time, proportionately, than the value here assigned, while the purchasing power of both precious metals was very much greater then than now.

(72) At the time of the "settlement" of Iceland the homestead of the more prominent "settler" became the nucleus of a little community. The head of this little community, who was the acknowledged leader in matters spiritual and temporal, was called the "godi." With the introduction of Christianity the "godi" lost his religious character though he still retained his place of importance in the Commonwealth.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

 

BOOK II.

 

By NORTH LUDLOW BEAMISH.

ARGUMENTS and evidences respecting the claim that America was discovered by Norsemen about A. D. 1000, and colonized about A. D. 1003, with proofs submitted as to occupation of a part of the country, known as Irland in Mikla, or Great Ireland, by the Irish, in the Eleventh Century.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

 

Introduction to a Study of Icelandic Records.

 

BY N. L. BEAMISH.

 

SKETCH OF THE RISE, EMINENCE, AND EXTINCTION OF ICELANDIC HISTORICAL LITERATURE

THE national literature of Iceland holds a distinct and eminent position in the literature of Europe. In that remote and cheerless isle, separated by a wide and stormy ocean from the more genial climates of southern lands, religion and learning took up their tranquil abode, before the south of Europe had yet emerged from the mental darkness which followed the fall of the Roman Empire. There the unerring memories of the Skalds and Sagamen were the depositories of past events, which, handed down from age to age in one unbroken line of historical tradition, were committed to writing on the introduction of Christianity, and now come before us with an internal evidence of their truth, which places them among the highest order of historical records.

To investigate the origin of this remarkable advancement in mental culture, and trace the progressive steps by which Icelandic literature attained an eminence which even now imparts a lustre to that barren land, is an object of interesting and instructive inquiry, and will, it is presumed, form an acceptable introduction to the perusal of the ancient Icelandic manuscripts, which constitute the text of the present volume.

[p. 150]

The author has, therefore, availed himself of an able essay by Bishop Muller on this interesting subject, to put before his readers, in a concise form, the leading characteristics of that peculiar state of society, which generated these evidences of peaceful and civilized pursuits, and gave birth to productions, which, like their own Aurora, stood forth the Northmen's meteor in the shades of night!

Among no other people of Europe can the conception and birth of historical literature be more clearly traced than amongst the people of Iceland. Here it can be shown how memory took root, and gave birth to narrative; how narrative multiplied and increased until it was committed to writing; how the written relation became eventually sifted and arranged in chronological order, until at length, in the withering course of time, the breath which had given life and character to the whole fled hence, and only the dead letter remained behind.

But why was it Icelanders, in particular, who kindled the torch of history in the North. How came its light to spread so far from this remote and unimportant island? What cause led Icelanders more than any other people to a minute observation of both the present and the past? How came they to clothe these recollections in connected narratives, and eventually to commit them to writing?--are questions which first naturally present themselves, and the true solution of which can alone lead to a correct estimate of the value of Icelandic annals.

It is well known, that when towards the end of the ninth century Iceland had been discovered by the roving northern Vikings, the imperious sway of Harald Haarfager led many Norwegians to seek safety and independence in that distant island. But its remote position rendered the voyage

[p. 151]

thither both difficult and dangerous; not one amongst hundreds of fugitives,--scarcely the chiefs themselves, who possessed large ships,--could provide the necessary outfit for a voyage, which often lasted for half the year; and the colonization of the new country was necessarily slow and progressive, and confined, at first, to the high-minded and more wealthy chieftains of the western coast. But the intelligence was soon abroad that brave and daring men had established themselves in a new country, where the cattle could provide for themselves in winter, where the waters were full of fish, and the land abounding in wood; and many therefore determined upon removing to this favoured region. The tide of emigration from Norway progressively increased, and soon became so great that Harald, fearing that his kingdom would, eventually, be left desolate, prohibited it altogether, and laid a tax upon every voyager to Iceland.

The chiefs took their families, servants, slaves, and cattle; and many kinsmen and relatives, who were accustomed to follow the fortunes of the chief, accompanied him also on this new venture. The particular locality of their future residence was determined by the wind and weather, united with an implicit faith in the superintending guidance of the tutelary idol, under whose invocation the seat-posts were cast into the sea, and wherever these happened to be washed ashore was the dwelling raised.

In the course of sixty years the whole island had become thus colonized. Meantime the first settlers had acquired no means of circumscribing the movements of the last, who with the same independent spirit as their predecessors, took possession of that particular tract of country which appeared to them most eligible; and the extent of the land, the

[p. 152]

difficulties of the voyage, and the limited number of the population, admitted, for some time, the continuance of this arbitrary appropriation. Amicable restrictions were the only checks that could be at first opposed to such unconstrained and uncertain movements, and these were all either of Norwegian origin, or brought directly from Norway. For many of the settlers were related by ties of blood; the greater number had made common cause against Harald; in their native land they had been accustomed to meet together at the Court (Thing), in the temple, at the great feast of Yule, at the periodical offerings to their idols--and thus, naturally, and with one accord, they were led to establish a form of self-government somewhat similar to that under which they had lived in Norway. The absence of any despotic ruler gave, however, the new community a great advantage over the parent state, and hence arose a constitution more free than the model upon which it had been formed.

This little republic was held together solely by moral laws. Some of the richer emigrants had slaves, which after putting to cultivate some particular lands, they liberated; all others were free; the sturdy yeoman was the unrestricted lord of his own soil; if be came into collision with his neighbour, and thought himself more powerful, he slew him without scruple, but thereupon immediately endeavoured either through the intercession of the chief of the district or some other influential person, to screen himself from reproach, or effect a reconciliation with the friends of the deceased, by the payment of a fine.

The situation of chief generally arose from the relative position of the ship's-company in the mother country, which led to one particular individual among the crew taking

[p. 153]

possession of the new district in his own name; but it oftener depended upon property or personal bravery. Was he a gallant warrior, or could afford to keep more servants and slaves than his neighbors, his assistance became of importance in settling disputes: and the same cause produced a reciprocal feeling in support of the chief, on the part of those whom he assisted.

Before a certain number of statutes had been collected and formally established, the people followed the old customs of their native land, the parties themselves naming their judges from amongst the neighbouring yeomen; but although there was no want of legal forms to which they could appeal, or chicanery by which justice could be evaded, the result more often depended upon the relative strength and influence of the party than upon the merits of the case. At the district courts (Herredsthinget), the influence of the Chief was considerable, but not altogether paramount; many of the more wealthy yeomen could offer him effective resistance: his influence at the superior court (Althinget), depended upon his personal reputation, the power of his friends, and the number of his followers.

The income of the Chief was principally derived from the tract of land, of which he had taken possession on his arrival; he was also, in most cases, the Hofgode, or priest of the temple; and for the duties of this office, in which providing the altar with offerings was included, he received a small contribution (hoftollr) from every farm in the neighbourhood. To this was afterwards added compensation for journeys to the Althing, and he also received fees from those whose causes he conducted, as well as a small payment from the ships which landed their cargoes on his ground. But all these various sources did not furnish him

[p. 154]

with any considerable income, and his land remained his principal means of support. The office was hereditary, as in Norway, but it could also be sold or resigned, and sometimes was lost by being appropriated to the payment of a judicial fine.

Notwithstanding this elevated position of the chief, it not unfrequently happened that a powerful individual in the province acquired a higher reputation, and obtained more clients than his superior. Thus after Olaf Paa had returned from his celebrated expedition to Ireland, married the daughter of the powerful Egil Skalagrim, and became possessed of his father-in-law's property, many people flocked around him, and he became a great chief, without being actually a Godordsman, or pontiff.

So long as the colonization continued, the extent of the island secured internal peace; the Landnamsmen, as the first settlers were called, had few disputes amongst themselves, for every one was taken up with his own affairs and although it might sometimes happen, that a quarrelsome individual by single combat (Holmgang [*1]) or the threat of personal encounter, would drive another from his farm, disputes and contests were of rare occurrence. Another local circumstances of no inconsiderable importance as connected with the tranquillity of the country, was the diminutive character of the forests in Iceland. These consisted of dwarf trees, ill suited to ship building, and therefore only small vessels could be built upon the island; whoever wished to trade with Norway, entered into partnership with some Norwegian merchant, or bought a vessel which had been already brought out from the parent state. Such vessels

[p. 155]

could not, however, be used for piratical expeditions, and those who wished to engage in such adventures were obliged to join some kindred spirits in Norway who possessed what was called a long ship (Langskip). These difficulties of outfit, connected with the want of sufficient hands for warlike purposes, and the long distance from the coasts, where they were accustomed to carry on their piratical proceedings, was doubtless the cause of so few of the new settlers being concerned in sea-roving, while in all other matters they followed the customs of their ancestors.

Thus did this remote and comparatively barren island give freedom and peace to many of Norway's bravest sons, far from their native land. Instead of participating in the dangers of the perilous voyage, or aiding in the obstinate encounter, or sharing in the lawless spoil, when plunder conferred upon the Sea-King both a fortune and a name, they now sat down peacefully in their tranquil homes, or directed the agricultural labours of their servants and dependants. And now did faithful memory carry them back in imagination to the old and warlike time, which appeared the more attractive when contrasted with the tranquility of their present pursuits; personal deeds led to the remembrance of those of the father, for it was often in avenging his death that their prowess had been first called forth, or from his kinsmen or associates that they had received the first assistance. The colonists were, besides, men of high family; the Scandinavians were accustomed to set great weight upon this circumstance; the fewer were the outward distinctions that characterized the individual, the more important was that prerogative considered which promised magnanimity and valour. The stranger was therefore minutely questioned about his family, and even

[p. 156]

the peasant girl despised the suitor whose lineage was unknown. In the mother country the remembrance of the old families lived amongst the people of the district; they had travelled together to the national assembly; the paternal barrow, and the ancient hall bore testimony to their noble birth,--but of this, nothing save the relation could accompany them to Iceland, and therefore was the new settler so careful in detailing to his sons and posterity the history and achievements of their kinsmen in Norway. The son equally tenacious of ancestral fame failed not to propagate the same minute details amongst his immediate descendants, and thus was insensibly formed, among the Icelanders, connected oral narratives of the families, fortunes, and actions of their ancestors.

These Sagas, or traditions, did not generally go further back than the time of the father and grandfather; but the recollections preserved in the songs of the Skalds were of much older date, and a number of historical songs can be pointed out which the Icelanders must have brought with them to the new country. Others were historical in a more limited sense, being thrown into rhyme for the occasion, to flatter the vanity of some powerful chief, by a poetical representation of his genealogy; but the more numerous were those in which all the achievements of a hero were specifically enumerated.

These compositions bore little evidence of Brage's [*1] favour. Under the jingle of rude rhymes and alliteration a pictorial expression was given to sword-cuts and slaughter, which brought to remembrance the order in which the several achievements had succeeded each other. The poetical form is more visible in the earlier songs, such as: Hornklove's

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] Ode on Harald Haarfager, particularly his description of the battle of Hafursfjord [*1] than in the later, such as Ottar Svartes Ode on the combats of Olaf the Saint; and those compositions have still more poetical worth in which, like Eyvind Skialdespilders Ode in praise of the fallen king Hakon Adelsteen, the writers express the feeling which the events call forth.

It may be readily supposed that heroic verses, sung by the Skalds themselves in the courts of heroes, were committed to memory, and that at a time when this was the only means of recording their achievements such verses would pass orally through many generations. The memory was also sometimes aided by carving the verses in Runic letters [*2] upon a staff. The dying Halmund is introduced in Gretter's Saga, saying to his daughter:--"Thou shalt now listen whilst I relate my deeds, and sing thereof a song, which thou shalt afterwards cut upon a staff." In Egil's Saga, also, Thorgerd, addressing her father Egil Skalagrimson, whose grief for the loss of his son Bodvar had made him resolve on putting an end to his existence, says:--"I wish, father, that we might live long enough for you to sing a funeral song upon Bodvar, and for me to cut it upon a staff."

Sometimes verses were immediately committed to memory by a number of persons. When King Olaf the Saint drew up his army for the battle of Stikklcstad (1030), he directed the Skalds to stand within the circle (Skioldborg), which the bravest men had formed around the king. "Ye shall," said be, "stand here, and see what passes, and thus

[p. 158]

will ye not require to depend on the sagas of others for what ye afterwards relate and sing." The Skalds now consulted with each other, and said that it would be fitting to indite some memorial of that which was about to happen, upon which each improvised a strophe, and the historian adds: "these verses the people immediately learned." In the same manner much older songs were held in remembrance, and there is still extant in that part of Snorre's Edda, called Kenningar, a fragment of Brage the Skald's ode on Ragnor Lodbrok, by means of which he, in the 7th century, moderated the anger of Bjorn Jernside against himself. In the same poem are fragments of an old ode on the fall of Rolf Krake, which St. Olaf directed the Skald, Thormod Kolbran, to sing when the battle of Stikklestad was to commence. The whole army, says the Saga, was pleased at hearing this old song, which they called the Soldier's Whetstone, and the king thanked the bard, and gave him a gold ring that weighed half a mark.

But it was more particularly the Skalds themselves who preserved the older songs in remembrance. By hearing these, their own poetical character had been formed, their memories sharpened; and a knowledge of the past was necessary for the acquisition of those mythic and historical allusions which were considered indispensable to poetical expression. An instance of their historical knowledge is thus mentioned in the Landnamabok: [*1] when King Harald

[p. 159]

[paragraph continues] Haardraade lay with his army in Holland, two large barrows were observed on the edge of the strand, but no one knew who was interred there; however, on the return of the army to Norway, Kare the black, a kinsman of the famous Skald Theodolf of Hvine, was enabled to state that the graves contained the bodies of Snial and Hiald, the two warlike sons of the old Norwegian King Vatnar. This historical knowledge of the Skalds led to their being held in high respect throughout Scandinavia, and, we find them allotted the first place at the courts of Kings. Harald Haarfager is stated to have had more respect for the Skalds than for all the rest of his courtiers, and more than a century later they appear to have been held in equal estimation by the Swedish King, Olaf Skiodkonning, who is stated to have taken great delight in their freedom of speech.

The northern pagan Skalds must not however be looked upon as the Grecian Aonides, whose only province was to sing; they bear a nearer resemblance to the Provencal Knights, who were also Troubadours. The Scandinavian bards were besides of goodly lineage, for only the higher and more independent conditions of life could call forth Brage's favour; they were also well versed in warlike exercises; the song was the accompaniment to, the combat, and we have nearly as many records of their heroic deeds as of their poetical effusions. They were also, at times, the favourites or confidants of kings, like Theodolf of Hvine, who was the bosom friend of Harald Haarfager, and Flein, to whom the Danish King, Eisteen, gave his daughter in marriage.

Thus were the Skalds well furnished with knowledge of both the present and the past, and therefore has the

[p. 160]

sagacious Snorre Sturleson truly said, in the Preface to his work:--"The principal foundation is taken from the songs that were sung before the chiefs, or their children, and we hold all that to be true, which is there stated, of their deeds and combats. It was, no doubt, the practice of the Skalds to praise those the most in whose presence they stood, but no one even so circumstanced would venture to tell of actions which both he and all those who heard him knew to be false, for that would be an affront instead of a compliment."

Besides heroic songs, or Drapas, single strophes were often improvised, not only by Skalds but by many other individuals, of both sexes, in a critical moment; and these, by being committed to memory, preserved the remembrance on the occasion which called them forth. Like the Orientalists, the Northmen loved to shew their wit by an enigmatical and antithetical mode of speaking, and from thence, the ear having been once accustomed to the simple measure, the transition was easy to the formation of a strophe, by means of alliteration or rhyme.

The means of preserving the recollections of past events, which have been here pointed out, were for the most part common both to those who remained in Norway and those who emigrated to the new country; but in the parent state the stream of present events carried away and obscured the recollections of the past. The changes which came upon the whole nation from Harald Haarfager's time were naturally looked upon by the Norwegians as more important than the events in which only individual persons or families had been previously concerned. The Icelanders, on the other hand, viewed the one as affecting their home, while the other appeared to be the transactions of a foreign

[p. 161]

country, and thus the recollections which up to the time of the migration had been preserved in the several detached districts of Norway were transferred to and became united in Iceland, as the one settler enumerated to the other the valorous deeds and achievements of his forefathers.

Besides, it was amongst the families of high birth that these ancient traditions were best preserved. Such families maintained an unbroken succession in Iceland, whereas in Norway they became extinct, first, in consequence of the many events under the immediate successors of Harald Haarfager, and next, from the furious zeal of Olaf in the propagation of Christianity, which brought ruin to the more tenacious adherents of the old faith, and these were just the individuals amongst whom the ancient Sagas were best preserved. Not less destructive to the old families was the unfortunate expedition to England and Ireland under Harald Haardraade and Magnus Barfoot, in the 11th century, as also the long civil wars in the 12th century, which ended with the fall of the Optimists.

The other parts of Scandinavia also produced Skalds, and several, both Danish and Swedish, are mentioned in the ancient Sagas; but these countries were of much greater extent, and ruled by much more powerful monarchs, than Norway, previous to the 9th century; and thus did the heroic age terminate and the songs of the Skalds become silent at an earlier period there than in the neighbouring kingdom.

Footnotes

^154:1 From holm, a small island. So called in consequence of these duels generally taking place upon one of the small neighbouring islands, from whence the combatants could not so easily escape.

^156:1 Brage, the fourth son of Odin and Frigga, was the Apollo of the Northern Mythology; he chaunted the exploits of the Gods and heroes to the tones of a golden harp, and was represented by the figure of an old man with a snow-white beard.

^157:1 The famous naval engagement In the Bay of Hafursfjord, now called Stavangerfiord. (A. D. 875), made Harald Haarfager master of the entire kingdom of Norway.

^157:2 The word Rune is said to be derived from ryn a furrow or channel; the invention is attributed to Odin and his Aser, or Gods; the alphabet consists of sixteen letters, which, like the Hiberno-Celtic, claims Phoenician origin.

^158:1 The Landnamabok or Book of the first Norwegian settlers in Iceland, is the most complete national record that has, perhaps, ever been compiled. It contains the names of about 3000 persons, and 1400 places, and forms a minute genealogical register of the colonists, their properties, kinsmen, and descendants, together with short notices of their achievements. The compilation was the work of several authors, beginning with Are, surnamed Hinns Frode, or the learned (b. 1067, d. 1148), continued by Kolsteg, Styrmer, and Thordsen, and ending with Hauk Erlendson, for many years Lagman, or Governor of Iceland, who died A. D. 1834. The Landnamabok is considered the first authority in all matters connected with the early history of the island, and will be often found quoted in the present volume.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 162]

 

SECOND PERIOD.

WE have thus seen how the desire to tell of old times arose and was propagated amongst the inhabitants of the new colony. But the remembrance and relation of individual exploits, and the transmission of these records from one generation to the other, would perhaps have never led to the Icelanders becoming historians had not such habits been united with a strong feeling for poetry, a desire for fame, and that peculiar state of society which had been formed amongst them.

The Island had been colonized in peace; each enterprising navigator as he touched its shore took possession of a tract of land without impediment, and became the independent proprietor of his small estate; but now these settlements approached each other; interests began to clash; individual demeanour to become developed. The social bonds had been too loosely attached to keep within due limits the wild self will of so many impetuous Northmen. True, their ancient Norwegian customs had been spontaneously resumed on their arrival, and fifty years later (A. D. 928), the laws of Ulfliot had given a form and consistency to the moral code; but these checks had little weight when individual power or interest were enabled to oppose them. Personal strength was necessary for personal safety; and the many narratives which have been preserved, detailing the untimely fate of the most respectable families in the course of the first two centuries, exhibit a long list of feuds and deeds of violence unchecked by the laws or the judicial authority of the land.

[p. 163]

These civil broils were not, however, in general, of a very sanguinary character, and often consisted of individual encounters, where courage and presence of mind were equally exhibited on both sides, and the contest was obstinate: in a more general fray the loss was looked upon as considerable if ten men fell.

The time of feud was also a time of re-union: the object of the individual was spread abroad; discussion was created, sympathy was awakened; the relative merits of the contending parties became the theme of conversation, and the Skalds were stimulated to the composition of new specimens of their inspiring art. On particular occasions they improvised. Hate as well as love formed the theme of these effusions, and the same means were employed to give a graceful form to satire, in which style of composition these ancient poets were remarkably successful: in fact, so cutting were these sallies, and of so much weight among a people peculiarly under the influence of public opinion, that they often became the causes of bloodshed, and were looked upon as a ground of complaint before the Courts. [*1] For the most part, however, the songs were of an historical character; sometimes the Skald sang of his own exploits, sometimes of those of his friends, who upon such occasions were accustomed to present him with costly gifts: After the Norwegian Skald, Eyvind Skialdespilder, had sung a Drapa or ode in praise of the Icelanders, every peasant in the island contributed three pieces of silver, which were applied to the purchase of a clasp or ornament for a mantel

[p. 164]

that weighed 50 marks and this they sent to the bard, as an acknowledgment of his poetic powers.

The climate and mode of living contributed to keep alive this taste for poetry, which the Icelanders had inherited from their Norwegian ancestors. Agriculture was almost entirely confined to the care of pasture and meadow land; fishing could only be carried on at certain seasons, and the feeding of cattle required little attention. Their hostile proceedings were also soon concluded; but was a reprisal apprehended, it became necessary for the chief to retain his followers at the farm until a reconciliation was brought about, and these assemblages in the common room, during the long winter evenings, contributed to increase the social union and reciprocal communication of past events. Public amusements also brought the people frequently together: besides the great feasts, which lasted from eight to fourteen days, sports and games, such as bowls or wrestling, were carried on in the several districts for many weeks in succession; and still more attractive was the Heste-thing, where stallions were made to fight against each other, to the great amusement of both old and young. To these reunions must be added those caused by attendance at the different courts, and particularly at the Althing [*1] or general Assizes, where all the first men of the island met annually, with great pomp and parade. It was looked upon as a disgrace to be absent from this meeting, which was held in the open air on the banks of the Thingvalla Vatn, the largest lake in Iceland, a natural hill or mount forming the court.

To figure here with a display and retinue that drew upon him the eyes of all beholders, was the great ambition of the

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] Chief, whose power and influence depended much upon the number of friends and followers he could produce on such occasions. These were again determined by the degree of support and assistance which they could calculate on obtaining from him in the hour of need; and hence the anxiety on the part of the Icelandic yeoman to be fully acquainted with the character and circumstances of his chief, to which cause may be more immediately attributed the interest which he took in all new Sagas or narratives of remarkable individuals.

In the Laxdaela Saga [*1] it is related that, after a brave Icelander, named Bolle Bolleson, had gallantly defeated an assailant, by whom he had been attacked in the course of a journey through the island, his exploit became the subject of a new Saga, which quickly spread over the district and added considerably to his reputation. In Gisle Sursens Saga, a stranger is introduced, saying to his neighbours at the court--"Shew me the men of great deeds, those from whom the Sagas proceed."

The greater number of the remaining Sagas bear what may be called a political stamp; they contain a detail of the most important disputes between individual families, or districts, painted in the most minute manner, and followed by a general description of the most important personages in the narrative. How much weight was attached to these personal descriptions is shewn by the nature of the Icelandic language, which is richer than any other European tongue in words that express those various qualities and shades of character which are of the most importance in society. The exterior of the chief person in the Saga is

[p. 166]

also painted with equal accuracy, especially his features, in which the richness of the language is also observable; and even the particulars of the dress are not omitted. This was of importance in a country where it was not always easy to determine whether the stranger who made his appearance was friend or foe, and a remarkable instance is mentioned in the Laxdaela Saga of a chief named Helge Hardbeinsen identifying some stranger knights, whom he had never seen, solely from the accurate description of their personal appearance, which was brought to him by the messenger who communicated the intelligence of their approach.

The same characteristics are imprinted on the Sagas. The peculiarities of the narrator never appear; it is as if one only heard the simple echo of an old tradition; no introductory remarks are made, but the history begins at once abruptly with:--"There was a man called so and so, son of so and so," etc.: no judgment is pronounced upon the transaction, but it is merely added that this deed increased the hero's reputation, or that was considered bad. In most Sagas the dialogistic form prevails, particularly in those of more ancient date, for this form was natural to the people, who insensibly threw their narratives into dialogue, and thus they acquired a more poetical colouring; for not only were the conversations related which had actually taken place, but also those which from the nature of the subject it might have been concluded had been held; and the general mode of expression being simple and nearly uniform, and the character being best developed in this definite form, those imaginary conversations were, for the most part, not inconsistent with truth.

The talent for narrating was naturally generated by the desire of hearing these narratives. Those Skalds who remembered

[p. 167]

the old Sagas, and whose imagination was lively, were best enabled to adopt the dramatic form, and now, independent of their local or political interest, the narratives became interesting on their own account. Scarce a century after the colonization of the country we find that the people took great pleasure in this amusement. "Is no one come," asks Thorvard, at a meeting of the people mentioned in Viga Glums Saga, "who can amuse us with a new story?" They answered him: "There is always sport and amusement when thou are present." He replied: "I can think of nothing better than Glum's songs," upon which he sang one of those which he had learned. In the Sturlunga Saga a certain priest, named Ingemund, is mentioned as a man rich in knowledge, who told good stories, afforded much amusement, and indited good songs for which he obtained payment abroad. Such a narrator was called a Sagaman.

Thus did oral tradition, beginning with the mythic, proceed thence to the historical and end with the fabulous. We have now come to the period when books were written and collected in the island; but in order to trace the cause of that peculiar fondness for their own history, which led the Icelanders not only to become the historians of Iceland but of the whole North, it is necessary to go back to the earlier condition of the country and the people.

It may at first sight appear that the local position of this remote island would be alone sufficient to prevent the inhabitants from taking any interest in the affairs of other countries; but the communication with Norway continued; the migration from thence lasted for many generations, even after the island was colonized, and many merchant ships passed annually between Iceland and the parent state. They brought with them meal, building-timber, leather, fine

[p. 168]

cloth and tapestry, taking in exchange silver, skins, coarse cloth (Wadmel), and other kinds of wollens, as well as dried fish.

As soon as it was known that a merchant had brought a cargo to the Icelandic coast the chief of the temple, and in later times the governor of the province, rode down immediately to the ship and asked for news; he then fixed the price at which the various goods were to be sold to the people of the district, chose what he wanted for himself, and invited the captain of the vessel to stop at his house for the winter. The visitor was now looked upon as one of the family, he entered into their amusements, and disputes, entertained them at Yule with his stories, and presented his host at parting with a piece of English tapestry, or some other costly gift, in return for the hospitality which he had received. Piratical expeditions had at this time given place to trading voyages, and the merchant or ship's captain was often a person of good family sometimes attached to the Norwegian Court, and hence well acquainted with ail that was passing there. How much this intercourse tended to the increase of historical material is shown by an old MS. of St. Olafs Saga, wherein is stated that:--"In the time of Harald Haarfager there was much sailing from Norway to Iceland; every summer was news  between the two countries, and this was afterwards remembered, and became the subject of narratives."

The Icelanders not only received intelligence from Norway, but brought it away themselves. They were led to undertake these voyages as well from the desire to see their relations, and claim inheritances, as for the purpose of procuring more valuable building-timber than the merchant could bring them. The chief considered that his reputation

 

Click to enlarge
FRONT VIEW OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKALI OR HALL

 

[p. 169]

depended much upon the number of persons he could entertain, and for this purpose a spacious hall was required. This formed a separate building, in the midst of which the cheerful wood fire blazed upwards to an aperture in the roof, unchecked by ceilings or partition walls:--

	 
		The drinking hall, a separate house, was built
		 Of heart of fir; not twice three hundred men
		 Could fill that hall, when gather'd there at Yule.
		
		    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
		
		The cheerful faggot on the straw-strewn floor
		 Unceasing blazed, gladdening its stony hearth,
		 While downwards through the dense smoke shot the stars,
		 Those heavenly friends, upon the guests below. [*1]
		
		 The adventurous stripling, on the other hand, sailed to Norway for the purpose of there engaging in a sea-roving expedition, or seeking advancement amongst his influential kinsmen; and thus many earned renown at the courts of the Norwegian kings, or entered into mercantile pursuits in order to obtain wealth, or experience and consideration. For the old Northern maxim of "a fool is the home-bred child," also held good in Iceland, and therefore do we find Bolle Bollesen saying to his father-in-law Snorre Gode, who wished to dissuade him from going abroad: "Little do I think he knows who knows no more than Iceland." Trading was often undertaken by young men solely as the means of acquiring knowledge, which being accomplished, the pursuit was given up.

After the lapse of a few centuries this passion for travelling was increased by a new cause which had more immediate influence upon the collection of historical materials.

[p. 170]

The Skalds passed over to England, the Orkneys, and the Norwegian courts, seeking rewards and reputation. They neither required the aid of friends nor money for such expeditions, but boldly entering the drinking hall of the kings craved permission to sing a drapa in praise of the monarch, which was always granted, and the bard received handsome presents, such as weapons, clothes, gold rings, together with an honourable reception at the court, in return for his exertions.

The Icelandic Skalds, favoured by the independent position of their country, and a superior knowledge of the Scandinavian mythology, acquired a marked pre-eminence over their competitors in other parts of the North. The praises of a stranger bard, from a free country, were more flattering to a king or chieftain than the more servile adulation of his own laureate; and it was but reasonable, as well as politic, to reward him well who had come from so great a distance, and who, travelling from land to land, could sound the king's praise and tell of the royal bounty. The odes thus sung were all of an historical character; and it was therefore necessary for the Skald to be well acquainted with the deeds of the monarch and his ancestors. It was also required of him that he should be able to repeat the national ballads; and the extraordinary power of the Skalds in this particular is shown in the saga of the blind Skald Stuf, who one evening sang sixty songs before Harald Haardraade, and could repeat four times as many longer poems!

But if a knowledge of history was of importance to the Skald, it was absolutely indispensable to the Sagaman. A remarkable anecdote of one of these narrators is contained in the Saga of Thorstein Frode, preserved in the Arne-Magnaean

 

Click to enlarge
GROUND PLAN OF THE INTERIOR OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKALI OR HALL

 

[p. 171]

collection of Icelandic MSS.; [*1] a certain Sagaman, called Thorstein, repaired to King Harald of Norway. The Brig asked him "whether he knew anything that would amuse." He replied that he knew a few sagas. "I will receive thee," said the king, "and thou shalt entertain whoever requires it of thee." Thorstein became favoured by the courtiers, and obtained clothes from them; the king also gave him a good sword.

Towards Yule [*2] he became sorrowful; the king guessed the cause, namely, that his Sagas were at an end, and that he had nothing for Yule. He answered that so it was; he had one remaining, and that he durst not tell, for it was about the king's journeys. The king said that he should begin with that the first day of Yule, and he (the king) would take care

[p. 172]

that it should last to the end of the festival. The thirteenth day Thorstein's Saga came to an end, and now he looked anxiously for the judgment of the king who said smiling: "It is not the worse told because thou hast a talent therefor, but where didst thou get it?" Thorstein answered: "It is my custom to repair every summer to the Althing in our land, and there I learn the sagas which Haldor Snorreson relates." The king said: "Then it is no wonder thou knowest them so well," and upon this, gave him a good ship load; and now Thorstein passed often between Norway and Iceland.

To comprehend how such a narrative could have lasted thirteen days, we must presume that the dialogistic form was freely used, and that the story was interrupted and decorated with verses and poetical allusions to a considerable extent. The anecdote also shows that while Sagamen were of later origin than Skalds, they also stood in lower estimation; the Skald was enrolled amongst the courtiers; the Sagaman was only looked upon as an amusing visitor.

In the 11th century, the Icelanders ceased to engage in piratical expeditions; the chiefs, whose power and riches had increased, looked with contempt on trading voyages; but on the other hand it was often a result of their feuds, that one of the parties was obliged to leave the country for a few years. Sometimes also they engaged in a voluntary pilgrimage to Rome. Such an expedition went first to Denmark, where it was always well received by the Danish kings, and more particularly in the 13th century we find the Icelandic chiefs drawing forth expressions of respect and esteem at the court of Valdemar II.

All these travellers were sure to return home after a few years and establish themselves in Iceland, nor could the

[p. 173]

most flattering reception at foreign courts abate their inherent love of country. Thus King Harald Gormson could not prevail upon Gunnar of Hlidarende to remain at his court, although he held out the temptations of a wife and fortune; and hence says Hakon to Finboge Ramme, "That is just the way with you Icelanders! the moment you are valued and favoured by princes, you want to get away." When the travelled man came home he was received with the greatest attention; he was instantly sought out at the Althing, and now he must make a public statement of his travels and adventures. The curiosity of Icelanders is proverbial, and seems to be in proportion to their distance from the continent. If a ship arrived, the people instantly ran down to the shore to ask for news, unless the chief of the district (Herredsforstanderen) had ruled that he should be the first. Thorstein Ingemundson, a hospitable man, who lived in the 10th century, looked upon it as the duty of every stranger to visit him first; and he was once highly exasperated with some strangers who neglected this courtesy. When Kiartan, mentioned in the history of Olaf Tryggveson, had returned from Norway, and was grieving over the infidelity of his betrothed, his father was most distressed at the people thus losing the benefit of his stories; and when he was afterwards married, and a splendid wedding took place on the island, nothing amused the guests more than the bridegroom's narratives of his services under the great King Olaf Tryggveson. However desirous the new comer might be to learn what had happened during his absence from home, be was always first obliged to tell his countrymen the news from abroad. A remarkable illustration of this is given in the life of Bishop Magnus, who returned from Saxony by Norway (A. D. 1135), just as the

[p. 174]

people were assembled at the Althing, and were loudly contending upon a matter respecting which no unanimity could be obtained. A messenger suddenly appears among the crowd, and states that the Bishop is riding up. Upon this they all become so pleased that they instantly leave the court, and the Bishop is obliged to parade on a height near the church, and tell all the people what had happened in Norway whilst he was abroad!

Such a narrative, told by a person of veracity, went from mouth to mouth, under the name of the first narrator, which was looked upon as a security for the truth of the Saga.

Footnotes

^163:1 "As an instance of the effect produced by these satirical songs, it is related that Harold Blaatand, King of Denmark, was so incensed at some severe lines which the Icelanders had made upon him for seizing one of their ships, that he sent a fleet to ravage the island, which occurrence led them to make a law subjecting any one to capital punishment who should indulge in satire against the Sovereigns of Norway, Sweden and Denmark!"

^164:1 Ting or Thing signifies in the old Scandinavian tongue to speak, and hence a popular assembly, or court of justice. The national assembly of Norway still retains the name of Stor-thing, or great meeting, and is divided into two chambers called the Lag-thing, and Odels-thing.

^165:1 The annals of a particular family, as the Eyrbiggia Saga is of a particular district in Iceland. The former has been translated into Latin by Mr. Repp, and Sir Waiter Scott has given a brief account of the other.

^169:1 Frithiof's Saga.

^171:1 Arne Magnussen, a learned Icelander and ardent patriot, devoted his time, talents, and fortune to the national literature of his country. Filling the situation of Professor of Northern Antiquaries at the University of Copenhagen, in the beginning of the 18th century, he amassed the largest collection of books and manuscripts that has, perhaps, ever been brought together by one individual. Amongst these are the rarest and most ancient vellum MSS. in the old northern tongue, relating to the history, laws, manners, and customs of the ancient Scandinavians. The great fire of Copenhagen, in 1728, robbed the devoted antiquary of many of these often dearly purchased treasures; but he recommenced his labours with undiminished zeal, and although then in his 65th year, was enabled to leave to his country, at his death (A. D. 1730), nearly 2000 Icelandic MSS., together with a fund of 10,000 rix dollars for their publication. Little progress was made towards carrying the testator's wishes into effect until a commission, called the Arne-Magnaean commission, was instituted by the King of Denmark, in 1772, soon after which the publication commenced, and all the most important MSS, have been given to the public by this society. The collection is called the Arne-Magnaean collection, and is preserved in the University Library of Copenhagen.

^171:2 Yule was a pagan festival, celebrated in honor of Thor, at the beginning of February, when the Northmen's year commenced, and they offered sacrifices for peace and fruitful seasons to this deity, who presided over the air, launched the thunder, and guarded mankind from giants and genii; it lasted 14 days. Etymologists differ as to the derivation of the name, but the most probable seems to be the supposition that it was so called from Jolner, one of the many names for Odin, the father of Thor. After the introduction of Christianity, the anniversary of Yule was transferred to Christmas, which is still called by that name throughout Scandinavia. The word Yule is also used In many parts of Scotland to denote the same festive period, shewing the early connection of the Caledonians with their more northern neighbours, and tending to confirm the conjecture of Tacitus, as, well as the accounts of ancient English chroniclers, that the Picts were of northern descent, or as Moore expressively says, "from the same hive of northern adventurers, who were then pouring forth their predatory swarms over Europe."

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

THIRD PERIOD.

It has thus been shewn how the materials for history had been collected in Iceland, and how these materials were moulded into the form of narrative by oral tradition; it now remains to be seen how the traditions became the subjects of written documents, and historical literature assumed a definite and permanent form.

Snorre Sturleson says in the preface to the Heimskringla that Are Frode (b. 1067, d. 1148) was the first who committed to writing, in the northern tongue, historical narrations both of the present and past. Soon afterwards Saemund Frode wrote of the Norwegian kings. Both these authors finished their works at a late period of life, and after the year 1120; hence it has been inferred that no history was written in Iceland before the time of Are Frode, and consequently that such historical writing was the fruit

[p. 175]

of a taste for literature generated by the introduction of Christianity.

This important event occurred in the year 1000. New ideas and new writings were now, doubtless, introduced, but a considerable time must have elapsed before these civilizing effects became general. Christianity was not propagated in Iceland by force, but was the result of the example of the mother country, the adhesion of individual chiefs to the new religion, and the indifference of many to the old. No violent persecution was awakened against the followers of the old idolatry, nor was the influence of the new religion upon morals and customs very visible at first. Sixteen years had elapsed from the introduction of Christianity, before an injunction from Olaf the Saint forbade the Icelanders to expose their children and eat horse-flesh. The first bishop (Isleif) was consecrated in 1056, but the influence of the priestly character depended, like that of the Hofgode in former times, on his personal qualities, and the power of his kinsmen. The oligarchy checked the growth and influence of the hierarchy. Even in the beginning of the 13th century, interdicts were little attended to, and we find the Archbishop of Throndhjem so late as A. D. 1213, obliged to shew great indulgence to the chiefs, who had cruelly maltreated Bishop Jodmund Aresen. With Christian worship came also frankincense, clerical robes, bells and books. Previous to this, the Icelanders were only acquainted with Runes, Runic stones, and Staves, and such small articles, upon which single words or sentences were inscribed. Individuals may, doubtless, have met with books, upon or near the island, just as Irish books were found there by the first settlers, but so long as Roman letters and the language in which

[p. 176]

they were written were unknown, such books could only have been looked upon as foreign novelties. Now the priests brought Latin breviaries, and the new alphabet could not be found very difficult after the use of Runes. Fifty years after the introduction of Christianity, Bishop Isleif established the first school, which was soon followed by many others. The previous state of society had awakened a greater taste for reading and knowledge in Iceland, than in the rest of the North, and the tranquil habits of the people being favourable to the cultivation of letters, it was not long before many of them applied themselves ardently to literature. The Kristni Saga relates that towards the end of the 11th century there were many chiefs so learned that they might have been priests, and many were actually appointed to the sacred office. In the beginning of the 12th century, Ovid's Epistles and Amores were read in the schools, and in the course of the same century we find mention made of many who possessed collections of books.

For some time reading and literature were closely connected with the new religion. A knowledge of Latin letters was acquired in order to sing the Psalter, to which, without well understanding it, some magical influence was ascribed, and the young priest applied himself to Latin, in order that he might becomingly celebrate the Mass. For records of daily life, the Icelander needed not the foreign character; his Runes afforded him a readier medium, and their use was continued for a long period. On the other hand an acquaintance with the Latin language became of the greatest importance to his whole being; for thus an inexhaustible source of knowledge had been opened to him, and the travelling Icelander could now, in foreign

[p. 177]

schools, become endowed with all the learning of the age, and by means of Latin books transfer this learning to his own country. Of these, the historical were the most congenial to his taste and habits, and the annalistic form was best suited to retain the fruits of his reading; hence came Icelanders to copy and afterwards to compile annals embracing long periods of time, and hence to treat Northern history in the same simple manner.

But peculiar difficulties presented themselves to the correct arrangement of these records. Much as had been related in Iceland of the events of the past, their chronological order was not preserved, and the only guide to this indispensable element of history were the long genealogical details of the individuals whose actions were recorded. To ascribe these different events to particular years, and arrange them in chronological order, required much time, trouble and investigation, yet under all these difficulties a book was completed which must excite the surprise and admiration of all the modern literati.

This book was written by Are Frode, under the title of Book of the Icelanders (Islendingabok) and contained a dry and condensed, but at the same time well arranged and , view of the most important events in the history of the country. It has often been regretted, that a larger work by the same author has been lost. The former, with good reason, was highly prized, for it laid the foundation of all northern history, determining many important epochs, and shewing their connexion and succession with minor events. But Snorre's expression about Are Frode has been misunderstood, when he is made to say that Are was the first Icelander who wrote anything historical. Snorre says that Are was the first Icelander who was a historian,

[p. 178]

but by this he could not mean to say that no one had ever put a Saga upon paper before Are Frode; for this, after Icelanders had been educated in schools, could not be well maintained.

The preceding shows that a number of narratives, thrown into an agreeable form, were current throughout Iceland, and that these, favoured by a free constitution, were increased by all the remarkable events that took place either in the island or the neighbouring kingdoms. The transition to written documents was now easy and natural: he who was accustomed to read and write, and who perhaps relied less upon his memory than others, was readily led to take down in writing that which he was desirious to retain, and thus he constructed a Saga. But the writer of such a Saga would never think of appending his name to it, and thereby seeking the honours of authorship, for he merely wrote down what he had heard others say, and exactly as he had heard it. Hence are the greater number of Icelandic Sagas anonymous; the date must be determined by the contents, and it is very possible that many of these narratives, such as Vigastrys and Heidarviga Saga were written earlier than the Schedae of Are Frode. The other principal Icelandic historian was Are's friend, Saemund, also surnamed Frode, or the learned, whose work on the Norwegian kings, from Harald Haarfager to Magnus the Good, is now lost: it is quoted less frequently than that of Are, the most important events having probably been already determined by him.

The peculiar nature of the settlement, and the circumstances under which it had been formed, directed the attention of the Icelandic historians of the 12th century more particularly to details connected with the colonization of the island: the order in which families had become established,

[p. 179]

their genealogy, territory, how they were allied etc.; and the fruit of these enquiries was the celebrated Landnamabok. Next to these local matters came the reigns of the two Olafs, of whose achievements many narratives were in circulation and whose zeal in the propagation of Christianity caused them to be surrounded with a sacred halo. The life of Olaf Tryggveson was written in Latin by two monks, named Gunlaug and Odd, who gave as authorities the oral relations of men from the middle of the same century, at the end of which they wrote; their labour consisted in little more than translating into Latin, and accompanying with a few remarks that which had been communicated to them by others, for both these notices of Olaf's life shew that neither of the authors related anything on his own personal knowledge. About the same period a diffuse compilation was made, recording the achievements of St. Olaf during his life, and his miracles after his death; this was afterwards employed by Snorre, and his contemporary Styrmer, but the nature of both these works renders it probable that many parts had been already written in detached narratives before the whole was collected.

These lives of the Olafs are, in all probability, the earliest regularly arranged written record of a narrative which had been orally related, and they form a connecting link between historical writing and tradition. The achievements of Harald Haarfager, also, which are mentioned in so many narratives of the Icelandic colonists, as having been sung by so many Skalds, whose songs were remembered, and which besides contained events of such great general importance to the Icelanders, were no doubt committed to writing in the course of the 12th century

From such lives of individual kings, the Sagas of the

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Kings of Norway could easily be compiled, for just as the isolated deeds of an Icelander were put together to form the history of his life, and thereto were added the achievements of his forefathers and children, so by uniting the lives of Harald Haarfager and the two Olafs, a Saga of Norwegian Kings was already formed. But he who collected or transcribed such a history in the 12th century never thought of writing a book, still less of being looked upon as an author; he wrote either because he wished to note down certain events for his own satisfaction, or in order to have a good collection of entertaining narratives to relate to his friends. The first attempts were naturally imperfect and unequal, for the materials were casually collected, and the most disproportionate brevity and prolixity is to be observed amongst them; but these became better after a time, and only the most deserving were eventually transcribed.

Next to the Olafs, Harald Haardraade was the Norwegian King who furnished the richest materials to the historian, and already during his life time, and with his cognizance, a romantic complimentary Saga, of his residence at Constantinople, founded upon Haldor Snorreson's prolix narrative, was in circulation. There was another class of Saga which must have led the admirers of the bardic art to collect them into a united form, namely, the celebrated mythic Sagas of the Volsunger and Ginkunger, whose deeds formed the theme of the oldest songs of the Skalds, and from whence so many poetical images are taken. No Icelander who either ventured to indite a strophe himself, or made any pretensions to poetic taste, could be ignorant of these. The Volsunga Saga is supposed to have been written either at the end of the 12th or beginning of the 13th century.

[p. 181]

That the Icelanders who thus, in the 12th century, committed to paper for their own information the achievements of foreign kings, were not unmindful of the transactions of their own island, may be easily believed; nor did they fail to note down carefully the concerns of their own families and the valorous deeds of their kinsmen and forefathers. But of these narratives, there was scarcely one that could be properly called a book, that is to say, a work published for the information of others; they could only be looked upon as records for personal use, or echoes of the living narrative and assistants to its propagation.

The first real writers of history that Iceland produced--those, namely, who collected historical materials, which they individually worked out with the view of communicating the knowledge of remarkable events to their fellow men,--were those who wrote the history of their own times. The first of these was Erik Oddson, who, according to Snorre, wrote from the testimony of eye-witnesses, and from what he himself had learned from Harald Gille and his sons in the middle of the 12th century. This book is used by Snorre, and still more literally by the author of the MS. Morkinskinna. Next to him comes Carl Jonson, who was Abbot of Thingore Monastery in 1169, and wrote the first part of the history of King Sverre, under the personal inspection of the monarch himself: the succeeding part was finished by Styrmer, in the first half of the 10th century. These authors followed exactly the historical style which had been formed by oral relation. The circumstance of King Sverre, who carefully employed every means of leading public opinion in his favour, having sought to influence the Abbot while writing his history, proves that already at that time a feeling for literature had been awakened.

[p. 182]

Thus in the 12th century, when the night of ignorance and barbarism still hung over the rest of Europe, narratives which had previously been transmitted by oral tradition were taken down with the pen, and the writing of books was commenced in Iceland. The following century was the golden age of Icelandic historical literature, for in that age lived Snorre Sturleson. [*1] His mode of writing history was to collect the Sagas that had been written before his time, to strike out whatever displeased him, make abstracts of what he considered too diffuse, and enliven the recital by the introduction of a few strophes from the old Skalds. He states nothing for which he has not good authority; he rejects whatever was too trifling to be consistent with the dignity of history, as well as the greater part of those legends which several of the copyists have inserted in his work: but, on the other hand, he does not pass by a single illustrative feature, and has faithfully preserved the lively character of the ancient Saga.

Between 1264 and 1271, being some years after Sverres Saga had been completed, Sturle Thordson wrote the history of Hakon Hakonson, at the instigation of Magnus Lagebaeter, and according to the materials which he had collected at the Norwegian court. His work is therefore to be looked upon as an independent performance, and both

[p. 183]

as regards its comprehensiveness and historical arrangement, must be classed amongst the best of the Icelandic historical works.

The Sagas which embrace that period of time, extending from the death of Sverre to the birth of Hakon Hakonson, are probably written later than Hakon Hakonson's Saga, for as they just fill up the space between these two great historical works, the want of this link would not clearly appear until the latter had been completed. The fragment which remains of Magnus Lagebaeter's Saga, shews that it was intended to continue the series of Royal Narratives, but these could scarcely have been of much interest, as no MSS. are extant.

A Jarls Saga was also compiled in the 13th century, being a collection of ancient Narratives relating to the Jarls of the Orkneys, which were united and continued under the name of the Orkneyinga Saga. The civil disturbances in Iceland at this period were described by Sturle Thordson, and besides this many were employed in writing Annals.

In the 16th century, although the decline of learning had commenced much literary activity was still visible in Iceland; but the independent compilation or composition of history had ceased, and only a few Bishop Sagas were still written. On the other hand copying was carried on with great industry, older Sagas were transcribed, the Landnamabok completed, and the Kristnisaga, or description of the introduction of Christianity into the country, was extracted from the older writings: the copious MSS. called Flatobogen, [*1] still shews with what industry individual ecclesiastics

[p. 184]

collected and transcribed the older historical Sagas towards the end of this century.

Footnotes

^182:1 Son of the wealthy and powerful Chief Sturle Thordson, and Lagman or governor of Iceland in 1213. "His countrymen," says an eloquent writer, love to compare him with the most celebrated of the Roman orators, to whom both in character and fortune he bore a striking resemblance. Both were called to the highest offices in their native land by the voice of their admiring countrymen--both amidst the cares and distractions of political life, soothed their labours by literature, and won its brightest honors from their less busy contemporaries,--both lived at a time when the bulwarks of freedom were crumbling into fragments around them,--and both, taking an active share in the unnatural conflict, fell victims to the success of their enemies. Like Cicero, too, Snorre was distinguished for his powerful, fervid eloquence, and by his rank, wealth and talents was entitled to the highest place in the state. But his character was stained by avarice and ambition, and he is accused of having often failed to perform boldly what he had prudently contrived."

^183:1 The book of Flat Island (codex Flateyensis), so called from having been found in a monastery on the Island of Flato (Flat Island) situated north of the Brelda Fjord in Iceland. It is a vellum MS. containing copies of a number of Sagas, executed between 1387 and 1395, and is preserved in the Royal Library of Copenhagen.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

LAST PERIOD.

We have now seen how Icelandic historical literature, after having blossomed and borne good fruit, began at last to wither and decay; and the cause of its origin and bloom leads us also to the cause of its decline and extinction. The old state of society had called forth individual action and heroic deeds, and awakened a feeling for their representation; but now the power of the petty chief over his Thingmen had become diminished, and the equilibrium had been removed from amongst the chieftains themselves. Already in the beginning of the 11th century had Gudmund the Powerful one hundred servants at his farm, and he was accustomed to travel through his district like a petty king, with a retinue of thirty men, to judge the disputes of his Thingmen. He did not, however, venture to combat the general dissatisfaction caused by the increased expense to the individuals where he lodged, which this practice occasioned, and eventually contented himself with six attendants. As long as public opinion had so much weight, the voice of the Saga was also influential, but when powerful families intermarried, their influence invariably increased as well as the number of their followers and constituents. In the beginning of the 12th century Haflide Marson had a dispute with Thorgill Oddeson, and rode to the Thing with 1200 men, while 700 accompanied his antagonist. No individual yeoman could oppose such an armament, either with

[p. 185]

his own force or that of his kinsmen, and the field of domestic narrative was therefore reduced from the multiplicity of characters and events which the time of the colonists brought forth, to the more serious feuds of a few powerful chiefs.

From the middle of the 12th century all power and influence was divided between the three warlike sons of Sturle--the historian--Snorre, Thord, and Sigvat. Avarice, ambition, and revenge generated implacable hatred between these, and brought on the destruction of their race; and the history of the independent age of Iceland may be said to end with the feuds of this family, which lasted one hundred years, and gave to that period the name of "the time of the Sturlungers" (Sturlungatiden). Although the history of this period has been written in a good style, with the greatest accuracy, and rare impartiality by an eye-witness and participator in the events--Sturle Thordson;  the much more important occurrences which are here narrated, as compared with the former periods, and which, it might therefore be supposed, would awaken greater interest,--the Sturlunga Saga does not present that attraction to the reader which is afforded by the narratives of less important periods.

Mere numerical force, and not the personal strength or ability of the individual now determined the result. The question was no longer about defending a cause at the Court, but assembling an army; the old thirst for revenge had not vanished, but honourable feeling had given place to treachery, and the power of numbers. No distinguished individual appeared whose deeds could awaken sympathy. Snorre Sturleson was talented and eloquent, but at the same time ambitious, avaricious, and not very celebrated for his

[p. 186]

personal prowess; his nephew, Sturle Sigvatson, was full of energy, but imperious, violent, and faithless; Kolbein the younger, and Gissur, authors of Snorre's murder, were only clever partisans; Thord Kakal, who revenged the fall of the Sturlungers, awakened more sympathy, but he did not possess energy enough either to overcome his enemies or sincerity enough to be reconciled to them, and hastened the submission of the island to Norway

The submission of the Icelanders to the sway of the Norwegian Kings was a natural consequence of these domestic dissensions; there was no end to the wars of the chiefs; not a single house, as formerly, was burned down, but whole provinces were laid waste. The chiefs themselves also looked to Norway for assistance as well as to their bishops, who were dependant on the see of Throndhjem; Hakon Hakonson well knew how to avail himself of this internal weakness, and hastening on a crisis, which was the necessary consequence of the natural course of events, secured the allegiance of the island in 1261.

Thus did all the noble sentiments generated by equal laws, an independent position, high descent and intellectual endowment, sink beneath the angry and narrow-minded conflicts of private interest and personal animosity. Party feeling,--that curse of a nation,--fell upon the land; the Norwegian monarch, availing himself of the weakness which ever accompanies disunion, accomplished the subjection of the island, and as in a more southern and greener isle, the intestine dissensions of his own excited sons affixed the badge of vassalage upon Iceland!

What theme could now animate the lyric muse, or give interest and distinction to the annals of the historian? The flame of discord lighted by the chiefs, and fanned into destructive

[p. 187]

extension by the Norwegian King, had carried with it the last spark of freedom from the exhausted land, and with freedom fled the spirit which had breathed life into the songs of the Skalds and given force and character to the records of the Saga!

After a short time the Sagas ceased to be produced, for nothing occurred that was worthy of being committed to writing; the dry annalist alone could fill his note book with the successions of Lagmen or chief magistrates, the  of the chiefs, law suits, and solitary deeds of violence, or more destructive still, with details of the ravages of the pestilential diseases which now spread death and desolation throughout the land.

But even more injurious to the historical literature of Iceland than these depopulating effects was the taste for romance which arose about this period, and weakened the feeling for pure history. We have already seen that in the 12th century, fabulous or poetical ornament was given to historical narrative, in order to increase the gratification of the hearer; and by such embellished adventures Sturle Thordson obtained so much favour with Magnus Lagebaeter; but so long as real acts of heroism were performed, and recorded, and the Sagas were connected with the songs of the Skalds and the genealogy of families, such narratives justly attained the preference; it was otherwise, however, when the public interest in domestic events had subsided, or rather when the altered condition of society produced nothing to call it forth, and the romances of chivalry were opened like a new world before the admiring eyes of the Icelanders. This was particularly apparent in the reign of Hakon Hakonson, by whose orders several of the most popular foreign romances were translated into Icelandic.

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] To these may be added the copious Vilkina Saga, a romance of Didrik of Bern and his champions, which was probably written by Icelanders in Bergen in the 14th century from the narratives of Hanseatic merchants.

The passion for hearing and reading foreign romances injured historical literature in two ways; first, by corrupting the pure taste for true history; and secondly, by leading many to exaggerate, and deck out facts with imaginative features borrowed from these fables. Public interest in the history of the neighbouring countries also ceased to be longer entertained; some considerable properties fell to the Norwegian crown; the riches of the chiefs passed away, and the island sank fast into an abject and unimportant condition. Journeys to foreign courts, and consequently the knowledge of foreign events became more rare; the complimentary verses of the subject poet to his monarch were naturally less valued than those sung by the travelling bard in honour of a stranger king; they were no longer liberally rewarded, and soon both Skald and Sagaman; ceased to sing and to narrate. With good reason therefore does Torfaeus observe that Hakon Hakonson, by subjecting Iceland, left a larger kingdom to his successors, but at the same time diminished their glory by depriving them of the men who could have immortalized their name.

In the 14th and 15th centuries the voyages of the Icelanders altogether ceased. The stranger who landed on their coast, unlike the old skipper of wide experience and goodly lineage and connexion, was now the paltry trader or ordinary seaman from whom little could be learned; and if an Icelander went abroad, he found himself a stranger in Scandinavia. In the course of the 13th century, the old language, by mixture with the German, and a careless

[p. 189]

manner of speaking, had become quite altered in Denmark, and the same change appeared in the following century in Norway, these two languages becoming nearly similar; so that the old Danske Tunge, together with the Saga, was no longer heard in Scandinavia, while in remote Iceland the ancient songs of the Skalds, and stories of the Sagamen, secured its preservation there.

Thus separated from the rest of the world, as well by language as locality, the Icelanders could only gratify their taste for reading in the books of their own country. The value of oral tradition, and therewith its power had gradually diminished and died away as books and reading became more general; but the old supply of true and poetical narratives became corrupted by legends of foreign and native saints, adventures with ghosts and spirits, and traditions from foreign romances, which were written in the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. Meantime the feeling for the old Saga was still kept alive by historical songs (Rimar) and the labours of the genealogist; the latter has been a favourite pursuit with Icelanders in all ages, and by these means have the principal families been enabled to trace their descent, from the 10th and 11th centuries, with far greater accuracy than the most ancient nobility of the rest of Europe. The Rimar had much resemblance to the Champion songs (Kaempe viser), traces of which are to be found in the Sturlunga Saga, and which were composed in great numbers in the following century. Of the seventy-eight Icelandic poets that are enumerated by Einarm, as having flourished from the Reformation to the end of the 18th century, the greater number have composed such rhymes, and in many of these the old traditions are included.

[p. 190]

In the 16th century still fewer Sagas were written than in the 15th, not so much because people began to get acquainted with printed works, which took place slowly, but because the Reformation at first operated against the reading of Sagas: they were said to contain Popery.

It was, therefore, fortunate for history that from the 17th century the attention of the literati, both in Sweden and Denmark, was turned to the importance of Icelandic manuscripts. Arngrim Johnson, author of Crymogaea, assisted by King Christian IV. of Denmark (1643), collected several of them, and Bishop Brynjulf Svendson sent some of the most important Icelandic codices to Frederic III. (1670), who was a zealous promoter of all intellectual advancement. The Icelander Rugman who, taken prisoner in the wars of Charles X. of Sweden, had awakened the attention of the  literati to the literary treasures of his own country, was sent to the island in 1661 to purchase manuscripts for the Antiquarian Museum of Stockholm, and many were afterwards sent thither on the same errand; but Christian V. of Denmark, whose dominion, including Norway, extended to Iceland, issued a prohibition in 1685 against any manuscripts being disposed of to strangers, nor was it until the eminent antiquary Professor Arnas Magnussen was placed at the head of a royal commission in Iceland, which carried on its labours with unwearied assiduity from 1702 to 1712, that the remaining manuscripts were collected and lodged in the libraries of Copenhagen.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 191]

 

SAGA OF ERIK THE RED.

DISCOVERY AND COLONIZATION OF GREENLAND.

A. D. 985.

In presenting the historical evidences, and results that attended the independent investigations of Professors Reeves, Rafn and Beamish, there is necessarily much repetition, but it is nevertheless essential, because not only are the translations, in many instances, different, but the interpretations of text, and the conclusions reached therefrom are at times widely dissimilar. The importance of bringing the relations, arguments, and proofs of these distinguished authorities into apposition will, therefore, readily appear. The value of the submitted record from so many sources will be appreciated by those who have a sincere desire to know all the grounds upon which are based the claim that Norsemen discovered and made a settlement upon what are now America's shores as early as about the year 1000-3.

THE first important document that appears in Professor Rafn's collection, is the Saga or narrative of Erik the Red, the first settler in Greenland. This manuscript forms part of the celebrated Flatobogen, or Codex Flateyensis, and the language, construction and style of the narrative, together with other unerring indications, prove it to have been written in the 12th century.

Although the main object of the writer of this narrative appears to have been to enumerate the deeds and adventures of Erik and his sons, short accounts are also given of the discoveries of succeeding voyagers, the most distinguished of whom was Thorfinn Karlsefne; but as a more detailed narrative of the discoveries of this remarkable personage is contained in the manuscript entitled the Saga of Thorfinn Karlsefne, which is also translated, the

[p. 192]

following selections are principally confined to the voyages of Erik and his immediate followers.

Thorvald hight (name) a man, a son of Osvald, a son of Ulf-Oxne-Thorersson. Thorvald and his son Erik the Red removed from Jaeder [*1] to Iceland, in consequence of murder. At that time was Iceland colonized wide around. [*2] They lived at Drange on Hornstand; there died Thorvald. Erik then married Thorhild, the daughter of Jaerunda and Thorbjorg Knarrarbringa, who afterwards married Thorbjorn of Haukadal.

Then went Erik northwards and lived at Erikstad near Vatshorn. The son of Erik and Thorhild hight Leif. But after Eyulf Soers and Rafn the duellists' murder, was Erik banished from Haukadal, and he removed westwards to Breidafjord, and lived at Oexney at Erikstad. He lent Thorgest his seat-posts, and could not get them back again; he then demanded them; upon this arose disputes and frays between him and Thorgest, as is told in Erik's saga. Styr Thorgrimson, Eyulf of Svinoe, and the sons of Brand of Alptafjord, and Thorbjorn Vifilson assisted Erik in this matter, but the sons of Thorgeller and Thorgeir of Hitardal stood by the Thorgestlingers. Erik was declared outlawed by the Thornesthing, and he then made ready his ship in Erik's creek, and when he was ready, Styr and the others followed him out past the islands.

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Erik told them that he intended to go in search of the land, which Ulf Krages son Gunnbjorn saw, when he was driven out to the westward in the sea, the time when he found the rocks of Gunnbjorn. [*1] He said he would come back to his friends if he found the land. Erik sailed out from Snaefellsjokul; he found land, and came in from the sea to the place which he called Midjokul; it is now hight Blaserkr. He then went southwards to see whether it was there habitable land. The first winter he was at Eriksey, nearly in the middle of the eastern settlement; the spring after repaired he to Eriksfjord, and took up there his abode. He removed in summer to the we-stern settlement, and gave to many places names. He was the second winter at Holm in Hrafnsgnipa, but the third summer went he to Iceland, and came with his ship into Breidafjord. He called the land which he had found Greenland, because, quoth he, "people will be attracted thither, if the land has a good name." Erik was in Iceland for the winter, but the summer after, went he to colonize the land; he dwelt at Brattahlid in Eriksfjord. Informed people say that the same summer Erik the Red went to colonize Greenland, thirty-five ships sailed from Breidafjord and Borgafjord, but only fourteen arrived; some were driven back, and others were lost. This was fifteen winters before Christianity was established by law in Iceland. The following men who went out with Eirik took land in Greenland: Herjulf took Herjulfsfjord (he lived at Herjulfsness), Ketil Ketilsfjord, Rafn Rafnsfjord,

[p. 194]

[paragraph continues] Soelve Soelvedal, Helge Thorbrandsson Alptefjord, Thorbjornglora Siglefjord, Einar Einarsfjord, Hafgrim Hafgrimsfjord and Vatnahverf, Arnlaug Arnlaugsfjord, but some went to the western settlement.

 

BJARNE SEEKS OUT GREENLAND.

A. D. 986.

Herjulf was the son of Bard Herjulfson; he was kinsman to the colonist Ingolf. To Herjulf gave Ingolf land between Vog and Reykjaness. Herjulf lived first at Drepstock; Thorgerd hight his wife, and Bjarne was their son, a very hopeful man. He conceived, when yet young, a desire to travel abroad, and soon earned for himself both riches and respect, and he was every second winter abroad, every other at home with his father. Soon possessed Bjarne his own ship, and the last winter be was in Norway, Herjulf prepared for a voyage to Greenland with Erik. In the ship with Herjulf was a Christian from the Hebrides, who made a hymn respecting the whirlpool, in which was the following verse:--

	 
		O thou who triest holy men!
		   Now guide me on my way,
		 Lord of the earth's wide vault, extend
		   Thy gracious hand to me!
		
		 Herjulf lived at Herjulfsness; he was a very respectable man. Erik the Red lived at Brattahlid; he was the most looked up to, and every one regulated themselves by him. These were Erik's children: Leif, Thorvald and Thorstein, but Freydis hight his daughter; she was married

[p. 195]

to a man who Thorvard hight; they lived in Garde, where is now the Bishop's seat; she was very haughty, but Thorvard was narrow-minded; she was married to him chiefly on account of his money. Heathen were the people in Greenland at this time. Bjarne carne to Eyrar with his ship the summer of the same year in which his father had sailed away in spring. These tidings appeared serious to Bjarne, and he was unwilling to unload his ship. Then his seamen asked him what he would do; he answered that he intended to continue his custom, and pass the winter with his father; "and I will," said he, "bear for Greenland if ye will give me your company." All said that they would follow his counsel. Then said Bjarne: "Imprudent will appear our voyage since none of us has been in the Greenland ocean." However, they put to sea so soon as they were ready and sailed for three days, until the land was out of sight under the water; but then the fair wind fell, and there arose north winds and fogs, and they knew not where they were, and thus it continued for many days. After that saw they the sun again, and could discover the sky; they now made sail, and sailed for that day, before they saw land, and counselled with each other about what land that could be, and Bjarne said that he thought it could not be Greenland. They asked whether he wished to sail to this land or not. "My advice is," said he, "to sail close to the land;" and so they did, and soon saw that the land was without mountains, and covered with wood, and had small heights. Then left they the land or their larboard side, and let the stern turn from the land. Afterwards they

[p. 196]

sailed two days before they saw another land. They asked if Bjarne thought that this was Greenland, but he said that he as little believed this to be Greenland as the other; "because in Greenland are said to be very high ice hills." They soon approached the land, and saw that it was a flat land covered with wood. Then the fair wind fell, and the sailors said that it seemed to them most advisable to land there; but Bjarne was unwilling to do so. They pretended that they were in want of both wood and water. "Ye have no want of either of the two," said Bjarne; for this, however, he met with some reproaches from the sailors. He bade them make sail, and so was done; they turned the prow from the land, and, sailing out into the open sea for three days, with a southwest wind, saw then the third land; and this land was high, and covered with mountains and ice-hills. Then asked they whether Bjarne would land there, but he said that he would not: "for to me this land appears little inviting." Therefore did they not lower the sails, but held on along this land, and saw that it was an island; again turned they the stern from the land, and sailed out into the sea with the same fair wind; but the breeze freshened, and Bjarne then told them to shorten sail, and not sail faster than their ship and ship's gear could hold out. They sailed now four days, when they saw the fourth land. Then asked they Bjarne whether he though that this was Greenland or not. Bjarne answered: "This is the most like Greenland, according to what I have been told about it, and here will we steer for land." So did they, and landed in the evening under a ness; and there was a boat by the

[p. 197]

ness, and just here lived Bjarne's father, and from him has the ness taken its name, and is since called Herjulfsness. Bjarne now repaired to his father's, and gave up seafaring, and was with his father so long as Herjulf lived, and afterwards he dwelt there after his father.

Such is the simple detail of the first voyage of the Northmen to the western hemisphere, and Professor Rafn shews that there are sufficient data in the ancient Icelandic geographical works to determine the position of the various coasts and headlands thus discovered by Bjarne Herjulfson. A day's sail was estimated by the Northmen at from twenty-seven to thirty geographical miles, and the knowledge of this fact, together with that of the direction of the wind, the course steered, the appearance of the shores, and other details contained in the narrative itself, together with the more minute description of the same lands given by succeeding voyagers,--leave no doubt that the countries thus discovered by Bjarne Herjulfson, were Connecticut, Long Island, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland, and the date of the expedition is determined by the passage in the preliminary narrative which fixes the period of Herjulf's settlement at Herjulfsness in Iceland.

It may, perhaps, be urged in disparagement of these discoveries that they were accidental,--that Bjarne Herjulfson set out in search of Greenland, and fell in with the eastern coast of North America; but so it was, also, with Columbus.--The sanguine and skilful Genoese navigator set sail in quest of Asia, and discovered the West Indies; even when in his last voyage, he did reach the eastern shore of Central America, he still believed it to be Asia, and continued under that impression to the day of his

[p. 198]

death [*1]. Besides, how different were the circumstances under which the two voyages were made? The Northmen, without compass or quadrant, without any of the advantages of science, geographical knowledge, personal experience, or previous discoveries,--without the support of either kings or governments,--which Columbus, however discouraged at the outset, eventually obtained,--but guided by the stars, and upheld by their own private resources, and a spirit of adventure which no dangers could deter--cross the broad northern ocean, and explore these distant lands! Columbus, on the other hand, went forth with all the advantages of that grand career of modern discovery which had been commenced in the preceding century, and which, under Prince Henry of Portugal, had been pushed forward to an eminent position in the period immediately preceding his first voyage.

The compass had been discovered and brought into general use; maps and charts had been constructed; astronomical and geographical science had become more diffused, and the discoveries of the African coast from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verde, together with the Cape de Verde and Azore Islands, had produced a general excitement amongst all who were in any way connected with a maritime life, and filled their minds with brilliant images of fairer islands and more wealthy shores amidst the boundless waters of

[p. 199]

the Atlantic. It should also be recollected that Columbus ever ready to gather information from veteran mariners, had heard of land seen far to the west of Ireland and of the island of Madeira; had been assured that, four hundred and fifty leagues east of Cape St. Vincent, carved wood, not cut with iron instruments, had been found in the sea, and that a similar fragment, together with reeds of an immense size, had drifted to Porto Santo from the west: added to this, was the fact of huge pine trees, of unknown species, having been wafted by westerly winds to the Azores, and human bodies of wondrous form and feature cast upon the island of Flores. Nor should it be forgotten that Columbus visited Iceland in 1477, [*1] when, having had access to the archives of the island, and ample opportunity of conversing with the learned there, through the medium of the Latin language, he might easily have obtained a complete knowledge of the discoveries of the Northmen, sufficient at least to confirm his belief in the existence of a western continent. How much the discoveries of the distinguished Genoese navigator were exceeded by those of the Northmen, will appear from the following narratives.

Footnotes

^192:1 S. W. coast of Norway.

^192:2 Iceland was colonized by Ingolf, a Norwegian, in 874. The discovery of the island has been erroneously given to Nadodd in 862, but Finn Magnusen and Rafn have shewn that it had been previously visited by Gardar, a Dane of Swedish descent about the year 860, and was first called Gardarsholm (Gardar's island), nor can the arrival of Nadodd, who called it Sneeland (Snowland) be fixed at an earlier period than 864. But both the Norwegian and Swedo-Dane must give place to the Irish monks, who, it will be shewn, visited and resided in Iceland sixty-five years before the discovery of Gardar.

^193:1 Gunnbjarnasker, stated by Bjorn Johnson to have been about midway between Iceland and Greenland, but now concealed, or rendered inaccessible by the descent of Arctic ice.

^198:1 "With all the visionary fervour of his imagination, its fondest dreams fell short of reality. He died in ignorance of the real grandeur of his discovery. Until his last breath, he entertained the idea that he had merely opened a new way to the old resorts of opulent commerce, and had discovered some of the wild regions of the East. He supposed Hispaniola to be the ancient Ophir, which had been visited by the ships of King Solomon, and that Cuba and Terra Firma were but remote parts of Asia." Irving's Columbus, Fam. Lib. No. XI, p. 359.

"He imagined that the vast stream of fresh water which poured into the gulf of Paria, issued from the fountain of the tree of life, in the midst of the Garden of Eden."--Ib. p. 219.

"He fancied that he had actually arrived at the Aurea Chersonesus, from whence, according to Josephus, the gold had been procured for the building of the Temple of Jerusalem. "--Ib. p. 291.

^199:1 "While the design of attempting the discovery in the west was maturing in the mind of Columbus, he made a voyage to the northern seas, to the island of Thule, to which the English navigators, particularly those of Bristol, were accustomed to resort on account of its fishery. He even advanced, he says, one hundred leagues beyond, penetrated the polar circle, and convinced himself of the fallacy of the popular belief, that the frozen zone was uninhabitable. The island thus mentioned by him as Thule is generally supposed to have been Iceland."

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 200]

 

VOYAGE OF LEIF ERIKSON.

A. D. 1008.

THE next thing now to be related is that Bjarne Herjulfson went out from Greenland and visited Erik Jarl, and the Jarl received him well. Bjarne told about his voyages, that he had seen unknown lands, and people thought he had shown no curiosity, when he had nothing to relate about these countries, and this became somewhat a matter of reproach to him. Bjarne became one of the Jarl's courtiers, and came back to Greenland the summer after. There was now much talk about voyages of discovery. Leif, the son of Erik the Red, of Brattahlid, went to Bjarne Herjulfson, and bought the ship of him, and engaged men for it, so that there were thirty-five men in all. Leif asked his father Erik to be the leader on the voyage, but Erik excused himself, saying that he was now pretty well stricken in years, and could not now, as formerly, hold out all the hardships of the sea. Leif said that still he was the one of the family whom good fortune would soonest attend; and Erik gave in to Leif's request, and rode from home so soon as they were ready; and it was but a short way to the ship. The horse stumbled that Erik rode, and he fell off, and bruised his foot. Then said Erik, "It is not ordained that I should discover more countries than that which we now inhabit, and we should make no further attempt in company." Erik went home to Brattahlid, but Leif repaired to the ship, and his comrades

[p. 201]

with him, thirty-five men. There was a southern [*1] on the voyage, who Tyrker hight (named). Now prepared they their ship, and sailed out into the sea when they were ready, and then found that land first which Bjarne had found last. There sailed they to the land, and cast anchor, and put off boats, and went ashore, and saw there no grass. Great icebergs were over all up the country, but like a plain of flat stones was all from the sea to the mountains, and it appeared to them that this land had no good qualities. Then said Leif, "We have not done like Bjarne about this land, that we have not been upon it; now will I give the land a name, and call it Helluland." Then went they on board, and after that sailed out to sea, and found another land; they sailed again to the land, and cast anchor, then put off boats and went on shore. This land was flat, and covered with wood, and white sands were far around where they went, and the shore was low. Then said Leif, "This land shall be named after its qualities, and called Markland [*2] (woodland.)" They then immediately returned to the ship. Now sailed they thence into the open sea, with a northeast wind, and were two days at sea before they saw land, and they sailed

[p. 202]

thither and came to an island (Nantucket?) which lay to the eastward of the land, [*1] and went up there, and looked round them in good weather, and observed that there was dew upon the grass; and it so happened that they touched the dew with their hands, and raised the fingers to the mouth, and they thought that they had never before tasted anything so sweet.

After that they went to the ship, and sailed into a sound, which lay between the island and a ness (promontory), which ran out to the eastward of the land; and then steered westwards past the ness. It was very shallow at ebb tide, and their ship stood up, so that it was far to see from the ship to the water.

But so much did they desire to land, that they did not give themselves time to wait until the water again rose under their ship, but ran at once on shore, at a place where a river flows out of a lake; but so, soon as the waters rose up under the ship, then took they boats, and rowed to the ship, and floated it up to the river, and thence into the lake, and there cast anchor, and brought up from the ship their skin cots, [*2] and made their booths.

After this took they counsel, and formed the resolution of remaining there for the winter, and built there large houses. There was no want of salmon either in the river or in the lake, and larger salmon than they had

Click to enlarge
NORSEMEN CELEBRATING THEIR DISCOVERY.

(From a drawing by Russell.)

Lief Erickson, with his companions, found the country about Vinland so fertile and attractive that sailing up the River St. Charles a short distance they landed at a site suitable for a settlement and there erected booths. These booths were built after the primitive fashion, by driving sharpened posts into the ground, which with forked tops supported cross pieces on which were then laid boughs and a covering of grass and earth. These temporary structures answered very well for shelter during the summer, and until more substantial buildings could be erected, which was done the following spring.

[p. 203]

before seen. The nature of the country was, as they thought, so good that cattle would not require house feeding in winter, for there came no frost in winter, and little did the grass wither there. Day and night were more equal than in Greenland or Iceland, for on the shortest day was the sun above the horizon from half-past seven in the forenoon till half-past four in the afternoon, hence Prof. Rafn makes the latitude 41 degrees, 24', 10".

This would give very nearly the latitude of Mount Hope Bay, which locality is previously pointed out by the details relating to the soil and climate, and fully corresponds with the descriptions of modern travellers.

But when they had done with the house building, Leif said to his comrades:--"Now will I divide our men into two parts, and have the land explored, and the half of the men shall remain at home at the house, while the other half explore the land; but however, not go further than that they can come home in the evening, and they should not separate." Now they did so for a time, and Leif changed about, so that the one day he went with them, and the other remained at home in the house. Leif was a great and strong man, grave and well favoured, therewith sensible and moderate in all things.

It happened one evening that a man of the party was missing, and this was Tyrker the German. This took Leif much to heart, for Tyrker had been long with his father and him, and loved Leif much in his childhood. Leif now took his people severely to task, and prepared to seek for Tyrker, and took twelve men with him. But when they had gotten a short way from the house, then

[p. 204]

came Tyrker towards them, and was joyfully received. Leif soon saw that his foster-father was not in his right senses. Tyrker had a high forehead, and unsteady eyes, was freckled in the face, small and mean in stature, but excellent in all kinds of artifice. Then said Leif to him: "Why wert thou so late my fosterer, and separated from the party?" He now spoke first, for a long time, in German, and rolled his eyes about to different sides, and twisted his mouth, but they did not understand what he said. After a time he spoke Norse. "I have not been much further off, but still have I something new to tell of; I found vines and grapes." "But is that true, my fosterer?" quoth Leif. "Surely is it true," replied he, "for I was bred up in a land where there is no want of either vines or grapes." They slept now for the night, but in the morning, Leif said to his sailors: "We will now set about two things, in that the one day we gather grapes, and the other day cut vines and fell trees, so from thence will be a loading for my ship," and that was the counsel taken, and it is said their long boat was filled with grapes. Now was a cargo cut down for the ship, and when the spring came they got ready and sailed away, and Leif gave the land a name after its qualities, and called it Vinland, or Wineland.

They sailed now into the open sea, and had a fair wind until they saw Greenland, and the mountains below the joklers. Then a man put in his word and said to Leif: "Why do you steer so close to the wind?" Leif answered: "I attend to my steering, and something more, and can ye not see anything?" They answered that they

[p. 205]

could not observe anything extraordinary. "I know not," said Leif, "whether I see a ship or a rock." Now looked they, and said it was a rock. But he saw so much sharper than they that he perceived there were men upon the rock. "Now let us," said Leif, "hold our wind so that we come up to them, if they should want our assistance, and the necessity demands that we should help them; and if they should not be kindly disposed, the power is in our hands, and not in theirs." Now sailed they under the rock, and lowered their sails, and cast anchor, and put out another little boat, which they had with them. Then asked Tyrker who their leader was? He called himself Thorer, and said he was a Northman; "but what is thy name?" said he. Leif told his name. "Art thou a son of Erik the Red, of Brattahlid?" quoth he. Leif answered that so it was. "Now will I," said Leif, "take ye all on board my ship, and as much of the goods as the ship can hold." They accepted this offer, and sailed thereupon to Eriksfjord with the cargo, and thence to Brattahlid, where they unloaded the ship. After that, Leif invited Thorer and his wife Gudrid, and three other men to stop with him, and got berths for the other seamen, as well Thorer's as his own, elsewhere. Leif took fifteen men from the rock; he was, after that, called Leif the Lucky. Leif had now earned both riches and respect. The same winter came a heavy sickness among Thorer's people, and carried off as well Thorer himself as many of his men. This winter died also Erik the Red. Now was there much talk about Leif's voyage to Vinland, and Thorvald, his brother, thought that the land

[p. 206]

had been much too little explored. Then said Leif to Thorvald: "Thou can'st go with my ship, brother! if thou wilt, to Vinland, but I wish first that the ship should go and fetch the timber, which Thorer had upon the rock;" and so was done.

 

THORVALD REPAIRS TO VINLAND.

A. D. 1002.

Now Thorvald made ready for this voyage with 30 men, and took counsel thereon with Leif his brother. Then made the their ship ready, and put to sea, and nothing is told of their voyage until they came to Leif's booths in Vinland. There they laid up their ship, and spent a pleasant winter, and caught fish for their support. But in the spring, said Thorvald, that they should make ready the ship, and that some of the men should take the ship's long boat round the western part of the land, and explore there during the summer. To them appeared the land fair and woody, and but a short distance between the wood and the sea, and white sands; there were many islands, and much shallow water. They found neither dwellings of men nor beasts, except upon an island, to the westward, where they found a corn-shed of wood, but many works of men they found not; and they then went back and came to Leif's booths in the autumn. But the next summer, went Thorvald eastward with the ship, and round the land to the northward. Here came a heavy storm upon them when off a ness, so that they were driven on shore, and the keel broke off from the ship, and they remained here a long time, and

[p. 207]

repaired their ship. Then said Thorvald to his companions: "Now will I that we fix up the keel here upon the ness, and call it Keelness (Kjalarness), and so did they. After that they sailed away round the eastern shores of the land, and into the mouths of the firths, which lay nearest thereto, and to a point of land which stretched out, and was covered all over with wood. There they came to, with the ship, and shoved out a plank to the land, and Thorvald went up the country with all his companions. He then said: "Here it is beautiful, and here would I like to raise my dwelling." Then went they to the ship, and saw upon the sands within the promontory three elevations, and went thither, and saw there three skin boats (canoes), and three men under each. Then divided they their people, and caught them all, except one, who got away with his boat. They killed the other eight, and then went back to the cape, and looked round them, and saw some heights inside of the frith, and supposed that these were dwellings. After that, so great a drousiness came upon them that they could not keep awake, and they all fell asleep. Then came a shout over them, so that they all awoke. Thus said the shout: "Wake thou! Thorvald! and all thy companions, if thou wilt preserve life, and return thou to thy ship, with all thy men, and leave the land without delay." Then rushed out from the interior of the frith an innumerable crowd of skin boats, and made towards them. Thorvald said then: "We will put out the battle-skreen, and defend ourselves as well as we can, but fight little against them." So did they, and the Skraelings shot at

[p. 208]

them for a time, but afterwards ran away, each as fast as he could. Then asked Thorvald his men if they had. gotten any wounds; they answered that no one was wounded. "I have gotten a wound under the arm," said he, "for an arrow fled between the edge of the ship and the shield, in under my arm, and here is the arrow, and it will prove a mortal wound to me. Now counsel I ye, that ye get ready instantly to depart, but ye shall bear me to that cape, where I thought it best to dwell; it may be that a true word fell from my mouth, that I should dwell there for a time; there shall ye bury me, and set up crosses at my head and feet, and call the place Krossaness for ever in all time to come." Greenland was then Christianized, but Erik the Red died before Christianity was introduced. Now Thorvald died, but they did all things according to his directions, and then went away, and returned to their companions, and told to each other the tidings which they knew, and dwelt there for the winter, and gathered grapes and vines to load the ship. But in the spring they made ready to sail to Greenland, and came with their ship in Eriksfjord, and could now tell great tidings to Leif.

[p. 209]

 

UNSUCCESSFUL VOYAGE OF THORSTEIN ERIKSON.

A. D. 1005.

THORSTEIN ERIKSON DIES IN THE WESTERN SETTLEMENT.

MEANTIME it had happened in Greenland that Thorstein in Eriksfjord married Gudrid, Thorbjorn's daughter, who had been formerly married to Thorer the Eastman, as is before related. Now Thorstein Erikson conceived a desire to go to Vinland after the body of Thorvald his brother, and he made ready the same ship, and chose great and strong men for the crew, and had with him 25 men, and Gudrid his wife. They sailed away so soon as they were ready, and came out of sight of the land. They drove about in the sea the whole summer, and knew not where they were; and when the first week of winter was past, then landed they in Lysefjord in Greenland, in the western settlement. Thorstein sought shelter for them and procured lodging for all his crew; but he himself and his wife were without lodging, and they, therefore, remained some two nights in the ship. Then was Christianity yet new in Greenland. Now it came to pass one day that some people repaired, early in the morning, to their tent, and the leader of the party asked who was in the tent. Thorstein answered: "Here are two persons, but who asks the question?" "Thorstein is my name," said the other, "and I am called Thorstein the Black, but my business here is to bid ye both,

[p. 210]

thou and thy wife, to come and stop at my house." Thorstein said that he would talk the matter over with his wife, but she told him to decide, and he accepted the bidding. "Then will I come after ye in the morning with horses, for I want nothing to entertain ye both; but it is very wearisome at my house, for we are there but two, I and my wife, and I am very morose; I have also a different religion from yours, and yet hold I that for the better which ye have." Now came he after them in the morning with horses, and they went to lodge with Thorstein the Black, who shewed them every hospitality. Gudrid was a grave and dignified woman, and therewith sensible, and knew well how to carry herself among strangers. Early that winter came sickness amongst Thorstein Erikson's men, and there died many of his people. Thorstein had coffins made for the bodies of those who died, and caused them to be taken out to the ship, and there laid; "for I will," said he, "have all the bodies taken to Eriksfjord in the summer." Now it was not long before the sickness came also into Thorstein's house, and his wife, who hight Grimhild took the sickness first; she was very large, and strong as a man, but still did the sickness master her. And soon after that, the disease attacked Thorstein Erikson, and they both lay ill at the same time, and Grimhild, the wife of Thorstein the Black, died. But when she was dead, then went Thorstein out of the room, after a plank to lay the body upon. Then said Gudrid: "Stay not long away, my Thorstein!" he answered that so it should be. Then said Thorstein Erikson: "Strangely now is our house-mother [*1] going on,

[p. 211]

for she pushes herself up on her elbows, and stretches her feet out of bed, and feels for her shoes." At that moment came in the husband Thorstein, and Grimhild then lay down, and every beam in the room creaked. Now Thorstein made a coffin for Grimhild's body, and took it out, and buried it; but although he was a large and powerful man, it took all his strength to bring it out of the place. Now the sickness attacked Thorstein Erikson and be died, which his wife Gudrid took much to heart. They were then all in the room; Gudrid had taken her seat upon a chair beyond the bench upon which Thorstein her husband, had lain; then Thorstein the host took Gudrid from the chair upon his knees, and sat down with her upon another bench, just opposite Thorstein's body. He comforted her in many ways, and cheered her up, and promised to go with her to Eriksfjord, with her husband's body, and those of his companions; "and I will also," added he, "bring many servants to comfort and amuse thee." She thanked him. Then Thorstein Erikson sat himself up on the bench, and said: "Where is Gudrid?" Three times said he that, but she answered not. Then said she to Thorstein the host: "Shall I answer his questions or not?" He counselled her not to answer. After this, went Thorstein the host across the floor, and sat himself on a chair, but Gudrid sat upon his knees, and he said: "What wilt thou, Namesake?" After a little he answered: "I wish much to tell Gudrid her fortune, in order that she may be the better reconciled to my death, for I have now come to a good resting place; but this can I tell thee, Gudrid! that thou wilt

[p. 212]

be married to an Icelander, and ye shall live long together, and have a numerous posterity, powerful, distinguished, and excellent, sweet and well favoured; ye shall remove from Greenland to Norway, and from thence to Iceland; there shall ye live long, and thou shalt outlive him. Then wilt thou go abroad, and travel to Rome, and come back again to Iceland, to thy house; and then will a church be built, and thou wilt reside there, and become a nun, and there wilt thou die." And when he had said these words, Thorstein fell back, and his corpse was set in order, and taken to the ship. Now Thorstein the host kept well all the promises which he had made to Gudrid; in the spring (1006) he sold his farm, and his cattle, and betook himself to the ship, with Gudrid, and all that he possessed; he made ready the ship, and procured men therefor, and then sailed to Eriksfjord. The bodies were now buried by the Church. Gudrid repaired to Leif in Brattahlid, but Thorstein the Black made himself a dwelling at Eriksfjord, and dwelt there so long as he lived, and was looked upon as a very able man.

This prophetic announcement of Thorstein Erikson is highly characteristic of the superstition of the times, and although pertaining to the marvellous, is not the less corroborative of the authenticity of the narrative. "Such incidents," says Sir Walter Scott, "make an invariable part of the history of a rude age, and the chronicles which do not afford these marks of human credulity, may be greviously suspected as being deficient in authenticity."

[p. 213]

FROM THE HEIMSKRINGLA, OR HISTORY OF THE: NORWEGIAN KINGS, ACCORDING TO THE 2nd VELLUM CODEX OF THE ARNAE-MAGNAEAN COLLECTION, No. 45 Folio.

 

VINLAND THE GOOD IS DISCOVERED.

The same winter was Leif, the son of Erik the Red, with King Olaf, in good repute, and embraced Christianity. But the summer that Gissur went to Iceland, King Olaf sent Leif to Greenland, in order to make known Christianity there; he sailed the same summer to Greenland. He found, in the sea, some people on a wreck, and helped them; the same time discovered he Vinland the Good; and came in harvest to Greenland. He had with him a priest, and other clerks, and went to dwell at Brattahlid with Erik, his father. Men called him afterwards Leif the Lucky; but Erik his father said that these two things went one against the other, inasmuch as Leif had saved the crew of the ship, but brought evil men to Greenland, namely the priests.

Footnotes

^201:1 Sudrmadr, supposed to mean a German, as the terms Sudrmenn and Thydverskirmenn are used promiscuously to distinguish the natives of Germany, by old northern writers.

^201:2 "The land about the Harbour of Halifax, and a little to the southward of it, is, in appearance, rugged and rocky, and has on it, in several places, scrubby withered wood. Although it seems bold, yet it is not high." Columbian Navigator, Vol. I. P. i. p, 17. "The land is low in general, and not visible twenty miles off, except from the quarter-deck of a seventy-four. Apostogon Hills have a long level appearance. Between Cape le Have and Port Medway, the coast to the seaward being level and low, and the shores with white rocks, and low barren points; from thence to Shelburne and Port Roseway are woods. Near Port Haldimand are several barren places, and thence to Cape Sable, which makes the S. W. point into Barrington Bay, is a low woody island, at the S. E. extremity of a range of sandy cliffs, which are very remarkable at a considerable distance in the offing."

^202:1 Literally "northward of the land," but the Editor shows that the Northmen placed this point of the compass nearly in the position of our east."

^202:2 Hudfot, from hud, skin, and fat, a case or covering, being strictly speaking, a skin bag or pouch, in which the ancients were accustomed to keep their clothes and other articles on a journey; the same was used for a bed on ship-board, as appears in the Laxdaela Saga, p. 116, where Thurid says, "she went to the couch, where Geirmund slept." It thus answers to the uter of the Romans.

^210:1 Husfreyju.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

 

SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNE.

NEXT in importance and interest to the Saga of Erik the Red, is that of Thorfinn, with the significant surname of Karlsefne, i. e., destined to become a great man. This distinguished individual was a wealthy and powerful Icelandic merchant, descended from an illustrious line of Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Irish, and Scottish ancestors, some of whom were kings, or of royal blood. The narrative of his exploits is taken from two ancient Icelandic MSS. not previously known to the literati, and one of which, there is every reason to believe, is a genuine autograph of the celebrated Hank Erlendson, who was Lagman or Chief Governor of Iceland in 1295, and one of the compilers of the Landnamabok; he was also a descendant of Karlsefne in the ninth generation. This very remarkable Saga forms part of the Arnae-Magaean collection, and besides short notices of the discoveries of the earlier voyagers, which are more fully described in the Saga of Erik the Red, gives detailed accounts of voyages to and discoveries in America, carried on by Karlsefne and his companions for a period of three years, commencing in 1007. Some discrepancies and misnomers appear in those parts of the narrative, which treat of the personages and events recorded in the preceding Saga, but they are only such as to preclude all suspicion of confederacy or fraud on the part of the writers, as all the main facts are substantially the same in both; and the circumstance

[p. 215]

of the Saga of Erik having been written in Greenland, while that of Karlsefne was written in Iceland, is sufficient to account for these variations. The same circumstance, also, renders the former the best authority in all matters of detail connected with Greenland, while the other must be considered more correct respecting occurrences relating to Iceland. These differences are pointed out in the notes, and where any minor points of interesting detail connected with the voyage of Karlsefne appear in the Saga of Erik the Red, while they are absent in Karlsefne's saga, they have been supplied from that of Erik, the interpolation being pointed out.

Torfaeus imagined that the Saga of Thorfirm Karlsefne was lost, and the only knowledge he had of its contents was derived from some corrupt extracts contained in the collection of materials for the history of ancient Greenland, left by the Icelandic yeoman Bjorn Jonson, of Skardso.

[p. 216]

 

SAGA OF THORFINN KARLSEFNI.

GENEALOGY OP THORFINN KARLSEFNI, HIS VOYAGE TO GREENLAND, AND MARRIAGE WITH GUDRID, THE WIDOW OF THORSTEIN ERIKSON.

(Translation from the Manuscript.)

THORD hight [*1] a man who lived at Hofda in Hofda strand; he married Fridgerda, daughter of Thorer Hyma and Fridgerda daughter of Kjarval, king of the Irish. Thord was the son of Bjarni Byrdusmjor, son of Thorvald Ryg, son of Asleik, son of Bjarni Jarnsid, son of Ragnar Lodbrok. They had a son called Snorri; he married Thorhild Rjupa, daughter of Thord Gellar; their son was Thord Hesthofdi. Thorfinn Karlsefni hight Thord's son; Thorfinn's mother hight Thorum. Thorfirm took to trading voyages, and was thought an able seaman and merchant. One summer Karlsefni fitted out his ship, and purposed a voyage to Greenland. Snorri Thorbrandson, of Alptefjord, went with him, and there were forty men in the ship. There was a man hight Bjarne Grimolfson, of Breidafjord; another hight Thorhall Gamalason, an Eastfjordish man; they fitted out their ship the same summer for Greenland; there were also forty men in the ship. Karlsefni and the others put to sea with these two ships, so soon as they were ready. Nothing is told about how long they were at sea, but it is to be related that both these ships came to Eriksfjord in the autumn. Erik rode to the ship together with several of

[p. 217]

the inhabitants, and they began to deal in a friendly manner. Both the ship's captains begged Erik (Leif) to take as much of the goods as he wished; but Erik (Leif) on his side, showed them hospitality, and bade the crews of these two ships home, for the winter, to his own house at Brattahlid. This the merchants accepted, and thanked him. Then were their goods removed to Brattahlid; there was no want of large out-houses to keep the goods in, neither plenty of every thing that was required, wherefore they were well satisfied in the winter. But towards Yule Erik (Leif) began to be silent, and was less cheerful than he used to be. One time turned Karlsefni towards Erik (Leif) and said: "Hast thou any sorrow, Erik, my friend? people think to see that thou art less cheerful than thou wert wont to be; thou hast entertained us with the greatest splendour, and we are bound to return it to thee with such services as we can command; say now, what troubles thee?" Erik (Leif) answered: "Ye are friendly and thankful, and I have no fear as concerns out intercourse, that ye will feel the want of attention; but, on the other hand, I fear that when ye come elsewhere it will be said that ye have never passed a worse Yule than that which now approaches, when Erik the Red entertained ye at Brattahlid, in Greenland." "It shall not be so, Yeoman!" [*1] said Karlsefne; "we have in our ship, both malt and corn; take as much as thou desirest thereof, and make ready a feast as grand as thou wilt!" This Erik (Leif) accepted, and now preparation was made for the feast of Yule, and this'

[p. 218]

feast was so grand that people thought they had hardly ever seen the like pomp in a poor land. And after Yule Karlsefni disclosed to Erik (Leif) that he wished to marry Gudrid, for it seemed to him, as if he must have the power in this matter. Erik answered favourably, and said that she must follow her fate, and that he had heard nothing but good of him; and it ended so that Thorfinn married Thurid [*1] (Gudrid), and then was the feast extended; and their marriage was celebrated; and this happened at Brattahlid, in the winter.

 

EXPEDITION TO AND SETTLEMENT IN VINLAND BY THORFINN KARLSEFNI.

A. D. 1007.

BEGINNING OF THE VINLAND VOYAGE.

IN Brattahlid began people to talk much about that Vinland the Good should be explored, and it was said that a voyage thither would be particularly profitable by reason of the fertility of the land; and it went so far that Karlsefni and Snorri made ready their ship to explore the land in the spring. With them went also the before-named men hight Bjarni and Thorhall, with their ship. There was a man hight Thorvard; he married Freydis, a natural daughter of Erik the Red; he went

[p. 219]

also with them, and Thorvald the son of Erik, [*1] and Thorhall who was called the hunter; he had long been with Erik, and served him as huntsman in summer and steward in winter; he was a large man, and strong, black and like a giant, silent and foul-mouthed in his speech, and always egged on Erik to the worst; he was a bad Christian; he was well acquainted with uninhabited parts, he was in the ship with Thorvard and Thorvald. They had the ship which Thorbjorn had brought out [from Iceland]. They had in all 160 men, [*2] when they sailed to the western settlement, and from thence to Bjanney. Then sailed they two days to the south; then saw they land, and put off boats, and explored the land, and found there great flat stones, many of which were 12 ells broad; foxes were there. They gave the land a name, and called it Helluland. [*3] Then sailed they two days, and turned from the south to the southeast, and found a land covered with wood, and many wild beasts upon it; an island lay there out from the land to the south-east; there killed they a bear, and called the place afterwards Bear Island, but the land Markland. Thence sailed they far to the southward along the land, and came to a ness; the land lay upon the right; there

[p. 220]

were long and sandy strands. They rowed to land, and found there upon the ness the keel of a ship, and called the place Kjalarness, and the strands they called Furdustrands for it was long to sail by them. Then became the land indented with coves; they ran the ship into a cove. King Olaf Tryggvason had given Leif two Scotch people, a man hight Haki, and a woman hight Hekja; they were swifter than beasts. These people were in the ship with Karlsefni; but when they had sailed past Furdustrands, then set they the Scots on shore, and bade them run to the southward of the land, and explore its qualities, and come back again within three days. They had a sort of clothing which they called kjafal, which was so made that a hat was on the top, and it was open at the sides, and no arms to it; fastened together between the legs, with buttons and clasps, but in other places it was open. They staid away the appointed time, but when they came back, the one had in the hand a bunch of grapes, and the other a new sown ear of wheat; [*1] these went on board the ship, and after that sailed they farther. They sailed into a frith; there lay an island before it, round which there were strong currents, therefore called they it Stream island. There were so many eider ducks on the island that one could scarcely walk in consequence of the eggs. They called the place Stream-frith. They took their cargo from the ship, and prepared to remain there. They had with them all sorts of cattle. The country there was very beautiful. They

[p. 221]

undertook nothing but to explore the land. They were there for the winter without having provided food beforehand. In the summer the fishing declined, and they were badly off for provisions; then disappeared Thorhall the huntsman. They had previously made prayers to God for food, but it did not come so quick as they thought their necessities required. They searched after Thorhall for three days, and found him on the top of a rock; there he lay, and looked up in the sky, and gaped both with nose and mouth, and murmured something; they asked him why he had gone there; he said it was no business of theirs; they bade him come home with them, and he did so. Soon after, came there a whale, and they went thither, and cut it up, and no one knew, what sort of whale it was; and when the cooked  it then ate they, and all became ill in consequence. Then said Thorhall: "The red bearded was more helpful than your Christ; this have I got now for my verses that I sung of Thor, my protector; seldom has he deserted me." But when they came to know this, they cast the whole whale into the sea, and resigned their case to God. Then the weather improved, and it was possible to row out fishing, and they were not then in want of provisions, for wild beasts were caught on the land, and fish in the sea, and eggs collected on the island.

In the account of these transactions, given in the Saga of Erik the Red, it is stated that a son was born to Gudrid during this autumn (1007); which statement is corroborated in a subsequent part of the present narrative The child was called Snorre, and from this first of European

[p. 222]

blood born in America, the celebrated sculptor Thorvaldson, as well as many other eminent Scandinavians, is lineally descended.

 

OF KARLSEFNI AND THORHALL.

So is said, that Thorhall would go to the northward along Furdustrands, to explore Vinland, but Karlsefni would go southwards along the coast. Thorhall got ready, out under the island, and there were no more together than nine men; but all the others went with Karlsefni. Now when Thorhall bore water to his ship, and drank, then sung he this song:--

	 
		People told me when I came
		 Hither, all would be so fine;
		 The good Vinland, known to fame,
		 Rich in fruits, and choicest wine;
		 Now the water pail they send;
		 To the fountain I must bend,
		 Nor from out this land divine
		 Have I quaffed one drop of wine.
		
		 And when they were ready, and hoisted sail, then chaunted Thorhall:--

	 
		Let our trusty band
		 Haste to Fatherland;
		 Let our vessel brave,
		 Plough the angry wave,
		 While those few who love
		 Vinland, here may rove,
		 Or, with idle toil,
		 Feted whales may boil,
		 Here on Furdustrans
		 Far from fatherland.
		
		 
		
		 [p. 223]

After that sailed they northwards past Furdustrands, and Kjalarness, and would cruise to the westward; then came against them a strong west wind, and they were driven away to Ireland, and were there beaten, and made slaves, according to what the merchants have said.

Now is to be told about Karlsefni, that he went to the southward along the coast, and Snorri and Bjarne, with their people. They sailed a long time, and until they came to a river which ran out from the land and through a lake, out into the sea. It was very shallow, and one could not enter the river without high water. Karlsefni sailed, with his people, into the mouth, and they called the place Hop. They found there upon the land self-sown fields of wheat, there where the ground was low, but vines there where it rose somewhat. Every stream there was full of fish. They made holes there where the land commenced, and the waters rose highest; and when the tide fell there were secured fish in the holes. There were a great number of all kinds of wild beasts in the woods. They remained there a half month, and amused themselves, and did not perceive anything [new]; they had their cattle with them. And one morning early, when they looked around, saw they a great many canoes, and poles were swung upon them, and it sounded like the wind in a straw stack, and the swinging was with the sun. Then said Karlsefni: "What may this denote?" Snorri Thorbrandson answered him: "It may be that this is a sign of peace, so let us take a white shield and hold it towards them;" and so they did. Upon this the others rowed towards them, and looked with

[p. 224]

wonder upon those that they met, and went up upon the land. These people were black, and ill favoured, and had coarse hair on the head; they had large eyes and broad cheeks. They remained there for a time, and gazed upon those that they met, and rowed, afterwards, away to the southward, round the ness.

Karlsefni and his people had made their dwellings above the lake, and some of the houses were near the water, others more distant. Now were they there for the winter; there came no snow, and all their cattle fed themselves on the grass. But when spring approached, saw they one morning early that a number of canoes rowed from the south round the ness; so many, as if the sea was sowen with coal; poles were also swung on each boat. Karlsefni and his people then raised up the shield, and when they came together, they began to barter; and these people would rather have red cloth [than anything else]; for this they had to offer skins and real furs. They would also purchase swords and spears, but this Karlsefni and Snorri forbade. For an entire fur skin the Skrellings took a piece of red cloth, a span long, and bound it round their heads. Thus went on their traffic for a time; then the cloth began to fall short among Karlsefni and his people, and they cut it asunder into small pieces, which were not wider than the breadth of a finger, and still the Skrellings gave just as much for that as before, and more.

The Saga of Erik the Red, in giving an account of this transaction, adds that Karlsefni, on the cloth being expended, hit upon the expedient of making the women take

[p. 225]

out milk porridge to the Skrellings, who, as soon as they saw this new article of commerce would buy the porridge and nothing else. "Thus," says the Saga, "the traffic of the Skrellings was wound up by their bearing away their purchases in their stomachs, but Karlsefni and his companions retained their goods and skins."

It happened that a bull, which Karlsefni had, ran out from the wood and roared aloud; this frightened the Skrellings, and they rushed to their canoes, and rowed away to the southward, round the coast; after that they were not seen for three entire weeks. But at the end of that time a great number of Skrellings boats' were seen coming from the south like a rushing torrent; all the poles were turned from the sun, and they all howled very loud. Then took Karlsefni's people a red shield, and held it towards them. The Skrellings jumped out of their ships, and after this went they against each other and fought. There was a sharp shower of weapons, for the Skrellings had slings. Karlsefni's people saw that they raised up on a pole an enormous large ball, something like a sheep's paunch, and of a blue colour; this swung they from the pole over Karlsefni's men, upon the ground, and it made a frightful crash as it fell down. This caused great alarm to Karlsefni and all his people, so that they thought of nothing but running away, and they fell back along the river, for it appeared to them that the Skrellings pressed upon them from all sides; and they did not stop until they came to some rocks, where they made a stout resistance. Freydis came out and saw that Karlsefni's people fell back, and she cried

[p. 226]

out: "Why do ye run, stout men as ye are, before these miserable wretches, whom I thought ye would knock down like cattle? and if I had weapons, methinks I could fight better than any of ye." They gave no heed to her words. Freydis would go with them, but she was slower, because she was pregnant; however she followed after them into the wood. The Skrellings pursued her; she found a dead man before her; it was Thorbrand Snorrason, and there stood a flat stone stuck in his head; the sword lay naked by his side; this took she up, and prepared to defend herself. Then came the Skrellings towards her; she drew out her breasts from under her clothes, and dashed them against the naked sword; by this the Skrellings became frightened, and ran off to their ships, and rowed away. Karlsefni and his people then came up, and praised her courage. Two men fell on Karlsefni's side, but a number of the Skrellings. Karlsefni's band was overmatched, and they now drew home to their dwellings, and bound their wounds; and they thought over what crowd that could have been, which had pressed upon them from the land side, and it now appeared to them that it could scarcely have been real people from the ships, but that these must have been optical illusions. The Skrellings found also a dead man, and an axe lay by him; one of them took up the axe, and cut wood with it, and now one after another did the same, and thought it was an excellent thing, and bit well; after that one took it, and cut at a stone, so that the axe broke, and then thought they it was of no use, because it would not cut stone, and they threw it away.

[p. 227]

Karlsefni and his people now thought they saw that although the land had many good qualities, still would they be always exposed there to the fear of hostilities from the earlier inhabitants. They proposed, therefore, to depart, and return to their own country. They sailed northwards along the coast, and found five Skrellings clothed in skins, sleeping near the sea. They had with them vessels containing animal marrow mixed with blood. Karlsefni's people thought they understood that these men had been banished from the land; they killed them. After that came they to a ness, and many wild beasts were there, and the ness was covered all over with dung, from the beasts which had lain there during the night. Now came they back to Straumfjord, and there was abundance of everything that they wanted to have. It is some mens say, that Bjarne and Gudrid remained behind, and 100 men with them, and did not go further; but that Karlsefni and Snorri went southwards, and 40 men with them, and were not longer in Hope than barely two months, and, the same summer, came back. Karlsefne went then with one ship to seek after Thorhall the hunter, but the rest remained behind, and they sailed northwards past Kjalarness, and thence westwards, and the land was upon their larboard hand; there were wild woods over all, as far as they could see, and scarcely any open places. And when they had long sailed, a river fell out of the land from east to west; they put in to the mouth of the river, and lay by its southern bank.

[p. 228]

 

DEATH OF THORVALD ERIKSON

It happened one morning that Karlsefni and his people saw, opposite an open place in the wood, a speck which glistened in their sight, and they shouted out towards it, and it was a uniped, which thereupon hurried down to the bank of the river where they lay. Thorvald Erikson stood at the helm, and the uniped shot an arrow into his bowels. Thorvald drew out the arrow, and said: "It has killed me!--to a fruitful land have we come, but hardly shall we enjoy any benefit from it." Thorvald soon after died of this wound. Upon this the uniped ran away to. the northward; Karlsefni and his people went after him, and saw him now and then, and the last time they saw him, he ran out into a bay.

They drew off then, and to the northward, and thought they saw the country of the unipeds, they would not expose their people any longer. They looked upon the mountain range that was at Hope; and that which they now found, as all one, and it also appeared to be equal length from Straumfjord to both places. The third winter were they in Straumfjord. They now became much divided by party feeling, and the women were the cause of it, for those who, were unmarried would injure those that were married, and hence arose great disturbance. There was born the first autumn, Snorri, Karlsefni's son, and he was three years old when they went away. When they sailed from Vinland they had a south wind, and came then to Markland, and found there five Skraelings, and one was bearded; two were females, and two

[p. 229]

boys; they took the boys, but the others escaped, and the Skrellings sank down in the ground. These two boys took they with them; they taught them the language, and they were baptized. They called their mother Vathelldi and their father Uvaege. They said that two kings ruled over the Skrellings, and that one of them was hight Avalldania, but the other Valldidida. They said that no houses were there; people lay in caves or in holes. They said there was a land on the other side, just opposite their country, where people lived who wore white clothes, and carried poles before them, and to these were fastened flags, and they shouted loud; and people think that this was White-man's-Land, or Great Ireland.

Bjarne Grimolfson was driven with his ship into the Irish ocean, and they came into a worm-sea, and straightway began the ship to sink under them. They had a boat which was smeared with seal oil, for the sea-worms do not attack that; they went into the boat, and then saw that it could not hold them all; then said Bjarne: "Since the boat cannot give room to more than the half of our men, it is my counsel that lots should be drawn, for those to go in the boat, for it shall not be according to rank." This thought they all so high-minded an offer that no one would speak against it; they then did so that lots were drawn, and it fell upon Bjarne to go, in the boat, and the half of the men with him, for the boat had not room for more. But when they had gotten into the boat, then said an Icelandic man, who was in the ship, and had come with Bjarne from Iceland: "Dost thou intend, Bjarne, to separate from me here?" Bjarne answered:

[p. 230]

[paragraph continues] "So it turns, out." Then said the other: "Very different was thy promise to, my father, when I went with thee from Iceland, than thus to abandon me, for thou said'st that we should both share the same fate." Bjarne replied: "It shall not be thus; go thou down into, the boat, and I will go up into the ship, since I see that thou art so desirous to live." Then went Bjarne up into the ship, but this man down into the boat, and after that continued they their voyage, until they came to Dublin in Ireland, and told there these things; but it is most people's belief that Bjarne and his companions were lost in the worm-sea, for nothing was heard of them since that time.

 

POSTERITY OP KARLSEFNI AND THURID HIS WIFE.

The next summer went Karlsefni to Iceland, and Gudrid with him, and he went home to Reynisness. His mother thought that he had made a bad match, and therefore was Gudrid not at home the first winter. But when she observed that Gudrid was a distinguished woman, went she home, and they agreed very well together. The daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson was Hallfrid, mother to Bishop Thorlak Runolfson. They had a son who Thorbjorn hight, his daughter hight Thorunn, mother to Bishop Bjorn. Thorgeir hight the son of Snorri Karlsefnesson, father to Yngvild, mother of Bishop Brand the first. A daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson was also Steinum, who, married Einar, son of Grundarketil, son of Thorvald Krok, the son of Thorer, of Espihol; their son was Thorstein Ranglatr; he was

[p. 231]

father to Gudrun, who married Jorund of Keldum; their daughter was Halla, mother to Flose, father of Valgerde, mother of Herr Erlend Sterka, father of Herr Hauk the Lagman. Another daughter of Flose was Thordis, mother of Fru Ingigerd the rich; her daughter was Fru Hallbera, Abbess of Stad at Reinisness. Many other great men in Iceland are descended from Karlsefni and Thurid, who are not here mentioned. God be with us! Amen!

Footnotes

^216:1 The word "hight" means name so that the sentence may be read: "A man named Thord, who lived at Hofda," etc.

^217:1 Bondi, a householder.

^218:1 The daughter of Thorbjorn is sometimes called Thurid and sometimes Gudrid, in this narrative; and the Editor thinks it probable that she was called by the former name during childhood, but that, afterwards, for religious reasons, the pagan name (derived from the God Thor) was laid aside, and that of Gudrid adopted in its place.

^219:1 Here is again evidently some confusion of names, as Thorvald Erikson's death has been previously related in the Saga of Erik the Red, and Karlsefni was now married to his widow Gudrid; it seems probable that some other Thorvald accompanied Karlsefne on this voyage.

^219:2 Literally "40 men and a hundred" [40 manna oh hundrad] but the great or long hundred must be understood, consisting of 12 decades, or 120. Antiq. Amer. p. 137, note b. Thus Tegner, describing the drinking hall of Frithiof: Not five hundred men (though ten twelves you count to the hundred), could fill that wide hall, when they gathered to banquet at Yule.

^219:3 The whole of the northern coast of America, west of Greenland, was called by the ancient Icelandic geographers Helluland it Mikla, or Great Helluland; and the island of Newfoundland simply Helluland, or Litla Helluland.

^220:1 Hveitiax nysaid. This was, no doubt, the maize or Indian corn,--the "fruges non seminatas" of Adam of Bremen,--which, as well as beans, pumpkins, and squashes, were found growing in the State of Massachusetts, when first visited by the whites.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

VOYAGE OF FREYDIS, HELGI AND FINNBOGI.

A. D. 1011.

FREYDIS CAUSES THE BROTHERS TO BE KILLED. [*1]

Now began people again to talk about expeditions to Vinland, for voyages thereto appeared both profitable and honourable. The same summer that Karlsefni came from Vinland, came also a ship from Norway to Greenland; this ship steered two brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, and they remained for the winter in Greenland. These brothers were Icelanders by descent, and from Austfjord. It is now to be told that Freydis, Erik's daughter, went from her home at Garde to the brothers Helgi and Finnbogi, and bade them that they should sail to Vinland with their vessels, and go halves with her in all the profits which might be there made. To this

[p. 232]

they agreed. Then went she to Leif her brother, and begged him to give her the houses, which he had caused to be built in Vinland; but he answered the same as before, that he would lend the houses, but not give them. So was it settled between the brothers and Freydis, that each should have thirty fighting men in the ship, besides women. But Freydis broke this agreement, and had five men more, and hid them; so that the brothers knew not of it before they came to Vinland. Now sailed they into the sea, and had before arranged that they should keep together, if it could so be, and there was little difference, but still came the brothers somewhat before, and had taken up their effects to Leif's houses. But when Freydis came to land, then cleared they out their ships, and bore up their goods to the house. Then said Freydis: "Why bring ye in your things here?" "Because we believed," said they, "that the whole agreement should stand good between us." "To me lent Leif the houses," quoth she, "and not to you." Then said Helgi: "In malice are we brothers easily excelled by thee." Now took they out their goods, and made a separate building, and set that building further from the strand, on the edge of a lake, and put all around in good order; but Freydis had trees cut down for her ship's loading. Now began winter, and the brothers proposed to set up sports, and have some amusement. So was done for a time, until evil reports and discord sprung up amongst them, and there was an end of the sports, and nobody came from the one house to the other, and so it went on for a long time during the winter. It happened one morning early that Freydis

[p. 233]

got up from her bed, and dressed herself, but took no shoes or stockings, and the weather was such that much dew had fallen. She took her husband's cloak, and put it on, and then went to the brothers' house, and to the door; but a man had gone out a little before, and left the door half open. She opened the door, and stood a little time in the opening, and was silent; but Finnbogi lay inside the house, and was awake, and said: "What wilt thou here, Freydis?" She said: "I wish that thou wouldest get up, and go out with me, for I will speak with thee." He did so; they went to a tree that lay near the dwellings, and sat down there. "How art thou satisfied here?" said she; he answered: "Well think I of the land's fruitfulness, but ill do I think of the discord that has sprung up betwixt us, for it appears to me that no cause has been given." "Thou sayest as it is," said she, "and so think I; but my business here with thee, is that I wish to change ships with thy brother, ye have a larger ship than I, and it is my wish to go from hence." "That must I agree to," said he, "if such is thy wish." Now with that they separated; she went home, and Finnbogi to his bed. She got into the bed with cold feet, and thereby woke Thorvard, and he asked why she was so cold and wet. She answered, with much vehemence: "I was gone," said she, "to the brothers, to make a bargain with them about their ship, for I wished to buy the large ship; but they took it so ill that they beat me, and used me shamefully; but thou! miserable man! wilt surely, neither avenge my disgrace nor thine own, and it is easy to see that I am no longer in Greenland, and

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] I will separate from thee if thou avengest not this." And now could he no longer withstand her reproaches, and bade his men to get up, with all speed, and take their arms; and so did they, and went straightway to the brothers' house, and went in, and fell upon them sleeping, and then took and bound them, and thus led out one after the other; but Freydis had each of them killed as he came out. Now were all the men there killed, and only women remained, and them would no one kill. Then said Freydis: "Give me an axe!" So was done; upon which she killed the five women that were there, and did not stop until they were all dead. Now they went back to their house after this evil work, and Freydis did not appear otherwise than as if she had done well, and spoke thus to her people: "If it be permitted us to come again to Greenland," said she, "I will take the life of that man who tells of this business; now should we say this, that they remained behind when we went away." Now early in the spring made they ready the ship that had belonged to the brothers, and loaded it with all the best things they could get, and the ship could carry. After that they put to sea, and had a quick voyage, and came to Eriksfjord with the ship early in the summer. Now Karlsefni was there, and had his ship quite ready for sea, and waited for a fair wind; and it is generally said, that no richer ship has ever gone from Greenland than that which he steered.

[p. 235]

 

OF FREYDIS.

Freydis repaired now to her dwelling, which, in the meantime, had stood uninjured; she gave great gifts to all her companions, that they should conceal her misdeeds and sat down now in her house. All were not, however, so mindful of their promises to conceal their crimes and wickedness but that it came out at last. Now finally it reached the ears of Leif, her brother, and he thought very ill of the business. Then took Leif three men of Freydis's band. and tortured them to confess the whole occurrence, and all their statements agreed. "I like not," said Leif, "to do that to Freydis, my sister, which she has deserved, but this I will predict, that thy posterity will never thrive." Now the consequence was, that no one, from that time thought otherwise than ill of them.

Now must we begin from the time when Karlsefni got ready his ship, and put to sea; he had a prosperous voyage, and came safe and sound to Norway, and remained there for the winter and sold his goods, and both he and his wife were held in great honor by the most respectable men in Norway. But the spring after, fitted he out his ship for Iceland; and when he was all ready, and his ship lay at the bridge waiting for a fair wind, then came there a southern to him, who was from Bremen in Saxony, and wanted to buy from Karlsefni his house broom. "I will not sell it," said he. "I will give thee a half mark gold for it," said the German. Karlsefni thought this was a good offer, and they closed the bargain. The southern went off with the house

[p. 236]

broom, but Karlsefni knew not what wood it was; but that was mausur, brought from Vinland. Now Karlsefni put to sea, and came with his ship to Skagafjord, on the northern coast, and there was the ship laid up for the winter. But in spring bought he Glaumbaeland, and fixed his dwelling there, and lived there, and was a highly respected man, and from him and Gudrid his wife has sprung a numerous and distinguished race. And when Karlsefni was dead, took Gudrid the management of the house with her son Snorri, who was born in Vinland. But when Snorri was married, then went Gudrid abroad, and travelled southwards, and came back again to the house of Snorri her son, and then had he caused a church to be built at Glaumbae. After this, became Gudrid a nun and recluse, and remained so whilst she lived. Snorri had a son who Thorgeir hight; he was father to Ingveld, mother of Bishop Brand. The daughter of Snorri Karlsefnesson hight Hallfrid; she was mother to Runolf, father to Bishop Thorlak. Bjorn hight a son of Karlsefni and Gudrid; he was father to Thorunn, mother of Bishop Bjarn. A numerous race are descended from Karlsefni, and distinguished men; and Karlsefni has accurately related to all men the occurrences on all these voyages, of which somewhat is now recited here.

Footnotes

^231:1 This narrative is contained in the Saga of Erik the Red (Antiq. Amer. p. 65, seq.) but has been transferred to this place, as well to make the chronological order of the various voyages more perspicuous, as on account of the further particulars relating to Karlsefni and Gudrid, with which it concludes.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237]

 

GEOGRAPHICAL NOTICES IN ANCIENT ICELANDIC MSS.

B.--FRAGMENT OF VELLUM CODEX, No. 192.

Supposed to have been written about the end of the 14th Century.

NEXT to Denmark is the lesser Sweden, then is Oeland, then Gottland, then Helsingeland, then Vermeland, and the two Kvendlands, which lie to the north of Bjarmeland. From Bjarmeland stretches uninhabited land towards the north, until Greenland begins. South of Greenland is Helluland; next lies Markland; thence it is not far to Vinland the Good, which some think goes out from Africa; and if it be so, the sea must run in between Vinland and Markland. It is related that Thorfinn Karlsefni cut wood here to ornament his house, and went afterwards to seek out Vinland the Good, and came there, where they thought the land was, but did not effect the knowledge of it, and gained none of the riches of the land. Leif the Lucky first discovered Vinland, and then be met some merchants in distress, at sea, and by God's mercy saved their lives; and he introduced Christianity into Greenland, and it spread itself there, so that a Bishop's seat was established in the place called Gardar. England and Scotland are an island, and yet each is a kingdom for itself. Ireland is a great island. Iceland is also a great island north of Ireland. These countries are all in that part of the world which is called Europe.

[p. 238]

 

C. GRIPLA. [*1]

Codex No. 115.

Bavaria is bounded by Saxony; Saxony is bounded by Holstein, then comes Denmark; the sea flows through the eastern countries. Sweden lies to the east of Denmark, Norway to the north; Finmark north of Norway; thence stretches the land out to the north-east and east, until you come to Bjarmeland; this land is tributary to Gardarige. From Bjarmeland lie uninhabited places all northward to that land which is called Greenland, [which, however, the Greenlanders do not confirm, but believe to have observed that it is otherwise, both from drift timber, which it is known is cut down by men, and also from Reindeer, which have marks upon the ears, or bands upon the horns, likewise from sheep, which stray thither, of which there now are remains in Norway, for one head hangs in Throndhjem, another in Bergen, and many more besides are to be found.] But there are bays, and the land stretches out toward the southwest; there are Jokels and Fjords; there lie islands out before the Jokels; one of the Jokels cannot be explored; to the other is half a month's sail, to the third a week's sail; this is nearest to the settlement hight Hvidserk; thence stretches the land toward the north; but he who wishes not to miss the settlement, steers to the south-west. Gardar hight the Bishop's seat at the bottom of Eriksfjord; there is a

[p. 239]

church dedicated to the holy Nicholas; XII churches are upon Greenland in the eastern settlement, IIII in the western.

Now is to be told what lies opposite Greenland, out from the bay, which was before named: Furdustrandir hight a land; there are so strong frosts that it is not habitable, so far as one knows; south from thence is Helluland, which is called Skrellingsland; from thence it is not far to Vinland the Good, which some think goes out from Africa; between Vinland and Greenland is Ginnungagap, which flows from the sea called Mare oceanum, and surrounds the whole earth [Haec verbotenus Gripla.]

Footnotes

^238:1 This remarkable geographical fragment is contained in the celebrated Greenlandic collection of Bjorn Johnson, and was evidently written before the time of Columbus. The name is supposed to be derived from the word gripa, to snatch, the collection being of a miscellaneous character. Antiq. Amer. pp. 280-1.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

MONUMENTS AND INSCRIPTIONS.

THE DIGHTON WRITING ROCK.

Some remarkable monuments and inscriptions have been found on the eastern shores of North America, which bear testimony to the voyages and settlements recorded in the preceding narratives, and complete the, mass of evidence that has been so ably brought forward by Professor Rafn, upon this interesting subject. The Rhode Island Historical Society have applied themselves to the examination of these remains, with a degree of zeal and ability worthy of the occasion, and details of high interest and value have been made known to the corresponding Danish members, through the medium of the distinguished American secretary, Dr. Webb. From these communications it appears that in the western part

[p. 240]

of the county of Bristol in the State of Massachusetts may still be seen numerous and extensive mounds, similar to the tumuli that are so often met with in Scandinavia, Tartary, and Russia; "also the remains of fortifications that must have required for their construction a degree of industry, labour, and skill, as well as an advancement in the arts, that never characterized any of the Indian tribes. Various articles of pottery are found in them, with the method of manufacturing which they were entirely unacquainted. But above all, many rocks, inscribed with unknown characters, apparently of very ancient origin, have been discovered scattered through different parts of the country: rocks, the constituent parts of which are such as to render it almost impossible to engrave on them such writings without the aid of iron, or other hard metallic instrument. The Indians were ignorant of the existence of these rocks; and the manner of working with iron they learned from the Europeans, after the settlement of the country by the English."

Of such remains, the most important that has yet been discovered is the Assonet rock, or "Dighton writing rock," which is thus described in the Report of a Committee that was appointed by the Rhode Island Historical Society, to examine and report upon this remarkable stone, and who visited it in the month of February, 1830--

"It is situated six and a half miles south of Taunton, on the east side of Taunton river, a few feet from the shore, and on the west side of Assonet neck, in the town of Berkely, county of Bristol, and Commonwealth of

[p. 241]

[paragraph continues] Massachusetts; although, probably from the fact of its being generally visited from the other side of the river, which is in Dighton, it has always been known by the name of the 'Dighton Writing Rock.' It faces northwest, towards the bed of the river, and is covered by the water two or three feet at the highest, and is left ten or twelve feet from it at the lowest tides: it is also completely immersed twice in twenty-four hours. The rock does not occur in situ, but shews indubitable evidence of having occupied the spot where it now rests, since the period of that great and extensive disruption, which was followed by the transportation of immense boulders to, and a deposit of them in places at a vast distance from their original beds. It is a mass of well characterized fine grained greywacke. Its true colour, as exhibited by a fresh fracture, is a bluish grey. There is no rock in the immediate neighbourhood that would at all answer as a substitute for the purpose for which the one bearing the inscription was selected, as they are aggregates of the large conglomerate variety. Its face, measured at the base, is eleven feet and a half; and in height, it is a little rising five feet. The upper surface forms, with the horizon, an inclined plane of about sixty degrees. The whole of the face is covered, to, within a few inches of the ground, with unknown hieroglyphics. There appears little or no method in the arrangement of them. The lines are from half an inch to an inch in width; and in depth sometimes one-third of an inch, though generally very superficial. They were, inferring from the rounded elevations, and intervening depressions, picked

[p. 242]

in upon the rock, and not chiselled or smoothly cut out. The marks of human power, and manual labour are indelibly stamped upon it. No one who examines attentively the workmanship, will believe it to have been done by the Indians. Moreover, it is a well attested fact, that nowhere, throughout our wide-spread domain, is there a single instance of their recording, or having recorded, their deeds or history on stone."

This remarkable monument had long been an object of interest to American antiquaries, and several drawings and examinations were made of the rock and inscription, at various periods, beginning in the year 1680, but without any satisfactory result; and it remained for Professors Finn Magnusen and Rafn to shew that the whole was a Runic inscription, containing various cryptographs, and rude combinations of figures illustrative of the settlements of the Northmen, among which devices may be yet traced the name of THORFINN, and the figures CXXXI. being the number of Karlsefni's associates (151), [*1] which after the departure of Thorhall, accompanied him to Hope. [*2]

[p. 243]

A perspective representation of this remarkable rock, together with fac-similes of the several drawings that have been made of the inscription, ending with the most recent and accurate, made by the Committee of the Rhode Island Historical Society in 1830, are appended to the Antiquitates Americanae; and the analogy between these and inscriptions which have been found both in Sweden and Iceland is shewn by contiguous representations of the Scandinavian remains. The same plate contains also the delineation of a curious fragment of metallic tessera, found near Dublin, upon which is inscribed a monogram similar to that seen upon the Assonet Rock, as well as the Runic letter  (th), shewing the Scandinavian origin of the fragment, which may be ascribed to the 9th or 10th century.

The Rhode Island Historical Society have also forwarded to Professor Rafn descriptions and delineations of several other remains which bear a striking analogy to that at Dighton; among these the Portsmouth and Tiverton Rocks form interesting subjects for examination and comparison. [*1]

[p. 244]

 

RUNIC STONE AT KINGIKTORSOAK.

BUT traces of the adventurous spirit, and early voyages of the Northmen are to be found in much higher, and far less inviting latitudes, shewing the progress of their course through regions, which even in the present age of high scientific advancement, and maritime enterprise, have tested, and not unfrequently baffled the skill and hardihood of our most distinguished navigators.

In the year 1824, a remarkable Runic stone was found upon the island of Kingiktorsoak, lying in 72 degrees 55' north latitude and 56 degrees 5' west longitude.

The following is a representation of this remarkable monument which was transported to Copenhagen, and found on examination, to present a complete inscription in Runic characters:--

which in modern Icelandic orthography would run thus --

ELLIGR . SIGVATHS: SON : R . OK : BJANNE : TORTARSON : OK : ENRITHI . ODSSON : LAUKARDAK : IN : FYRIRGAKNDAG HLOTHU .VARDATE .OKRYDU :MCXXXV.

[p. 245]

or

Erling Sighvatsson and Biarni Thordarsson, and Eindrid Oddsson, on the seventh day, [*1] before the day of Victory, [*2] erected these stones, and explored. MCXXXV.

Some doubts have been expressed by Runic scholars as to the signification of the characters representing the date, but the peculiar formation of the Runes, and other unerring indications shew that the inscription cannot be later than the 12th century.

It appears from various Icelandic documents given in Professor Rafn's work, that the Northmen had two principal stations in the Arctic regions, the one called Greipar, lying immediately south of the island of Disco, in Davis' Straits, and the other called Kroksfjardarheidi, situated on the north-side of Lancaster's sound. Their general name for these regions was Nordrsetur, to which vessels were dispatched from Greenland for the purpose of carrying on the operations of hunting and fishing. But voyages of discovery were also made in this direction; and a clear account of such an expedition, undertaken in the year 1266, follows the narratives which have been given in the preceding pages. It is contained in a letter addressed by a clergyman named Halldor, to a brother ecclesiastic named Arnold, who, after having lived in Greenland, had become chaplain to king Magnus Lagabaeter in Norway; and the voyage appears to have been made under the auspices of some clergymen of the

[p. 246]

[paragraph continues] Bishopric of Gardar in Greenland. The object of the expedition is stated to have been, to explore regions lying more to the northward than those which they had been hitherto accustomed to frequent, consequently further north than Lancaster's sound. They sailed from Kroksfjardarheidi, but meeting with southerly winds, and thick weather, were obliged to let the vessel run before the wind; on the fogs clearing off they described several islands, and saw many seals, whales, and bears. They penetrated into the innermost part of the gulf, and saw icebergs lying to the southward, as far as the eye could reach; they observed traces of the Skraelings having inhabited these regions in former times, but were unable to land, in consequence of the bears. They, therefore, went about, and sailed back for three days, when they again found traces of the Esquimaux, upon some islands lying to the southward of a mountain, which they call Snaefell. After this, on St. James's Day (25th July), they proceeded southwards, a long day's rowing (einn mikin dagrodr). It froze during the night, but the sun was above the horizon both night and day; and "it was not higher when on the meridian than that when a man lay across a six oared boat, towards the gunwale, the shade of that side of the boat which was nearest the sun fell on his face; but at midnight was it as high as at home in the settlement, when it is in the northwest." The expedition afterwards returned to Gardar.

These observations are of course very loose and uncertain; the relative depth of the man's position with regard to the gunwale of the boat, would be necessary in

Click to enlarge
General Chart Exhibiting Discoveries of the Northmen in the Arctic Regions And America

[p. 247]

order to be able to make anything of the first observation, and the result of the other can only be deduced by presuming the day of the summer solstice to bc implied. This, however, is not an unreasonable supposition, more particularly when we find so many other circumstances corroborative of the locality which is thence determined, and Professor Rafn, proceeding upon this assumption, draws out the following result:--

	 
		"In the 13th century, on the 25th July, the Sun's declination was 17 degrees 54' North Inclination of the Ecliptic, 23 degrees 32'."
		
		 If we now assume that the colony, and particularly the episcopal seat of Gardar, was situated on the north side of Igaliko frith, where the ruins of a large church, and of many other buildings, indicate the site of a principal settlement of the ancient colony, consequently in 60 degrees 55' N. lat. then at the summer solstice, the height of the sun there, when in the N. W. was 3 degrees 40', which is equivalent to the midnight altitude of the sun on St. James's day (25th July) in the parallel of 75 degrees 46'." Now the parallel of 75 degrees 46' north latitude, would fall to the northward of Wellington Channel, the highest latitude reached by Parry in his most favourable expedition in search of a North-west passage; and the description of the land seen, and objects met with on the voyage, corresponds well with the characteristics of these regions, as given by the distinguished English navigator. The Northmen sail from Kroksfjardarheidi, a name implying a frith bounded by barren highlands (heidi), and known to be

[p. 248]

on the north side of Lancaster's sound; this frith must have been of considerable extent, as three days sailing are specifically mentioned in that part of the narrative describing their return;--they descry several islands, and meet with many seals, whales, and bears;--they see icebergs lying to the southward, as far as the eye can reach;--they observe traces of the Esquimaux (Skraelings) in various directions; the sun was above the horizon both night and day, and although in the month of July, it froze during the night. There is little doubt, therefore, that these early explorers of the arctic regions, starting from Lancaster's sound, were driven through Barrow's straits, and Wellington Channel, into the Polar sea, from whence they saw the North Georgian Islands, and where they naturally fell in with a multitude of seals, whales, and bears.

It is a startling conclusion, and somewhat mortifying to national pride, to find that these simple navigators of the 13th century, in their humble barks, rivalled the most distinguished arctic explorers of the present day; but however unwilling we may be to admit the evidence of a progress in maritime discovery, which tends to dim the lustre of our own enterprising age, the simple documents in support of these early voyages carry a degree of conviction to the mind which disarms scepticism, and compels us to admit their credibility.

It is a great mistake, however, to suppose that the Northmen of this period were altogether ignorant of astronomical science, and still greater, as some writers have done, to confound them with the Vikings or Pirates

[p. 249]

of a more barbarous age. The discoverers of America were Merchants, their ships were called trading ships [Kaupskip]; sea-roving had been almost altogether discontinued by the Northmen before the voyages of Bjarne Herjulfson and the descendants of Erik; and all the expeditions which are related in these Sagas were undertaken either for the purposes of discovering new countries, or making settlements in, or trading with, countries that had been already discovered. In the ancient Icelandic work called Rimbegla, which has been before quoted, many rules are given for the measurement of time, the study of astronomy, geometry, etc., and although these are probably translations or compilations from foreign works, they correspond with what the Icelandic clergy taught their people, after the introduction of Christianity. Among these are found scientific rules for finding the course of the sun, moon, and stars, also the division of time thereon depending; information respecting the astronomical quadrant, and its proper use; different methods for ascertaining the spherical figure of the earth; the longitude and latitude of places, and of calculating their distances from each other; the sun's declination; the earth's magnitude and circumference, the times when the ocean could best be navigated, etc.

Early in the eleventh century (1018-1026) the rich chieftain Raudulf, of Oesterdal, in Norway, taught his son Sigurd the science of computing the course of the sun and moon, and other visible celestial bodies, and particularly to know the stars which mark the lapse of time, that he might be able to ascertain the time both by

[p. 250]

day and by night, when neither the sun nor moon was visible. Even in heathen times we have similar accounts of Icelandic chieftains and their sons, nay even of simple peasants, who paid sedulous attention to the motions of the heavenly bodies, in order from thence to ascertain the true lapse of time; also of their belief in astrology, which was intimately connected with old Scandinavian mythology. Olaus Magnus said that in his time (about 1520) it was generally acknowledged in Sweden that the common people in ancient times had more knowledge of the stars than they possessed in his days.

Some idea may be formed of the character and acquirements of the Scandinavian merchants in the 11th and 12th centuries from the Speculum Regale, a work written in the latter period. Here the merchant is exhorted to make himself acquainted with the laws of all countries, especially those regarding commerce and navigation, as well as with foreign languages, particularly the Italian and Latin, which were then in more general use. He was also enjoined to obtain a complete knowledge of the places and motions of the heavenly bodies, the times of the day, the division of the horizon according to the cardinal and minor points, the movement of the sea, the climates, the seasons best adapted for navigation, the equipping and rigging of vessels, arithmetical calculation, etc. Moreover, to distinguish himself by a becoming and decorous way of living, both as to moral conduct, manners, and attire, etc.: and thus it may be safely inferred that the better educated of the northern merchants in the tenth and eleventh centuries were not so inferior

[p. 251]

to their southern neighbours, as may be generally supposed.

The extended voyages and commercial intercourse of the Northmen must have also contributed to the amelioration of their habits and character. From the 8th to the 11th centuries they carried on a more active commerce, and a more extensive maritime communication with foreign countries than any other nation in Europe. Such intercourse appears quite incompatible with that extreme degree of ignorance and barbarity in which so many writers would clothe all their actions and enterprises. England, Ireland, Italy, Sicily, France, Spain--were visited by these daring adventurers; true, in the character, and with the spirit, for the most part, of reckless invaders, but that they should have continued to return from such enterprises without exhibiting some modification of that ferocity, which might be expected to yield to the salutary influence of association with more civilized countries, seems scarcely credible. Their long continued intercourse of more than 200 years, with Ireland alone, a country which in the 8th century enjoyed a European reputation for intellectual eminence, [*1] cannot but have had a beneficial influence upon their character and habits, and we should receive with caution all statements

[p. 252]

upon a subject to which national or religious feeling is likely to have given an exaggerated colouring. Our knowledge of the excesses of the northern invaders is chiefly derived from the evidence of monkish chroniclers, whose Christian faith and feelings were no less outraged by the deeds than the infidelity of the Pagan ravagers, and who, writing in many cases long after the events, would naturally aid defective evidence with a fervid zeal and fertile imagination. The particular periods, also, and tribes to which this brutal ferocity of the Northmen is referred, should he more clearly distinguished. The peaceful Norwegian settlers in Iceland, for instance, in the 9th century were very different from those fierce invaders, who, in the same age, shook the kingdoms of Edmund and of Alfred to their centre, and committed barbarities which have called forth the just animadversions of the distinguished historian of the Anglo-Saxons. Flying from the despotic rule of Harald Haarfager, the Norwegian emigrants sought peace and freedom in a remote and sterile island, where the labours of the field, and the trading intercourse necessary to their isolated position were relieved by the relaxation of innocent domestic reunions, and intellectual pursuits; and although some ardent spirit, greedy of fame or plunder, or stimulated by the more honourable ambition of acquiring knowledge and experience by intercourse with foreign lands, might occasionally join the fierce band of the reckless viking, the voyages of the Icelandic Northmen were almost exclusively confined to trade, or discovery, or the formation of peaceful settlements on those

[p. 253]

shores, which their own enterprise, perseverance, and skill had opened to their connection.

It may, perhaps, be urged in disparagement of the early voyagers in the Polar Seas, that the seasons were then more favourable to arctic discoveries than they have been in later ages, and that therefore the difficulties encountered by modern navigators were unknown to their predecessors; but the popular belief of a milder and more genial climate having formerly prevailed in Europe, is not supported by any satisfactory evidence: indeed the opinions of scientific enquirers would lead to a directly opposite conclusion, and there is, at least, every reason to believe that the periodical changes, which so often call forth complaints, and retrospective comparisons from the aged and infirm, respecting the altered condition of the seasons in the present day, were not less frequent or severe in those favoured periods on which their praises are bestowed.

The supposed settlement on the eastern coast of Greenland (Eystribygd), now nearly inaccessible, has tended to give currency to the popular notion of a less rigorous climate prevailing in those regions, at the period of the Icelandic emigration to that coast, but the able and arduous investigation of Captain Graah has dispelled that illusion, and there is now little doubt that the so called eastern settlement extended little further than the southeastern point of the Greenland coast, the chief and almost only habitations being seated upon the western shore. Of their remains Captain Graah has given highly interesting and minute descriptions, enabling us from these

[p. 254]

and more recent examinations of several localities on the west coast of Greenland, to trace the vestiges of the old colonies from the most southern fjord at Cape Farewell, up to the neighbourhood of Holsteinborg.

Footnotes

^242:1 Twelve decades being reckoned to the hundred, hence, called by the Icelanders and Scandinavians stort hundrad (great hundred). Antiq. Amer. p. 385, ante, p. 88, note *.

^242:2 See ante, <page 93>. Professor Rafn has gone into an elaborate dissertation upon this inscription, proving by unanswerable arguments its Scandinavian origin. (Antiq. Amer. p. 378, seq.) In this he is fully borne out by the eminent Runologist Finn Magnusen, who shews that the whole of the apparently unmeaning hieroglyphics are illustrative of the Icelandic settlement in Hope:--The well known Runic letter  (Th) on the left hand, at once stamps its Scandinavian or Icelandic origin; the combined letters which follow the numerals may be decyphered N. M. the initials of norronir menn (Northmen); the devices above this, represent the shields (<page 95>), under which lies a helmet reversed, indicative of peace. The figure below the name may be intended for a bullock, or some domestic animal, illustrative of their daily pursuits,--the outline of a ship is blended with these;--the figures of Gudrid and her child Snorri appear on the right; Karlsefni, protected by a shield from the attacks of the Skrellings, upon the left, while the bows, and missiles of their assailants, more particularly the large ball [p. 243] mentioned on page <page 98>, are clearly discernible. Altogether the analogy which this inscription presents to those upon well known Runic monuments--the facility with which the various devices may be made to apply to the incidents and circumstances connected with the Icelandic settlement, and the distinct Roman or Latin letters which form the numerals--leave no reasonable doubt as to its being the work of the Northmen.

^243:1 Since the publication of the Antiquitates Americanae, a still further addition to American monuments has been discovered in the neighborhood of Bahia, as appears from a communication made to the Royal Society of Northern Antiquaries by Dr. Lund, one of its members, residing at Lagoa Santa in Brazil:--It appears, on the authority of a Journal published by a Society lately established at Rio Janeiro, under the name of Instituto Historico Braziliero, that the remains of an ancient city, built of hewn stone, have been recently discovered in the neighborhood of Bahia, and that Professor Schuck, one of the members of the Institution, guided by Professor Rafn's work, has deduced from the inscriptions, the Scandinavian origin of these remains. Among the ruins is stated to be a huge column, bearing a remarkable figure, which stretches out the right hand, and points with the fore-finger towards the north pole.

^245:1 Saturday, Dies Saturni.

^245:2 A festival kept by the Northmen previous to the 12th century; it fell on the 25th of April.

^251:1 "In the 8th century, indeed, the high reputation of the Irish for scholarship had become established throughout Europe." Moore, Vol. I, p. 289. "As Druidism fell into disrepute, Christian seminaries multiplied . . . Soon after the first foundation, we read of a most noble city and Seminary founded at Clonard near the Boyne. In the days of St. Finanus, A. D. 500, we it sic to contain no less than 3000 scholars, among whom were some of the first eminence for piety and learning. Colgan calls it a repository of all knowledge. . . . About the same time, the academy of Ross, called Ross-Ailithri, in the county of Cork, was formed by St. Fachanus, as Ware notes, and Hanmer, in his Chronicle, tells us that here St. Brandan taught the liberal arts. . . . The schools of Clonfert, Bangor, Rathene, Cashel, etc., were not less remarkable . . . ."

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

MINOR NARRATIVES.

A. FROM THE HISTORY OF KING OLAF TRYGGVASON.

ACCORDING TO THE SECOND VELLUM CODEX, No. 61, Fol.

 Supposed to have been copied at the end of the 14th or beginning of the 15th Century.

THUS says the holy priest Bede, in the chronicles which he wrote concerning the regions of the earth: that the island which is called Thule in the books, lies so far in the north part of the world, that there came no day in the winter, when the night is longest, and no night in summer, when the day is longest. Therefore think learned men that it is Iceland which is called Thule, for there are many places; in that land, where the sun sets not at night, when the day is longest, and in the same manner, where the sun cannot he seen by day, when the night is longest. But the holy priest Bede died DCCXXXV years after the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, more than a hundred and twenty years before Iceland was inhabited by the Northmen. But before Iceland was colonized from Norway, men had been there whom the Northmen called Papas. They were Christians; for after them were found Irish books, bells, and croziers, and many other things from whence it could be

[p. 255]

seen that they were Christian men, and had come from the west over the sea: [*1] English books also shew that, in that time, there was intercourse between the two countries.

 

B. FROM THE SCHEDAe OF ARI FRODE.

No. 54, Fol.

AT that time was Iceland covered with woods, between the mountains and the shore. Then were here Christian people, whom the Northmen called Papas, but they went afterwards away, because they would not be here amongst heathens; and left after them Irish books, and bells, and croziers, from which could be seen that they were Irishmen. But then began people to travel much here out from Norway, until King Harold forbade it, because it appeared to him that the land had begun to be thinned of inhabitants.

 

C. FROM THE PROLOGUE TO THE LANDNAMABOK.

No. 53, Fol.

BUT before Iceland was colonized by the Northmen, the men were there whom the Northmen called Papas; they were Christians, and people think that they came from the west over the sea, for there was found after

[p. 256]

them Irish books, and bells, and croziers, and many more things from which it could be seen that they were Westmen; such were found eastwards in Papey, and Papyli; it is also mentioned in English books that in that time, was intercourse between the countries.

The particulars given of Thule by the Irish monk Dicuil, who wrote in the year 825, offer a remarkable confirmation of the Icelandic manuscripts respecting the residence of the Irish ecclesiastics in that region, which, in his work, is evidently identified with Iceland. He speaks of Thule as an uninhabited island, which, however, in his lifetime, about the year 795, had been visited by some monks, with whom he himself had spoken, and who had once dwelt upon the island from the first of February to the first of August. They denied the exaggerated statements that had been made by ancient writers respecting the perpetual ice, continued day from the vernal to the autumnal equinox, and corresponding interval of night, but stated that a day's journey further northward, the sea was really frozen, and that with respect to the length of the days and nights, at, and a few days before and after the summer solstice, the sun sank so little below the horizon during the night that one could pursue their ordinary occupations as well as by day-light. The author further describes several islands lying in the north part of the British ocean, and which, with a fair wind, might be reached from the north of Britain in two days and a night; and states that here nearly a hundred years before, namely A. D. 725, hermits from Ireland had taken up their abode, but, disturbed by the roving Northmen, had since departed, leaving the place uninhabited. These islands are further described as having upon them a great number of sheep, which circumstance

[p. 257]

leads to the conclusion that they were the Faroe islands, the name of which is known to be derived from the original Icelandic term Fareyjar or sheep islands.

 

ARI MARSON'S SOJOURN IN GREAT IRELAND,

A. D. 982.

 From the Landnamabok, collated with accounts of the same transactions in Hauksbok.

ULF the squinter, son of Hogna the white, took all Reykjanes, between Thorkafjord and Hafrafell; he married Bjorg, daughter to Eyvind the Eastman, sister to Helge the lean; their son was Atli the red, who married Thorbjorg, sister to Steinolf the humble; their son was Mar of Holum, who married Thorkatla, daughter of Hergil Neprass; their son was Ari; he was driven by a tempest to White Man's Land, which some call Great Ireland; it lies to the west in the sea, near to Vinland the Good, and VI days' sailing west from Ireland. From thence could Ari not get away, and was there baptized. This story first told Rafn the Limerick merchant, who had long lived at Limerick in Ireland. Thus said [also] Thorkell Gellerson, that Icelanders had stated, who had heard Thorfinn Jarl of the Orkneys relate, that Ari was recognised in White Man's Land, and could not get away from thence, but was there much respected. Ari married Thorgerd daughter to Alf of Dolum, whose sons were Thorgils, Gudleif and Illugi: this is the family of Reykjaness. Jorund hight a son of Ulf the squinter; he married Thorbjorg Knarrarbringa; their daughter was Thjodhild, who married Erik the Red; their son

[p. 258]

[paragraph continues] [was] Leif the Lucky of Greenland. Jorund hight the son of Atli the Red, he married Thordis, daughter of Thorgeir Suda; their daughter was Otkatla, who married Thorgill Kollson. Jorund was also father to Snorri.

 

VOYAGE OF BJORN ASBRANDSON

TO THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE AND SETTLEMENT IN GREAT IRELAND. A.D. 999.

BORK the fat and Thordis Surs daughter had a daughter that Thurid hight, and she was married to, Thorbjorn the fat, who lived at Froda; he was son of Orm the lean, who had taken and cultivated the farm of Froda. Thurid, daughter of Asbrand of Kamb in Breidavik had he formerly married; she was sister to Bjorn Breidvikingahappa, who is hereafter mentioned in the Saga, and to Arnbjorn the strong: her sons by Thorbjorn were Ketill the Champion, Gunnlaug and Hallstein. . . .

Now shall something be told about Snorri Godi, that he took up the process about the murder of Thorbjorn his brother-in-law. He also took his sister home to Helgafell, because there was a report, that Bjorn, son of Asbrand from Kamb, began to come there to inveigle her. . . .

Thorodd, hight a man from Medallfellstrand: an honourable man; he was a great merchant, and owned a trading ship. Thorodd had made a trading voyage westwards to Ireland, to Dublin. At that time had Jarl

[p. 259]

[paragraph continues] Sigurd Lodversson, of the Orkneys, sway to the Hebrides, and all the way westward to Man: he imposed a tribute on the inhabitants of Man, and when they had made peace the Jarl left men behind him to collect the tribute; it was mostly paid in smelted silver; but the Jarl sailed away northwards to the Orkneys. But when they who had waited for the tribute were ready for sailing, they put to sea with a south-west wind; but when they had sailed for a time the wind changed to the south-east and east, and there arose a great storm, and drove them northwards under Ireland, and the ship broke there asunder upon an uninhabited island. And when they had gotten on shore there came, by chance, the Icelander Thorodd, on a voyage from Dublin. The Jarl's men called out to the merchantmen to help them. Thorodd put out a boat, and went into it himself, and when it came up, the Jarl's men begged Thorodd to help them, and offered him money to take them home to Sigurd Jarl in the Orkneys; but Thorodd thought he could not do that, because he was bound for Iceland; but they pressed him hard, for they thought it concerned their goods and freedom, that they should not be left in Ireland or the Hebrides, where they before had waged war, and it ended so that he sold them the ship's boat, and took therefore a great part of the tribute; they steered then with the boat to the Orkneys; but Thorodd sailed without the boat to Iceland, and came to the south of the land; then steered he westwards, and sailed into Breidafjord, and landed, with all on board, at Dogurdarness, and went in autumn to winter with Snorri Godi at Helgafell; he was since then

[p. 260]

called Thorodd the tribute-buyer. This happened a little after the murder of Thorbjorn the fat. The same winter was at Helgafell Turid the sister to Snorri Godi, whom Thorbjorn the fat had married. Thorodd asked Snorri Godi to give him Thurid his sister in marriage; and because he was rich, and Snorri knew him from a good side, and saw that she required some one to manage her affairs,--with all this together resolved Snorri Godi to give him the woman, and their marriage was held there in the winter at Helgafell. But in the following spring Thorodd betook himself to Froda, and became a good and upright yeoman. But so soon as Thurid came to Froda, began Bjorn Asbrandson to visit there, and there was spread a general report that he and Thurid had unlawful intercourse; then began Thorodd to complain about his visits, but did not object to them seriously. At that time dwelled Thorer Vidlegg at Arnarhvol, and his sons Orn and Val were grown up, and very promising man; they reproached Thorodd for submitting to such disgrace as Bjorn put upon him, and offered Thorodd their assistance, if he would forbid the visits of Bjorn. It happened one time that Bjorn came to Froda, and he sat talking with Thurid. Thorodd used always to sit within when Bjorn was there, but now was he nowhere to be seen. Then said Thurid: "Take care of thy walks, Bjorn, for I suspect that Thorodd thinks to put an end to thy visits here, and it looks to me as if they had gone out to! fall upon thee by the way, and he thinks they will not be met by equal force." "That can well be," said Bjorn, and chaunted this stave:--

[p. 261]

	 
		O! Goddess of the arm-ring gold [*1]
		 Let this bright day the longest hold
		 On earth, for now I linger here
		 In my love's arms, but soon must fear
		 These joys will vanish, and her breath
		 Be raised to mourn my early death.
		
		 Thereafter took Bjorn his arms, and went away, intending to go home; but when he had gotten up the Digramula, sprang five men upon him; this was Thorodd and two, of his servants, and the sons of Thorer Vidlegg. They seized Bjorn, but he defended himself well and manfully; Thorer's sons pressed in hardest upon him, and wounded him, but he was the death of both of them. After that Thorodd went away with his men, and was a little wounded, but they not. Bjorn went his way until he came home, and went into the room; the woman of the house told a maid servant to attend him; and when she came into the room with a light, then saw she that Bjorn was very bloody; she went then in, and told his father Asbrand that Bjorn was come home bloody; Asbrand went into the room and asked why Bjorn was bloody; "or have you, perhaps, fallen in with Thorodd?" Bjorn answered that so it was. Asbrand then asked how the business had ended. Bjorn chaunted:--

	 
		Easier far it is to fondle,
		 In the arms of female fair,
		 (Vidlegg's sons I both have slain)
		 Than with valiant men to wrestle,
		 Or tamely purchased tribute bear.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 262]

Then bound Asbrand his wounds, and he became quite restored. Thorodd begged Snorri Godi to manage the matter about Thorer's sons' murder, and Snorri had it brought before the court of Thorsness; but the sons of Thorlak of Eyra assisted Breidvikinga in this affair, and the upshot was, that Asbrand went security for his son Bjorn, and undertook to pay a fine for the murder. But Bjorn was banished for three years, and went away the same summer. During the same summer Thurid of Froda was delivered of a male child, which received the name of Kjartan; he grew up at Froda, and was soon large and promising.

Now when Bjorn had crossed the sea [to Norway], he bent his way southwards to Denmark, and therefrom south to Jomsborg. Then was Palnatoki chief of the Jornsvikings. Bjorn joined their band, and was named Champion. He was in Jomsborg when Styrbjorn the strong took the castle. Bjorn was also with, them in Sweden, when the Jomsvikings aided Styrbjorn; he was also in the battle of Fyrisvall, where Styrbjorn fell, and escaped in the wood with other Jornsvikings. And so long as Palnatoki lived, was Bjorn with him, and was looked upon as a distinguished man, and very brave in all times of trial.

. . . The same summer came the brothers Bjorn and Arnbjorn out to, Iceland, to Raunhafnarsos. Bjorn was afterwards called the Champion of Breidavik. Arnbjorn had brought much money out with him, and immediately, the same summer that he came, bought land at Bakke in Raunhofn. Arnbjorn made no display, and

[p. 263]

spoke little on most occasions, but was, however, in all respects, a very able man. Bjorn, his brother, was, on the other hand, very pompous, when he came to the country, and lived in great style, for he had accustomed himself to the court usages of foreign chiefs; he was much handsomer than Arnbjorn, and in no particular less able, but was much more skilled in martial exercises, of which he had given proofs in foreign lands. In the summer, just after they had arrived, a great meeting of the people was held north of the heath, under Haugabret, near the mouth of the Froda; and thither rode all the merchants, in coloured garments; and when they had come to the meeting, was there many people assembled. There was Thurid, the lady of Froda, and Bjorn went up, and spoke to her, and no one objected to this, for it was thought likely that their discourse would last long, since they, for such a length of time, had not seen each other. There arose that day a fight, and one of the men from the northern mountains received a deadly wound, and was carried down under a bush on the bank of the river; much blood flowed from the wound, so that there was a pool of blood in the bush. There was the boy Kjartan, son of Thurid of Froda; he had a small axe in his hand; he ran to the bush, and dipped the axe in the blood. When the men from the southern mountains rode southwards from, the meeting, Thord Blig asked Bjorn how the discourse had turned out betwixt him and Thurid of Froda. Bjorn said that he was well contented therewith. Then asked Thord, whether he had that day seen the lad Kjartan, her and Thorodd's united son. "Him saw

[p. 264]

[paragraph continues] I," said Bjorn. "What do you think of him?" quoth Thord, again. Then chaunted Bjorn this stave:

	 
		"A stripling lo!
		 With fearful eyes
		 A woman's image,
		 Downwards ran
		 To the wolf's lair;--
		 The people say
		 The youth knows not
		 His Viking father."
		
		 Thord said: "What will Thorodd say when he hears of your boy?" Then sung Bjorn:

	 
		"Then will the noble lady,
		 When pressing to her breast
		 The image of his father
		 In her fair arms to rest,
		 Admit Thorodd's conjecture,
		 For me she ever loved,
		 And ever shall I bear her
		 Affection deep and proved."
		
		 Thord said: "It will be better for ye, not to, have much to do, with each other, and that thou turn thy thoughts from Thurid." "That is surely a good counsel," replied Bjorn, "but far is that from my intention, although it makes some difference when I have to do with such a man as Snorri her brother." "Thou wilt be sorry for thy doings," said Thord, and therewith ended the talk between them. Bjorn went home now to Kamb, and took upon himself the management of the place, for his father was then dead. In the winter he began his trips over the heath, to visit Thurid; and although

[p. 265]

[paragraph continues] Thorodd did not like it, he yet saw that it was not easy to find a remedy, and he thought over with himself, how dearly it had cost him, when he sought to stop their intercourse; but he saw that Bjorn was now much stronger than before. Thorodd bribed, in the winter, Thorgrim Galdrakin to raise a tempest against Bjorn, when he was crossing the heath. Now it came to pass one day that Bjorn came to Froda, and in the evening, when he was going home, was there thick weather, and some rain; and he set off very late; but when he had gotten up on the heath, the weather became cold, and it snowed; and so dark that he saw not the way before him. After that arose a drift of snow, with so much sleet that he could scarcely keep his legs; his clothes were now frozen, for he was before wet through, and he strayed about so that he knew not where to turn; at night he arrived at the edge of a cave, went in, and was there for the night, and had a cold lodging; then sung Bjorn:--

	 
		"Fair one! who dost bring
		 Vestments to the weary, [*1]
		 Little know'st thou where
		 Hid in cavern dreary,
		 I now shelter seek;
		 He that once on ocean
		 Boldly steered a bark,
		 Now lies without motion
		 In a cavern dark."
		
		 And again he chaunted:

[p. 266]

	 
		"The swan's cold region I have crossed
		 All eastwards with a goodly freight,
		 For woman's love, by tempest tost
		 And seeking danger in the fight:
		 But now no woman's couch I tread,
		 A rocky cavern is my bed."
		
		 Bjorn remained three days in the cave, before the weather moderated; but on the fourth day came he home from the heath to Kamb. He was much exhausted. The servants asked him where he had been during the tempest--Bjorn sang:

	 
		"Well my deeds are known
		 Under Styrbjorn's banner,
		 Steel-clad Erik slew
		 Gallant men in battle;
		 Now on mountain wild,
		 Met by magic shower,
		 Outlet could not find
		 From the Witches power." [*1]
		
		 Bjorn was now at home for the winter. In spring his brother Arnbjorn fixed his residence at Bakka in Raunhofn, but Bjorn lived at Kamb, and kept a splendid house. . . .

The same summer bade Thorodd the tribute-buyer his brother-in-law Snorri Godi to a feast at home at Froda, and Snorri betook himself thither with twenty men. And while Snorri was at the feast, disclosed Thorodd to him, how he felt himself both disgraced and injured by the visits which Bjorn Asbrandson made to Thurid his

[p. 267]

wife, but sister to Snorri Godi: Thorodd said that Snorri should remedy this bad business. Snorri was there a few days, and Thorodd gave him costly presents when he went away. Snorri Godi rode from thence over the heath, and gave out that he was going to the ship in the bay of Raunhafn. This was in summer, at the time of haymaking. But when they came south on Kamb's heath, then said Snorri: "Now will we ride from the heath down to Kamb, and I will tell you," said he, "that I will visit Bjorn, and take his life, if opportunity offers, but not attack him in the house, for the buildings are strong here, and Bjorn is strong and hardy, and we have but little force; and it is well known that men who have come even so, with great force, have with little success attacked such valiant men inside in the house, as was the case with Geir Godi, and Gissur the white, when they attacked Gunnar of Lidarend, in his house, with eighty men, but he was there alone, and nevertheless were some wounded, and others killed; and they had staid the attack had not Geir Godi, with his heedfulness, observed that he was short of arms. But forasmuch as," continued he, "Bjorn is now out, which may be expected, as it is good drying weather, so appoint I thee, my kinsman Mar, to fetch Bjorn the first wound; but consider well, that he is no man to trifle with, and that wherever he is you may expect a hard blow from a savage wolf, if he, at the onset, receives not such a wound as will cause his death." And now when they rode down from the moor to the farm, saw they that Bjorn was out in the homestead, working at a sledge, and there was nobody

[p. 268]

with him, and no weapons had he except a little axe, and a large knife, of a span's length from the haft, which he used for boring the holes in the sledge. Bjorn saw that Snorri Godi with his followers rode down from the moor, into the field, and knew them immediately. Snorri Godi was in a blue cloak, and rode in front. Bjorn made an immediate resolve, and took the knife, and went straight towards them; when they came together, he seized with the one hand the arm of Snorri's cloak, and with the other held he the knife in such a manner as was most easy for him to stab Snorri through the breast, if he should think fit to do so. Bjorn greeted them, as they met, and Snorri greeted him again; but Mar dropped his hands, for it struck him that Bjorn could soon hurt Snorri, if any injury was done to him. Upon this Bjorn went with them on their way, and asked what news they had, but held himself in the same position which he had taken at the first. Then took up Bjorn the discourse in this manner: "It stands truly so, friend Snorri, that I conceal not I have acted towards you in such wise that you may well accuse me, and I have been told that you have a hostile intention towards me. Now it seems to me best," continued he, "that if you have any business with me, other than passing by here to the high road, you should let me know it; but be that not the case, then would I that you grant me peace, and I will then turn back, for I go not in leading strings." Snorri answered: "Such a lucky grip took thou of me at our meeting that thou must have peace this time, however it may have been determined before; but this I beg of thee, that from

[p. 269]

henceforth, thou cease to inveigle Thurid, for it will not end well between us, if thou, in this respect, continue as thou hast begun." Bjorn replied: "That only will I promise thee, which I can perform, but I see not how I can hold to this so long as Thurid and I are in the same district." "Thou art not so much bound to this place," answered Snorri, "but that thou  easily give up thy residence here." Bjorn replied: "True is that which thou sayest, and thus shall it be, since you have yourself come to me, and as our meeting has thus turned out will I promise thee, that Thorodd and thou shalt have no more trouble about my visits to Thuridd for the next year." After this, they separated; Snorri Godi rode to the ship, and then home to Helgafell. The day following rode Bjorn southwards to Raunhofn to go to sea, and he got immediately, in the summer, a place in a ship, and they were very soon ready. They put to sea with a north-east wind, which wind lasted long during the summer; but of this ship was nothing heard since this long time.

 

The following narrative will shew that Bjorn was driven to that part of the eastern coast of North America, where White Man's Land, or Great Ireland was supposed by the Northmen to be situated, and where, thirty years afterwards (1029), Gudleif Gudlaugson, driven in the same direction by easterly winds, recognised his countryman in a Chief, to whose position and influence both he and his companions were indebted for a safe return to their native land. This narrative is contained in the same Saga from whence the preceding has been derived; but before introducing the second

[p. 270]

period in the history of Bjorn Asbrandson to the notice of the reader, a short sketch from the able pen of Bishop Muller, of the general characteristics of the Eyrbyggja Saga, its high position among Icelandic MSS. its well authenticated details, and its consequent claims to credibility as regards all the leading incidents which it records, will serve to place the two narratives in their proper light, and render the whole more worthy of consideration in a historical point of view:

"This Saga contains a number of occurrences and names of persons that are also mentioned in other places. Thorolf Mostrarskeg's death is fixed by the annals in 918; of him and his son Thorstein much is to be found in the Landnamabok; Thorgrim Thorsteinson's death is related at length in Gisle Surson's Saga; the Landnama mentions the most of Snorri's actions; the Annals record his birth in 964, and his death in 1031. . . . Besides, many of the persons named here are also mentioned in the Kristnisaga, and many are to be found in the Niala and Laxdaela Sagas."

"The author cites the testimony of Ari Frode; he remarks himself that Snorri appears in many other Sagas, and expressly mentions Laxdaela Saga, and Heidarviga, Saga. Certain circumstances are stated to have thus happened "according to what most people said;" and, we read, "one sees still the mark of the new barrow, which Arnkel raised over his father, and where he made a fence across, so that no animal should come there." It is also stated: "at that time it was the merchants' custom that they had no cook on board ship, but that all the ship's company should take it in turn to cook the victuals: there should also stand a covered can with drink by the sail." These expressions prove that the writer of this Saga lived some time after the events which he here relates; that already a part of the

[p. 271]

[paragraph continues] Saga was current, and that from these statements, and other individual oral relations, he put his work together."

"Again: verses are often introduced, as well by the acting persons as other Skalds who sung of the events. These must, therefore, on the whole, be considered credible, and contain many not unimportant characteristics of the times. Traces of later decoration appear in the description of the hardihood of those who were wounded at the battle of Alptefjord, and of Thorgunna's witchcraft, but it is only natural that somewhat more of superstition should appear in this than in many other Sagas, and the circumstance proves nothing against its antiquity The greater number of these embellishments are no more than what we commonly find, where such superstitious faith is entertained, and the additions are accordant with the credulity of the times. The Eyrbyggja Saga is expressly quoted in the Landnamabok. Besides, we can determine the date of this with greater accuracy than that of most other Sagas: it must have been written before 1264, when Iceland became subject to Norway, because as it is stated: "All should pay tribute to the temple, and be liable for the journeys of the Chief, just as in the present time the Thingmen for their Chief:" hence it follows, that the aristocratic form of society, which ceased when the island became subject to Norway, must have existed at the period in question. The Saga must also have been written whilst Thord Sturleson and his mother yet lived, for it says: "when the church which Snorri Godi had built was removed, his bones were taken up, and brought down to the place where the church now stands; there were present Gudny Bodvar's daughter, Thord and Sighvat Sturleson's mother; and Thord Struleson says, that they were the bones of a middle sized man, and not large. There were also taken up the bones of Bork

[p. 272]

the fat, Snorri Godi's uncle: they were very large; also was taken up the wife of Thordis, Thorbjorn Surs' daughter, Snorri Godi's mother. Gudny says that they were small women's bones, and as black as if they were singed." This proves that the writer of the Saga was present with Thord Sturleson, and his mother. Gudny died in the year 1220 odd, and the Saga must therefore have been written in the beginning of the 13th century."

Footnotes

^255:1 Til vestan um hat. Ireland lying to the west of Norway, from whence the Icelanders had emigrated, was generally spoken of by them with reference to their fatherland, and for the same reason they called the Irish "westmen." According to a learned enquirer into the origin of the Irish, the literal meaning of the word Ireland is Westland, the celtic syllable iar or er meaning the west. This, however, is disputed by O'Brien, who maintains that the original interpretation of iar is "after," or "behind," and considers Eirin to be compounded of i and erin, the genitive of ere, iron, signifying the island of iron or mines, for which Ireland had formerly been famed, and hence ranked by ancient writers among the Cassiterides. See Wood's Inquiry. concerning the primitive inhabitants of Ireland, p. 1.; O'Brien's Irish Diet. in voce Eirin.

^261:1 Jord, the earth, one of the many wives of Odin and mother of Thor.

^265:1 To the women of the Northern family was more particularly entrusted the duties of hospitality, among which was included that of bringing dry garments to the traveller who had suffered from the tempestuousness of the weather.

^266:1 These poetical effusions of Bjorn may, perhaps, appear somewhat improbable to modern readers, but, the Northmen of this period exhibited great readiness in a species of rude versification, the melody of which was chiefly formed on alliteration. "As late of the time of Chaucer," says Sir Walter Scott, "it was considered as the mark of a Northern man to 'affect the letter.'"

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

VOYAGE OF GUDLEIF GUDLAUGSON TO GREAT IRELAND.

A. D. 1029.

EYRBYGGJA SAGA, CAP. 64. VELLUM FRAGMENT, No. 4456, in 4to.
 Collated with the before mentioned MSS.

Gudleif hight a man; he was son of Gudlaug the rich, of Straumfjord, and brother of Thorfinn, from whom the Sturlungers are descended. Gudleif was a great merchant, he had a merchant ship, but Thorolf Eyrar Loptson had another, that time they fought against Gyrd, son of Sigvald Jarl; then lost Gyrd his eye. It happened in the last years of the reign of King Olaf the Saint, that Gudleif undertook a trading voyage to Dublin; [*1] but when he sailed from the west, intended he to sail to Iceland; he sailed then from the west of Ireland, [*2] and met with north-east winds, and was driven far to the west, and south-west, in the sea, where no land was to be seen. But it was already far gone in the summer, and they

[p. 273]

made many prayers that they might escape from the sea; and it came to pass that they saw land. It was a great land, but they knew not what land it was. Then took they the resolve to sail to the land, for they were weary of contending longer with the violence of the sea. They found there a good harbour; and when they had been a short time on shore, came people to them: they knew none of the people, but it rather appeared to them that they spoke Irish. [*1] Soon came to them so great a number that it made up many hundreds. These men fell upon them and seized them all, and bound them, and drove them up the country. There were they brought before an assembly, to be judged. They understood so much that some were for killing them, but others would have them distributed amongst the inhabitants, and made slaves. And while this was going on saw they where rode a great body of men, and a large banner was borne in the midst. Then thought they that there must be a chief in the troop; but when it came near, saw they that under the banner rode a large and dignified man, who was much in years, and whose hair was white. All present bowed down before the man, and received him as well as they could. Now observed they that all opinions and resolutions concerning their business, were submitted to his decision. Then ordered this man Gudleif and his companions to be brought before him, and when they had come before this man, spoke he to them in the Northern

[p. 274]

tongue, and asked them from what country they came. They answered him, that the most of them were Icelanders. The man asked which of them were Icelanders? Gudleif said that he was an Icelander. He then saluted the old man, and he received it well, and asked from what part of Iceland he came. Gudleif said that he was from that district which hight Borgafjord. Then enquired he from what part of Borgafjord he came, and Gudleif answered just as it was. Then asked this man about almost every one of the principal men in Borgafjord and Breidafjord; and when they talked thereon, enquired he minutely about every thing, first of Snorri Godi, and his sister Thurid of Froda, and most about Kjartan her son. The people of the country now called out, on the other side, that some decision should be made about the seamen. After this. went the great man away from them, and named twelve of his men with himself, and they sat a long time talking. Then went they to the meeting of the people, and the old man said to Gudleif: "I and the people of the country have talked together about your business, and the people have left the matter to me; but I will now give ye leave to depart whence ye will; but although ye may think that the summer is almost gone, yet will I counsel ye to remove from hence, for here are the people not to be trusted, and bad to deal with, and they think besides that the laws have been broken to their injury." Gudleif answered: "What shall we say, if fate permits us to return to our own country, who has given us this freedom?" He answered: "That can I not tell you, for I

[p. 275]

like not that my relations and foster-brothers should make such a journey hereto, as ye would have made, if ye had not had the benefit of my help; but now is my age so advanced, that I may expect every hour old age to overpower me; and even if I could live yet for a time, there are here more powerful men than me, who little peace would give to foreigners that might come here, although they be not just here in the neighbourhood where ye landed." Then caused he their ship to be made ready for sea, and was there with them, until a fair wind sprung up, which was favourable to take them from the land. But before they separated took this man a gold ring from his hand, and gave it into the hands of Gudleif, and therewith a good sword; then said he to Gudleif: "If the fates permit you to come to your own country, then shall you take this sword to the yeoman, Kjartan of Froda, but the ring to Thurid his mother." Gudleif replied: "What shall I say, about it, as to who sends them these valuables?" He answered: "Say that he sends them who was a better friend of the lady of Froda, than of her brother, Godi of Helgafell; but if any man therefore thinks that he knows who has owned these articles, then say these my words, that I forbid any one to come to me, for it is the most dangerous expedition, unless it happens as fortunately with others at the landing place, as with you; but here is the land great, and bad as to harbours, and in all parts may strangers expect hostility, when it does not turn out as has been with you." After this, Gudleif and his people put to, sea, and they landed in Ireland late in harvest, and were in Dublin for

[p. 276]

the winter. But in the summer after, sailed they to, Iceland, and Gudleif delivered over there these valuables; and people held it for certain, that this man was Bjorn, the Champion of Breidavik, and no other account to be relied on is there in confirmation of this, except that which is now given here.

___________

The reader will no doubt come to the same conclusion drawn by the Icelanders respecting the identity of the aged chief, to whose generosity and friendly feeling Gudleif and his companions were so much indebted, and unhesitatingly pronounce him to have been none other than Bjorn Asbrandson, the Champion of Breidavik, who, it will be remembered, had set sail about thirty years before, with a northeast wind, and had not since been heard of. The remarkable accordance of all the personal details, to which the writer evidently attaches the principal importance, with the historical events, which are only incidentally alluded to, enable us to determine dates and intervals of time with a degree of accuracy that places the truth of the narrative beyond all question, and gives a high degree of interest to these two voyages. The mention of Sigurd Jarl of the Orkneys, Palnatoki, Styrbjorn the nephew of Erik of Sweden, the battle of Fyrisvold, Snorri Godi, "the latter part of the reign of king Olaf the saint," gives a chronological character to the narratives, and enables us to fix with confidence, nearly the exact period of the principal events. Hence it appears that Gudleif Gudlaugson, sailing from the west of Ireland in the year 1029, with a N. E. wind, is driven far to the south and south-west, where no land was to be seen, and that after being exposed for many

[p. 277]

days to the violence of the winds and waves, he at length finds shelter upon a coast, where Bjorn Asbrandson, who had left Iceland with N. E. winds thirty years before, had become established as chief of the inhabitants of the country. He finds him, as might naturally have been expected, "stricken in years," and "his hair was white," for Bjorn had left Iceland for Jomsborg in the prime of life, had, after taking part in the achievements of the Jomsvikings up to the death of Palnatoki in 993, returned to and resided in Iceland until 999, and now thirty winters had passed over his head since his ultimate departure from his native land. The locality of the newly discovered country is next to be determined: Now if a line be drawn running N. E. to S. W. the course of Bjorn Asbrandson, from the western coast of Iceland, and another in the same direction (the course of Gudleif Gudlaugson) from the west coast of Ireland, they would intersect each other on the southern shores of the United States, somewhere about Carolina or Georgia. This position accords well with the description of the locality of their country, given by the Skraelings to Thorfinn Karlsefne, and which the Northmen believed to be White Man's land or Great Ireland, as also with the geographical notices of the same land which have been already adduced; and when to these evidences be added the statements of Gudleif and his companions respecting the language of the natives, "which appeared to them to be Irish," there is every reason to conclude that this was the Hvitramannaland, Albania, or Ireland ed mikla of the Northmen.

The notices of the country contained in these two narratives are, doubtless, scanty, and merely incidental, the object of the narrators being evidently to trace the romantic

[p. 278]

and adventurous career of the Champion of Breidavik, and the perilous voyage of his countrymen, but this very circumstance is an argument in favour of the honesty of the statement as regards the supposed Irish settlement; and the simple and unpretending character of both narratives, supported, as they are, by historical references, confirmatory of the principal events, gives to these incidental allusions a degree of importance to which they would not otherwise be entitled.

Professor Rafn is of opinion that the White Man's Land, or Great Ireland of the Northmen was the country situated to the south of Chesapeake Bay, including North and South Carolina, Georgia, and East Florida. It is well known that the Esquimaux Indians formerly inhabited countries much further south than they do at present, and a very remarkable tradition is stated to be still preserved amongst the Shawnese Indians, who emigrated 87 years ago, from West Florida to Ohio, that Florida was once inhabited by white men, who used iron instruments. A German writer also mentions an old tradition of the ancestors of the Shawnese having come from beyond the sea.

Various circumstances shew that Great Ireland was a country, of the existence of which the Icelandic historians had no doubt; it is spoken of in the Saga of Thorfirm Karlsefne as a country well known by name to the Northmen; in the account of Ari Marson's voyage, and the geographical fragment, its position is pointed out:--"west from Ireland, near Vinland the good"--"next and somewhat behind Vinland," and the following extract, taken from the collection of Bjorn Johnson, will shew that a Chart had actually been made of this distant land:--

"Sir Erlend Thordson had obtained from abroad the

[p. 279]

geographical chart of that Albania, or land of the White men, which is situated opposite Vinland the good, of which mention has been before made in this little book, and which the merchants formerly called Hibernia Major or Great Ireland, and lies, as has been said, to the west of Ireland proper. This chart had held accurately all those tracts of land, and the boundaries of Markland, Einfoetingjaland, and little Helluland, together with Greenland, to the west of it, where apparently begins the good Terra Florida." This Sir Erlend was priest of the parish of Staden in Steingrimsfjord, on the west coast of Iceland, in the year 1568, but no further information has been obtained respecting the chart, which probably contained the outlines of all the countries known to the Northmen soon after their discovery of the American continent.

From what cause could the name of Great Ireland have arisen, but from the fact of the country having been colonized by the Irish? Coming from their own green island to a vast continent possessing many of the fertile qualities of their native soil, the appellation would have been natural and appropriate; and costume, colour, or peculiar habits, might have readily given rise to the country being denominated White Man's Land by the neighbouring Esquimaux. Nor does this conclusion involve any improbability: we have seen that the Irish visited and inhabited Iceland towards the close of the 8th century, to have accomplished which they must have traversed a stormy ocean to the extent of about 800 miles; that a hundred years before the time of Dicuil, namely in the year 725, they had been found upon the Faroe islands; that in the 10th century, voyages between Iceland and Ireland were of ordinary occurrence; and that in the beginning of the

[p. 280]

[paragraph continues] 11th century, White Man's Land or Great Ireland is mentioned,--not as a newly discovered country,--but as a land long known by name to the Northmen. Neither the Icelandic historians nor navigators were, in the least degree, interested in originating or giving currency to any fable respecting an Irish settlement on the southern shores of North America, for they set up no claim to the discovery of that part of the Western continent, their intercourse being limited to the coasts north of Chesapeake Bay. The discovery of Vinland and Great Ireland appear to have been totally independent of each other: the latter is only incidentally alluded to by the Northern navigators; with the name they were familiar, but of the peculiar locality of the country they were ignorant, nor was it until after the return of Karlsefni from Vinland in 1011, and the information which he obtained from the Skrellings or Esquimaux who were captured during the voyage, that the Northmen became convinced that White Man's Land or Great Ireland was a part of the same vast continent, of which Helluland, Markland, and Vinland formed portions.

The traces of Irish origin which have been observed among some of the Indian tribes of North and Central America tend also to strengthen the presumption that these countries had been colonized from Ireland at some remote period of time. Rask, the eminent Danish philologist, leans to this opinion which he founds upon the early voyages of the Irish to Iceland and the similitude between the Hiberno-Celtic, and American Indian dialects. "It is well known," he says, "that Iceland was discovered and partially inhabited by the Irish before its discovery and occupation by the Scandinavians; and when we find that the Icelanders, descended from the Scandinavians, discovered North

[p. 281]

[paragraph continues] America, it will appear less improbable that the Irish, who, at that period, were more advanced in learning and civilization, should have undertaken similar expeditions with success:" the name of Irland it Mikla he also considers to be a sufficient indication of the Irish having emigrated thither from their own country.

It seems to be generally admitted by historians and antiquaries that the main stream of colonization has flowed from east to west, the Celts preceding the Teutonic and Sarmatian races, by a long interval of time. Herodotus, four centuries before the Christian era, places the Celts beyond the pillars of Hercules, and upon the borders of the most westerly region in Europe, and Caesar in the first century finds them in Gaul and Britain; that their successors, the Goths, should have driven them to seek for regions still further westward is therefore in full accordance with the course of their former migrations, and the same nomadic principle which brought them from Asia to the British isles, might have wafted them in later ages to the western world.

The illustrious Leibnitz seems to have contemplated the possibility of such a remote Celtic settlement when he wrote:--"And if there be any island beyond Ireland, where the Celtic language is in use, by the help thereof we should be guided, as by a thread, to the knowledge of still more ancient things."

The remarkable narrative of Lionel Wafer who resided for several months amongst the inhabitants of the Isthmus of America, contains some remarkable passages bearing upon this subject, and which, as the author had no preconceived opinions on the affinity of languages, or favourite theory to uphold, are deserving of notice: speaking of their language, he says:--

[p. 282]

"My knowledge of the Highland language made me the more capable of learning the Darien Indians' language, when I was among them, for there is some affinity; not in the signification of the words of each language, but in the pronunciation, which I could easily imitate, both being spoken pretty much in the throat, with frequent aspirates, and much the same sharp or circumflex tang or cant." This writer, however, had evidently not paid much attention to the affinities of the two languages which he compares and finds only to resemble in pronunciation, for many of the words which he afterwards adduces as examples of the Indian language, bear a marked similitude to those of the Celtic, as may readily be seen by the following comparison:

  AMERICAN-INDIAN.  CELTIC. 
  Tautah--Father  Taduys (Welsh), Tad (Corn.) Tat (Armoric) Dad or Daddy (vulg. Irish). 
  Namah--Mother  Naing (Irish). 
  Poonah--Woman  Bean (Ir.), Bun (Armor.). 
  Neenah--Girl  Neean (ancient Scotch). 
  Nee--the Moon  Neul, a star--light--neultaib njme, the stars of heaven(Ir.). 
  Eechah (pron. Eetsha)--Ugly  Etseact--Death (Ir.)--the ugliest of all things. 
  Paecchah--Foh! Ugly  Pah, prefixed to a word in Welsh augments its signification. 
  Eechah Malooquah, an expression of great dislike  Malluighe or malluigte, cursed, accursed (Irish). 
  Cotchah, sleep  Codalta and Codaltac, sleepy (Ir.). 
  Caupah (pron. Capa), hammock  Caba, a cloak, Caban, tent, cottage (Ir.), Caban, ib.(Welsh). 
  [p. 283]    
  Eetah, got  Ed, to take, handle (Irish). 
  Doolah, water  Tuile, a flood (Ir.). 
  Copah, drink  Ceobac, drunkenness (Ir.). 
  Mamaumah, fine  Ma, ma, ba, would be nearly the sound of the repetition of the word ba, which signifies good in Irish: the m and b are also often used indiscriminately. See O'Brien--Remarks on letter M. 
  Eenah, to call  Enwi, to name (Welsh), Henu, a name (Armor.). 
  

 

Wafer further says: "Their way of reckoning from score to score is no more than what our old English way was, but their saying, instead of thirty-one, thirty-two, etc., one score and eleven, one score and twelve, etc., is much like the Highlanders of Scotland and Ireland, reckoning eleven and twenty, twelve and twenty, etc.; so for fifty-three, the Highlanders say thirteen and two score, as the Darien Indians would two score and thirteen, only changing the place. In my youth I was well acquainted with the Highland or primitive Irish language, both as it is spoken in the north of Ireland, particularly at the Navan upon the Boyne, and about the town of Virgini upon Lough Rammer in the Barony of Castle Raghen, in the County of Cavan; and also in the Highlands of Scotland, where I have been up and down in several places. . . . I learned a great deal of the Darien language in a month's conversation with them."

Wafer's description of the dress of this tribe of American Indians, presents also a remarkable coincidence with the short notices of the inhabitants of White Man's Land, as given to Karlsefni by the Esquimaux:--

[p. 284]

"They have a sort of long cotton garment of their own, some white, others of a rusty black, shaped like our carters' frocks, hanging down to their heels, with a fringe of the same of cotton, about a span long, and short, wide, open sleeves, reaching but to the middle of the arms. These garments they put on over their heads. . . . When they are thus assembled, they will sometimes walk about the place or plantation where they are, with their robes on; and I once saw Lacenta (a chief) thus walking about with two or three hundred of these attending him, as if he was mustering them: and I took notice that those in the black gowns walked before him, and the white after him, each having their lances of the same colour with their robes. . . . They were all in their finest robes, which are long white gowns, reaching to their ancles, with fringes at the bottom, and in their hands they had half pikes."

The affinity between the American-Indian and Celtic languages, and consequent probability of an European settlement having been formed upon the shores of New Spain before the arrival of the Spaniards, appears to have been entertained by many writers of eminence in the 17th century. In the remarkable work entitled the "Turkish Spy," we find the author positively affirming the similarity of the two languages, and stating the tradition of an early European settlement:

"This prince (Charles II.) has several nations under his dominions, and 'tis thought he scarce knows the just extent of his territories in America. There is a region in that continent inhabited by a people whom they call Tuscorards and Doegs. Their language is the same as is spoken by the British or Welsh. . . . Those Tuscorards and Doegs of America are thought to descend from them. . . . It is certain

[p. 285]

that when the Spaniards first conquered Mexico they were surprised to hear the inhabitants discourse of a strange people, that formerly came thither in corraughs, who taught them the knowledge of God, and of immortality, instructed them also in virtue and morality, and prescribed holy rites and ceremonies of religion. 'Tis remarkable also what an Indian King said to a Spaniard, viz.: That in foregoing ages a strange people arrived there by sea, to whom his ancestors gave hospitable entertainment; in regard they found them men of wit and courage, endued also with many other excellencies: but he could give no account of their origin or name. . . . The British language is so prevalent here, that the very towns, bridges, beasts, birds, rivers, hills, etc., are called by British or Welsh names." "Who can tell," truly adds the author, "the various transmigrations of mortals on earth, or trace out the true originals of any people?"

The improbability of the Irish having, at any very remote period of time, been in possession of vessels of sufficient power and capacity to enable them to accomplish a voyage across the Atlantic may, perhaps, be urged as an objection to this supposed early migration to the American coast; but, without resting upon their ancient Spanish or Carthaginian connexion, a very little enquiry will show, that at least in the first centuries of the Christian era they were amply provided with the means of accomplishing a voyage to the New World, which, from the western coast of Ireland, little exceeds 1600 miles.

O'Halloran states, on the authority of the Psalter of Cashel, said to be the oldest Irish MS., that Moghcorb, King of Leath Mogha, or Munster, prepared a large fleet in the year 296, and invaded Denmark; and that in the

[p. 286]

following century (A. D. 367), Criomthan, who in the Psalter of Cashel is styled Monarch of Ireland and Albany, and leader of the Franks and Saxons, prepared a formidable fleet, and raised a large body of troops, which were transported to Scotland, for the purpose of acting in conjunction with the Picts and Saxons against the Roman wall, and devastating the provinces of Britain. In 396, an expedition, upon a most extensive and formidable scale, was undertaken by the celebrated Niall of the Nine Hostages, one of the most distinguished princes of the Milesian race: "Observing," says Moore, "that the Romans, after breaking up the line of encampment along the coast opposite to Ireland, had retired to the eastern shore and the northern wall; Niall perceived that an apt opportunity was thus offered for a descent upon the now unprotected territory. Instantly summoning, therefore, all the forces of the island, and embarking them on board such ships as he could collect, he ranged, with his numerous navy, along the whole coast of Lancashire," etc. It was to this expedition that the poet Claudian, lauding the achievement of his patron Stilicho, alluded, in the memorable lines:--

	 
		By him defended, when the neighbouring hosts
		 Of warlike nations spread along our coasts;
		 When Scots [*1] came thundering from the Irish shores,
		 And the wide ocean foamed from hostile oars.
		                                    De Laudab, Stil. Lib. 2.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 287]

This same Niall extended this enterprise to the coast of Brittany, and ravaged the maritime districts of the northwest of Gaul, during which expedition was captured the great Christian apostle, St. Patrick.

That such expeditions could have been carried on by means of the little fragile currachs, to which mode of transport some writers would limit the sea expeditions of the Irish at this period, seems scarcely credible, and while allowing full force to the fearless and enterprising spirit of the gallant Scoti, and the "contempto pelagi," alluded to by Eric of Auxerre, we must allow them some more rational means for conveying a body of troops across the British and Gallic channels than these frail barks.

Not that the currachs were insufficient for individual enterprise of a more peaceful character, and it seems probable that the monks of the 8th century launched themselves on the northern ocean in these simple hide-covered skiffs, and thus effected a passage to their island retreats; for we find St. Cormac committing himself to the sea in a similar bark, and on one occasion he is said to have been out of sight of land for fourteen days and nights.

But the remarkable passage in Tacitus, which has been so often cited by Irish historians in proof of the early maritime importance of their country, would lead to the conclusion that at a period anterior to that now under consideration, the Irish were possessed of ships, or vessels of no mean size or description. "Ireland," the Roman historian says, "situated midway between Britain and Spain, and convenient also to the Gallic sea, connected a most powerful portion of the empire by considerable mutual advantages; the soil and climate, and the dispositions and habits of the people do not differ much from those of

[p. 288]

[paragraph continues] Britain: the approaches and harbours are better known, by reason of commerce and the merchants." "From this it appears," says Moore, "that though scarce heard of till within a short period by the Romans, and almost as strange to the Greeks, this sequestered island was yet in possession of channels of intercourse distinct from either; and that whilst the Britons, shut out from the continent by their Roman masters, saw themselves deprived of all that profitable intercourse which they had long maintained with the Veneti and other people of Gaul, Ireland still continued to cultivate her old relations with Spain, and saw her barks venturing on their accustomed course, between the Celtic Cape, and the Sacred Promontory, as they had done for centuries before."

That Ireland must have been included amongst the Cassiterides which are known to have been visited by the Phoenicians, before the Gallic invasion of Britain, seems to be admitted by all unprejudiced writers upon this subject, [*1] and that the mystery, in which these wily traders sought to conceal their commercial monopoly, has led to the obscurity in which the records of their voyages is involved. That the nautical knowledge and equipments of the Celtic population of Spain and Ireland must have received considerable advancement from this connection, is a natural consequence. Inhabiting the maritime regions of the Spanish peninsula, they were necessarily brought into immediate contact with the Carthaginian merchants, who had formed settlements on the same coast, and from whom they probably obtained not only their knowledge of navigation,

[p. 289]

but of those religious rites and ceremonies which were afterwards developed in the form of Druidism.

That the latter was not of British origin seems obvious. Caesar's description of its observances is only reconcilable with his account of Britain, on the assumption that the chief seat of the Druids was in Ireland, for while he describes the Gauls as deriving their knowledge of Druidism from the British, he represents the latter as inferior in civilization to the Gauls. Even in the time of Tacitus the Britons are represented as ferocae, a state of barbarism obviously incompatible with the creation of a highly wrought mysterious superstition, implying considerable intellectual advancement and scientific knowledge: a superstition, be it remembered, which is known to have existed amongst the Phoenicians and Carthaginians.

The Roman knowledge of the British isles was extremely limited and imperfect; before the time of Tacitus they were ignorant of the insular position of Britain, and the acquaintance of Agricola with Ireland was principally derived from the doubtful information of a faithless Irish chief, who sought the Roman camp to betray his country. Ireland also, according to Ptolemy, was formerly called Little Britain, therefore when Caesar speaks of the Gauls repairing to Britain in order to become instructed in the mysteries of Druidism, the term may have been intended as a general expression for the British isles. [*1]

[p. 290]

The Druids, Caesar tells us, are concerned in divine matters, superintend public and private sacrifices, interpret religious rites, determine controversies, inheritance, boundaries of land, rewards and punishments . . . . "They are said to learn by heart a great number of verses, for which reason some continue in the discipline twenty years."--"They use written characters."--"Much besides they discourse, and deliver to youth, upon the stars, and their motion, on the magnitude of the world and the earth, on the nature of things, on the influence and power of the immortal Gods."

This particular class, combining the double office of judge and priest, although common in the time of Caesar to the British isles, would naturally be found most enlightened in that part of the three kingdoms, whose direct communication with Spain, from a remote period, brought it into more immediate contact with the Phoenician navigators; and the appellations of "Sacred Isle," and "Sacred Promontory," in the works of Ptolemy and Avienus, lead us involuntarily to the conclusion that, hundreds of years before the Roman invasion of Britain, Ireland was the depository of those Phoenician superstitions which afterwards became adopted throughout the British Isles under the form of Druidism.

The root of the word Druid is to be found with little variation in the Hiberno-Celtic language of the present day, Draoj signifying a Druid, magician or wise man, and Draoideacht or Draoide-achta, magic or the Druidical form of worship; the golden ornaments in the shape of a half moon, which have been frequently found in the Irish bogs, are supposed to have been connected with these superstitions, of which lunar worship formed a part, and add to the numerous testimonies in proof of its great antiquity.

[p. 291]

But the high state of perfection, if it may be so called, in which the Druidical form of worship existed in Ireland, and the superior acquirements of her Pagan priesthood to those of the British, is best evinced by the vestige of the Ogham or occult character in which their mysteries were recorded, and which presents a marked resemblance to the secret mode of writing, known to have been used for similar purposes by the hierarchies of the East.

It may therefore be presumed without much stretch of credulity that the same communication with the Phoenician settlers on the coast of Spain which transmitted these eastern superstitions to the Irish shore, may have also brought with it some knowledge of navigation, and the construction of ships; and therefore, that we are not driven to the hide-covered currach for a means of transporting the Celtic settlers to the American coast.

Or if the theory of those be adopted, who would bring the first colonists of Ireland from Belgic, or Celtic Gaul, the description of that people by Caesar will furnish equal evidence of maritime knowledge at a period sufficiently early to transport an expedition to America in the first centuries of the Christian era. The Veneti, inhabiting that district of Armoric Gaul, now known by the name of Vannes, are stated to have had vessels of considerable bulk and power, and admirably adapted as well for coasting voyages, as a stormy sea. The hull was of oak, the beams a foot in breadth, and fastened with iron, the bottom flat, the sails of leather, and what to nautical men may, perhaps, appear somewhat wonderful in those early days, the anchors were secured by means of chain cables.

Looking therefore, either to the Phoenician, Carthaginian, Iberian, Belgic, Gallic, or Scythic intercourse of an

[p. 292]

early period,--to the more continuous Scandinavian occupation of later years,--or to the primitive mode of transport of the simple skiff, it is evident that ample nautical means were not wanting in Ireland to transfer any part of her population to the western shores of America long before the period when Great Ireland became known to the Northmen.

The absence of any notice of such a migration in Irish Annals,--if such be the case,--is no argument against the probability of its existence. The most brilliant period of Irish History remains unsupported by Irish manuscripts. Of that enlightened age when pupils from all parts of Europe sought learning from Irish seminaries and Irish ecclesiastics,--when Columbkill dispensed the light of Christianity to the Picts, Columbanus to the French, Callus to the Swiss, and the brothers Ultan and Foilan to the Belgians,--when Virgilius, the Apostle of Carinthia, astounded the German bishops with his superior knowledge of cosmography and science--not one authentic written record now remains. [*1]

Invasion from without, and internal dissension from within, have swept away all written testimonies of a time, when the intellectual and religious eminence of Ireland attracted the attention and admiration of neighbouring nations, and obtained for her the just distinction of "Sacred Island" and "School of the West:" it cannot therefore be a matter of surprise that the records of earlier history should

[p. 293]

have been lost amid the ravages of such general devastation. [*1]

But further examination of Icelandic Annals may possibly throw more light upon this interesting question, and tend to unravel the mystery in which the original inhabitants of America are involved. Lord Kingsborough's splendid publication [*2] in 1829 first brought to the notice of the British public the striking similitude between Mexican and Egyptian monuments; the ruins of Palenque, Guatemala and Yucatan, the former rivalling the pyramids of Egypt or the ruins of Palmyra, were only known to a few hunters until the end of the 18th century, and modern travellers are still engaged in bringing the hidden wonders of this and other regions of the vast American continent to the knowledge of the literary world

The argument founded upon the absence of Irish records might as reasonably be applied to these later publications of the north; and why, may it as well be asked, was the discovery of American by the Northmen in the 10th century not satisfactorily established until the nineteenth?--The

[p. 294]

name of Vinland was, doubtless, known to Torfaeus; and Wormskiold, Malte Brun and others, following the erroneous calculation which he had made of its locality, fixed it in a latitude with which the physical features of the country did not correspond: [*1] hence the whole statement in the Sagas was long looked upon as fictitious; but the more accurate recent investigations of Danish archaeologists have set the question at rest, and the discovery of America by the Northmen has assumed its proper position in the history of the tenth century.

The existence of a Celtic or Irish settlement upon the south-eastern shores of North America, does not preclude the co-existence of other races upon the western and northern shores. A colony from western Ireland may have been planted on the east, while tribes from eastern Asia had settled on the west; and both have driven before them the less civilized, or more feeble Scythic wanderers, who may have entered at the north: all emanating,--but by distinct and separate channels,--from the one great center, which peopled the wide spread sphere, and thus multiplying, in every region and every clime, the living evidences of those sacred records which offer peace and immortality to man.

Footnotes

^272:1 Some of the MSS. add "vestr," shewing that Ireland was spoken of as lying westwards from Iceland.

^272:2 Probably Limerick, which was much frequented by the Northmen.

^273:1 This is a very remarkable passage, and affords the strongest grounds for believing that the country to which they were driven had been previously colonized from Ireland. The Northmen, from their intercourse with the Irish ports, might be supposed to have had just sufficient knowledge of the language to detect its sounds (here probably corrupted), and understand the general meaning of the words.

^286:1 The Irish are supposed to have obtained the name of Scots or Scoti from the Scotic or Scythic origin of the Spanish settlers under the sons of Milesius, whose invasion Moore places "about a century or two" before the Christian era; other more enthusiastic national historians take us back to 800 years before that period; and O'Halloran fixes the lauding on the 17th of May, A. M. 2736, or 1264 years before the birth of Christ. The name Scott, he derives from Scota, the wife of Niulus, High Priest of Phoenius, the inventor of letters, and ancestor of Milesius, in proof of which is given a quotation from an Irish poem of the 9th century, entitled, Canam bunadhas na Nagaoidheal, or "Let us rehearse the origin of the Irish."

^288:1 "We may therefore admit, without much chance of error, that the Cassiterides visited by the Phoenicians, were the British islands, though the Romans understood by the name the islands of Scilly, with perhaps, part of the coast of Cornwall."

^289:1 It should be recollected that Caesar merely mentions the origin of the Druids as traditionary: "Disciplinam existimatur reperta esse in Britannia," &c. Ibid. Sharon Turner would appear to lean to the opinion of Druidism having originated with the Phoenicians or Carthaginians: "if this system," he observes, "was the creature of a more civilized people, none of the colonizers of Britain are so likely to have been its parents as the Phoenicians or Carthaginians; the fact so explicitly asserted by Caesar, that the Druidical system began in Britain, and was thence introduced into Gaul, increases our tendency to refer it to those nations. The state of Britain was Inferior in civilization to that of Gaul, and therefore It seems more reasonable to refer the intellectual parts of Druidism to the foreign visitors who are known to have cultivated such subjects, than to suppose them to have originated from the rude unassisted natives."

^292:1 This point Is ably handled by Mr. Moore, who shews that the arguments against ancient Irish history, founded upon the non-existence of any authentic MSS. prior to the 9th century (Psalter of Cashel), applies with much greater force to the comparatively modern periods above mentioned, the records of which are never questioned. Hist. Ir. Vol. I., p. 308.

^293:1 O'Halloran charges the English Government with a wholesale destruction of Irish MSS. previous to the reign of James I,:--

"What the false piety and mistaken zeal of the early Christians left unfinished, the Danes continued, and the Saxon and Norman invaders completed.. ..In Ireland, until the accession of James I, it was a part of state policy to destroy or carry off all the manuscripts that could be discovered. "What the president Carew," says the author of the Analect (p. 555) "did in one province (Munster), Henry Sidney and his predecessors did all over the kingdom, being charged to collect all the manuscripts they could, that they might effectually destroy every vestige of antiquity and letters throughout the kingdom! The learned Archdeacon Lynch, with many others, give too many melancholy instances of the kind." Hist. Ireland,, p. 94. "Many of these precious remains," says Moore, "were, as the author of Cambrensis Eversus tells us, actually torn up by boys for covers of books, and by tailors for measures. It was till the time of James I., says Mr. Webb, an object of government to discover and destroy every literary remain of the Irish, in order the more fully to eradicate from their minds every trace of their ancient independence." Moore's Hist. of Ireland, V. I. p. 309, note.

^293:2 "Mexican Antiquities," a work upon which this lamented nobleman expended (at least) L30,000 and the best years of his life, but the circulation of which, from the small number of copies printed, and the inaccessible price (L150) to the majority of the reading public, was necessarily very limited.

^294:1 Torfaeus, in consequence of an erroneous interpretation of the passage, pp. <page 64>, <page 65>, in the Saga of Erik the Red, relating to the length of the day, which he took to be eight hours instead of nine, fixed the latitude of Vinland at 49 degrees, being that of Newfoundland.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 295]

 

THE NORSEMEN IN AMERICA.

 

BY RASMUS B. ANDERSON, LL. D.

 

CHAPTER I.

 

NORUMBEGA.

THE early discovery of this country by the Norsemen is of interest to every American. It is the first coming of Europeans to this continent. It is the first chapter of civilization in the Western world. It is also the first chapter of the history of the Christian Church in America; for Leif Erikson and his followers had been converted to Christianity and Leif was himself a missionary sent out by the king of Norway to preach the gospel of the Gallilean to the Norse colonists in Greenland.

Before the landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth Rock in 1620, the shores of North America had been visited by the so-called French voyageurs. Some of these explorers wrote accounts of their voyages, and in their narratives and on maps which they published there is frequent mention of the name Norumbega. The name is found with a variety of spellings, Norumbegue, Norumbergue, sometimes with the initial "n" omitted, Anorabegra, Anorumbega, etc. It is applied to a country, river and city located somewhere in the eastern part of the United States or Canada. It is said to have been discovered by Verrazzano, in 1524. The site of the city

[p. 296]

was given on a map published at Antwerp in 1570. In 1604 Champlain ascended the Penobscot River in Maine, supposing that stream to be the Norumbega. But after going twenty-two leagues he discovered no indications of a city or of civilization except an old moss-grown cross in the woods. American historians have found much difficulty in identifying Norumbega, The fact is the statements of the various French authorities are conflicting. As stated, the first mention is by Verrazzano on his map published in Antwerp in 1524, and later, that is, in 1539, Parmentier found the name Norumbega, applied to a country lying southwest from, Cape Breton. Allefonsce, under Roberval, in 1543, determined the fact of there being two Cape Bretons, of which the more southern, referred to by Parmentier, was in the forty-third degree and identical with Cape Anne. Within the limit of this forty-third degree was a river, at the mouth of which, according to Allefonsce, were many rocks and islands; up which river, as Allefonsce estimated, fifteen leagues from the mouth was a city called Norumbegue. "There was," Allefonsce said, "a fine people at the city and they had furs of many animals and wore mantles of martin skins." Allefonsce was a pilot by profession and on him particularly rests the identity of one of the Cape Bretons which Cape Anne and the fact of there being a river with a city on its banks, both bearing the name Norumbega between Cape Anne and Cape Cod. Wytfliet, in 1597, in an augment to Ptolemy, says, "Norombega, a beautiful city and a grand river, are well-known." He gives on his map a picture of the settlement, or villa,

[p. 297]

at the junction of two streams, one of which is called the Rio Grande. Thevet in his texts places Fort Norumbegue at the point where Wytfliet placed the city, that is, at the junction of two streams, and Thevet says "To the north of Virginia is Norumbega, which is well-known as a beautiful city and a great river. Still one can not find whence this name is derived, for the natives call it Agguncia. At the entrance of the river there is an island very convenient for the fishery." Thevet describes the fort as surrounded by fresh water and at the junction of two streams. The city of Norumbega on his map is lower down the river. The French, who occupied the fort, called the fort Norumbega. As stated, the identification of Norumbega has greatly puzzled American historians, and the country, river and city have from, time to time been located at various points from Virginia to the St. Lawrence. Most authorities have referred Norumbega to New England, while Lok, in 1582, seems to have believed that the Penobscot in Maine formed its southern boundary. Before 1880 this view seems to have been very generally adopted by American scholars. Our poet, J. G. Whittier, made Norumbega the subject of one of his most beautiful poems.

In connection with the poem, the poet gives the following explanatory note, which well represents the concensus of opinion of American scholars before 1880: "Norembega, or Norimbegue, is the name given by early French fishermen and explorers to a fabulous country south of Cape Breton, first discovered by Verazzano in 1524. It was supposed to have a magnificent city of the

[p. 298]

same name on a great river, probably the Penobscot. The site of this barbaric city is laid down cm a map published at Antwerp in 1570. In 1604, Champlain sailed in search of the Northern Eldorado, twenty-two leagues up the Penobscot from the Isle Haute. He supposed the river to be that of Norembega, but wisely came to the conclusion that those travelers who told of the great city had never seen it. He saw no evidence of anything like civilization, but mentions the finding- of a cross, very old and mossy, in the woods."

In 1881 Arthur James Weise, of Troy, N. Y., published a work called "The Discovery of America to the Year 1525." In the closing pages of this work he takes up the subject of Norumbega, and arrives at the conclusion that the name is a contraction of the old French L'Anormeeberge (the grand scarp), and claims that the adjective "anormee" and the noun "berge" definitely describe the wall of rocks known as the Palisades, on the Hudson river, above New York city. Weise has no doubt that by the term Norumbega river the Hudson is meant, and that the country around the Palisades was called by the French explorers La Terre d'Anormeeberge, afterwards contracted and corrupted into Norumbega and its other variations heretofore named. In identifying the river called by one of the French writers Norombega, with the present Hudson, Weise lays great stress upon the statement by the same writer that the water of the river was salty to the height of forty leagues, and shows that the Hudson is brackish beyond the city of Poughkeepsie. According to Weise, the city of Norumbega

Click to enlarge
MAP OF VINLAND from accounts contained in Old Northern MSS

[p. 299]

must have occupied the site of the present Albany, the capital of New York. Weise's arguments seemed so conclusive, particularly his interpretation of the name, that his view was very generally accepted by students of American history everywhere.

Passing on to the year 1890, we come to an entirely new theory. Before presenting this in detail it may interest my readers to learn a few facts leading up. to it. In 1873 I suggested to the famous Norwegian violinist, Ole Bull, that Leif Erikson, the first white man who planted his feet on American soil, ought to be honored with a monument. Ole Bull accepted the suggestion with the greatest enthusiasm, and he and I together immediately prepared plans for its realization. During the spring of 1873 we arranged a number of entertainments in Wisconsin and Iowa, the proceeds of which made the nucleus of the Leif Erikson monument fund. At these entertainments Ole Bull played the violin and the writer sandwiched in short addresses to the audiences while the artist rested. Later, that same year, I accompanied Ole Bull to Norway, and there a series of entertainments were arranged for the same purpose. At one of these entertainments the distinguished Norwegian poet, Bjornstjerne Bjornson, delivered an address. A sum of money was realized from the entertainments in Norway for the monument fund. A few years later Ole Bull made his American home in Cambridge, Mass.; there he was successful in organizing a committee for the purpose of carrying out our plans in regard to the Leif Erikson monument. The committee was a most brilliant one.

[p. 300]

[paragraph continues] In it were found James Russell Lowell, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Thomas S. Appleton, Prof. E. N. Horsford, the Governor of Massachusetts, the Mayor of Boston and many other distinguished people. Funds were rapidly raised, and America's most distinguished sculptress, Miss Anne Whitney, [*1] was engaged to produce in bronze a statue of Leif Erikson in heroic size. In due time the statue was completed and placed at the end of Commonwealth Avenue in Boston. The statue represents Leif Erickson as he discovers the first faint outlines of land far away on the horizon, and with his right hand he shades his eyes from the dazzling rays of the sun. The statue does not represent my idea of a long bearded and shaggy haired Norseman of the tenth century. Miss Whitney has made Leif smooth faced, with the general outlines of the Roman. She seems to have taken the splendid physique and features of Ole Bull for her model. But it is certainly a great work of art. No less authority than James Russell Lowell declared it to be the finest work of sculpture hitherto produced in America. A perfect replica, cast in the same mold as the original, was presented by a Milwaukee lady to the city of Milwaukee, where it can be seen by my readers. It stands on the lake front, a little north of the Chicago & Northwestern railway station, near the well-known Juneau monument.

It will be observed that Prof. Horsford was mentioned as one of the committee in Cambridge. Prof. Eben Norton

[p. 301]

[paragraph continues] Horsford, born July 27th, 1818, was the son of a distinguished missionary among the Indians. The son, Eben., acquired from his father, who was thoroughly familiar with many Indian dialects, an extensive knowledge of Indian words. He studied science both in America and in Europe under Prof. Liebig, and became Professor of Science in Harvard University in 1847, a position which he filled with distinction for sixteen years. Fortune smiled on him. He became wealthy and was able to devote his time exclusively to scientific and literary pursuits. He was a large hearted man and gave generously of his wealth to educational institutions. Wellesley College is under great obligations to him.

The organization of the Leif Erickson committee in Cambridge attracted his attention to the subject of the Norse discovery of America. The result was that he practically abandoned his other studies and concentrated all his energies on investigations bearing on the Norse voyages to this country. He was particularly interested in locating the landfall of Leif Erikson and in identifying the country explored by him and his countrymen from the tenth to the fourteenth century. Some idea can be formed of Prof. Horsford's enthusiasm in this cause when we learn that he spent more than $50,000 in making explorations, in publishing books and maps, and in building monuments and memorials in honor of the Norse discoverer. He was the orator at the unveiling of the Leif Erikson monument in Boston.

In 1890, Prof. Horsford presented an entirely new theory in regard to the perplexing question of Norumbega.

[p. 302]

[paragraph continues] In this year appeared his "Discovery of the Ancient City of Norumbega." In it he claims to have found the precise site of the ancient city, and locates it with absolute confidence on the Charles river, in Massachusetts, at its junction with Stony Brook, near Walton. He makes Norumbega identical with the Vinland of the Norseman, claiming that Norumbega is not derived from the old French D'Anormee Berge, but is a corruption of the old name Norvegr and that it has borne that name among the aborigines ever since the Norse explorers in the tenth and following centuries made their headquarters there. He takes Norumbega to be the name the French voyageurs did not bestow but found. So thoroughly convinced was Prof. Horsford of the correctness of his theory that he built on the site which he identified as Norumbega a costly tower in commemoration of the Norse discoverers and colonists. Prof. Horsford found at and around the junction of Stony Brook with Charles river evidences of a great industry involving, among other things, a graded area some four acres in extent, paved with field boulders. At the base of the bluffs along Stony Brook there are ditches or canals extending far into the country and above the ditches are walls made of boulders from three to five feet high. The existence of these works has long been known, but their origin has never been satisfactorily interpreted. It is certain that they existed before the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers in 1620. It is equally certain that they are the handiwork of man. They are too extensive to have been produced by the French or English explorers previous

[p. 303]

to 1620. They can scarcely be ascribed to the aborigines, for they differ widely from any works known to have been constructed by the natives of this country. The old Norse sagas tell us that the Norseman carried timber from Vinland to Greenland and Prof. Horsford suggests that the canals were filled with water at high tide and that logs were floated down to where their ships lay in the Charles river. He supposes that the walls above the canals were constructed to protect the canals from being filled with debris from the bluffs. When the immediate shores of the river had been cleared of wood the shores of the tributaries flowing into the river became the field of activity and maple blocks were sent floating down the stream; and where the streams were remote from the bases of the slopes on either side the sources of water were at hand. Canals, or nearly level troughs, were dug to transport the logs to the streams and ultimately to the Charles. Dams and ponds were necessary at the mouths of the streams to prevent the blocks from going down the Charles without a convoy and out to sea to be lost. There is an admirable canal, walled on one side, extending for a thousand feet along the western bank of Stony Brook in the woods above the Tiverton railroad crossing, between Walton and Weston. The Cheesecake Brook is another and Cold Spring Brook another, and there is an interesting dry canal near Murray Street, not far from Newtonville. It may be seen from the railroad cars on the right, a little to the east of Eddy Street, approaching Boston. Prof. Horsford found throughout the basin of the Charles numerous

[p. 304]

canals, ditches, deltas, boom-dams, ponds, fish-ways, forts, dwellings, walls, terraces of theatre and amphitheatre, and he insisted that there was not a square mile drained into the Charles River that lacked an incontestable monument of the presence of the Norsemen. I have myself gone over the most of this ground in company with Prof. Horsford and listened to his enthusiastic interpretations of these strange remains. It may seem as an undeserved dignity to speak of these ditches as canals, but they are so named in the old deeds in Weston, and if you look at them on the left of the highway, between Sibley's and Weston, with the stone wall on either side, you will not wonder that the word canal, as well as ditch, should have suggested itself. They are so called on the published town maps of Millis and Holliston. Prof. Horsford, as indicated, bought a tract of land at the junction of Stony Brook with Charles River, consecrating it to the memory of the Norsemen, and set up in Weston, at the mouth of Stony Brook, a magnificent tower. Over the tablet, set in the wall of the tower, is poised the Icelandic falcon about to alight with a new world in his talons. On the tablet is given the following inscription:

A. D. 1000,                                     A. D. 1889.

NORUMBEGA.

City--Country--Fort--River.

Norumbega--Nor'mbega.

Indian utterance of Norbega, the Ancient Form of Norvega,
 Norway, to which the Region of
 Vinland was Subject.

 

[p. 305]

City.

At and near Watertown,
 Where Remain To-day
 Docks, Wharfs, Walls, Dams, Basin.

Country:

Extending from Rhode Island to the St. Lawrence.
 First Seen by Bjarni Herjulfson, 985 A. D.
 Landfall of Leif Erikson on Cape Codd, 1000 A. D.
 Norse Canals, Dams, Walls, Pavements.
 Forts, Terraced Places of Assembly, Remain To-day.

Fort:

At Base of Tower and Region About
 Was Occupied by the Breton French in the 15th, 16th and
 17th Centuries.

River:

The Charles,
 Discovered by Leif Erikson 1000 A. D.
 Explored by Thorwald, Leif's Brother, 1003 A. D.
 Colonized by Thorfinn Karlsefni 1007 A. D.
 First Bishop Erik Gnupson 1121 A. D.
 Industries for 350 Years.
 Masur-wood (Burrs), Fish, Furs, Agriculture.
 Latest Norse Ship Returned to Iceland in 1347.

Prof. Horsford mentioned as considerations that led to the erection of the tower:

"1. It will commemorate the discovery of Vinland and Norumbega in the forty-third degree, and the identification of Norumbega with Norway, the home country to which this region was once subject by right of discovery and colonization.

[p. 306]

"2. It will invite criticism, and so sift out any errors of interpretation into which, sharing the usual fortune of the pioneer, I may have been led.

"3. It will encourage archaeological investigation in a fascinating and almost untrodden field, and be certain to contribute in the results of research and exploration, both in the study and the field, to the historical treasure of the commonwealth.

"4. It will help by reason of its mere presence, and by virtue of the veneration with which the tower will in time come to be regarded, to, bring acquiescence in the fruit of investigation, and so allay the blind skepticism, amounting practically to inverted ambition, that would deprive Massachusetts of the glory of holding the Landfall of Leif Erikson, and at the same time the seat of the earliest colony of Europeans in America."

In the old Norse sagas (histories) in which the Norse voyages to America are described, it is stated that when Leif Erikson came to Vinland he first sailed up a river, that the river then widened into a lake, that he crossed this lake and then sailed up another river as far as his ship could float. Such a description might doubtless apply to various points on the northeast coast, but it certainly applies well to the Charles river.

In 1887, at a scientific gathering in Cambridge, Prof. Horsford announced that he had studied the saga of Erik the Red and that he interpreted the brief but clear statement therein to refer to Leif's sailing across the mouth of Cape Cod Bay opening out northeast to the sea from the Race to the Gurnet; his coasting westerly along

[p. 307]

the Gurnet from Scituate Beach past the Cohasset Rocks to Nantasket, his entrance into Boston harbor, his running aground on an ebb-tide off the site of Long Wharf, his floating on the returning flood up into the reach or strait of Charles river, on to the expansion of the back bay, and later winding through the salt meadow and marshes up the Charles, beyond the bay to the south end of Symond's Hill at the so called Gerry's Landing in Cambridge, near which he built his large house, as indicated in the details given concerning Leif, Thorwald and Thorfin Karlsefne in the sagas. At the same time Prof. Horsford stated that if any remains of Leif's house in Vinland should ever be found they would be located between Symond's Hill, the ancient bluff extending eastward some hundred yards from the Cambridge City Hospital, and the angle of the Cambridge City Cemetery, about a quarter of a mile to the south. The place where Leif landed would be, Horsford insisted, the first place going up the Charles, where, landing on an even keel, permitting a plank to be run out to the shore was possible. It was the spot determined for Gerry's Landing, the great point in the earlier days of the colony for receiving goods from the sea and transporting them on wagons to the interior. Mr. Horsford made careful investigations in this vicinity and discovered in the turf a ridge, the outlines of which correspond with the outlines of an Icelandic house in the saga time. The old Norse house had a fire place in the centre of the floor and the smoke escaped through an opening in the roof. Prof. Horsford was so sure that this characteristic of the

[p. 308]

house near Gerry's Landing would be found that he announced it to the workmen, who of course showed the greatest incredulity. He told them that if they would dig a trench along the middle of the house they would uncover a fire place. The turf and blown sand were a foot thick. He indicated the spot where the hearth would be found. His prediction was verified. An area of about four feet in diameter, covered by boulders, was exposed. Some were more fine grained and compact, preserving their original shape, but pitted at the surface as if they had been exposed to prolonged heat. Others were cracked into several pieces. Others still, being originally fissile gneiss finely stratified sand and argillaceous material, were resolved into different fragments like slate. Ore of the blocks that had preserved its general form, but with all its corners rounded, was observed to be of a dull red as if covered with reddish brown rouge. Horsford said: "If this redness is due to peroxide of iron I shall find the interior of a greenish shade due to the presence of mineral combinations with protoxide of iron." A lapidary cut the stone into thin slices. Horsford says: "As I expected, in the interior where, though heated, it had been protected from the air, the color was of a dull bottle green. The outer surface where it had been heated and exposed to the air was reddish brown. Charcoal was found, as might have been expected, at the border of the hearth."

Mr. Horsford found on the south side of the outline a marked depression, as if there had been a door. If there were door posts they should have had something to stand

[p. 309]

on. On digging down a foot or more on either side of the door-way a boulder of two-thirds of a bushel basket capacity was found. The outline of the house of logs might have been expected to rest on stone as a protection against the decay of the logs. Such stone foundations were found in probing the ground with an iron rod at a depth of about one foot and were at various points uncovered. The whole outline of the house is a regular parallelogram. Prof. Horsford had this interesting place enclosed and suitably marked.

On the last night of the year 1892, Eben Norton Horsford called his daughter Cornelia to talk with her about the traces of the house built on the banks of the Charles River, both by Thorfin Karlsefni and Snorre Thorbrandson, two Icelanders who came from Greenland in three ships with 151 men and seven women and their live stock, intending to establish a colony in Vinland, in the year 1007. Prof. Horsford asked his daughter, "What will you find in Thorfin's house if I find a fire place in Leif's house? And if I found foundations of walls at Leif's house, what will you find to correspond with that at Thorfin's house?" Then he instructed her to buy the land herself, and in the spring, when the frost was out of the ground, to get an iron rod and strike it into the earth to find the fire place, and afterwards to find the foundation walls in the same way; because he wanted her to have the pleasure of making a discovery herself. The next day, January 1st, 1893, our dear old Prof. Horsford died suddenly in his library. Miss Cornelia Horsford afterwards got her mother's permission to finish

[p. 310]

and edit her father's unpublished works, and during the long days and evenings, while the ground was still covered with snow, she read all the books about the ancient Norsemen and their customs to learn what she might happen to find when the time came in the spring for her to look for the remains of Thorfin's long house on the bank of the river. On the 19th of April, when the frost was out of the ground, she began her search for the remains of the long house of Thorfin's party. It is no easy matter to find the foundations of a house after they have been buried several hundred years, even when they can be traced by ridges of earth. For an hour, she says, she watched the earth thrown up, and probed the ground in vain. At noon she went for Mr. Scorgie, who had made the search at Leif's house under her father's direction, and asked him to show her how to find the foundations and fire place of this house. He soon found them for her. The ring of the iron rod against the stone as he struck on the north wall was distinct and sharp, and in the afternoon he had outlined with the rod two walls about sixty-four feet long, having first found the end wall at the south. She was troubled by the fact that she found two fire places, but in examining the Yuglinga saga of Snore Sturlason, Chap. 14, she found that large buildings sometimes had more than one fire place. The stones which showed the action of heat were neatly laid together, with a few clam shells and oyster shells near by. She did not carry the excavations any further because her father did not wish to have the ridges destroyed by which he discovered the site of the house.

[p. 311]

[paragraph continues] Near by, and yet undisturbed, there are traces of other houses.

In 1892 I visited Prof. Horsford and he took me first to the junction of Stony Brook with Charles River, and showed me the magnificent monument he there had erected. He pointed out to me the four acres of solid pavement and showed me the long stretches of canals and stone walls. Afterwards he took me down to Gerry's Landing and he made me discover the site of Leif Erikson's house myself. I left him and went to where I could see a ridge in the form of a parallelogram in the sod, and walked slowly over its four sides, Prof. Horsford in the meantime clapping his hands. The stone from the fire place he subsequently had cut into thin slices, and one of these he sent me as a present on Christmas, 1892, only a week before his death. Prof. Horsford had not the slightest doubt that he had identified and explained satisfactorily the Norumbega of the French voyageurs. He had the fullest faith that Norumbega was a corruption of the ancient name Norvegr, that this name had been given to the aborigines by the Norsemen and that the aborigines had handed it down from generation to generation and had spoken it to the French voyageurs. He made the most careful investigations and found that no house had been built near Gerry's Landing since 1620. He therefore became absolutely convinced that the outlines which he described must be referred back to the house built in this country in the tenth and eleventh centuries by Leif Erikson and the other Norse explorers. Prof. Horsford was very anxious

[p. 312]

to convince me that he was right and my readers are doubtless anxious to know my opinion about the matter. I am sorry that I am not able to express a conviction on the subject. Horsford's discoveries are most startling, but they seem to prove too much. I am hospitably disposed to the basin of the Charles River as the site of Vinland and the operations of the Norse discoverers. All the descriptions in the sagas apply remarkably well to the Charles River with its surrounding country, and it is more than probable that Leif Erikson trod the ground now occupied by Harvard university. The remains pointed out by Horsford, both those near Weston and those near Gerry's Landing, deserve to be carefully studied, and it is possible that a thorough investigation will confirm many of Horsford's conclusions.

Footnotes

^300:1  Miss Anne Whitney was born in Watertown, Mass. She opened a studio as sculptress in Boston in 1873, and has made among other notable works, a statue of Samuel Adams and one of Harriet Martineau.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER II.

 

NORSE VOYAGES IN THE TENTH AND FOLLOWING CENTURIES.

IF we go back to the middle of the ninth century we find what is now Norway divided into thirty odd districts, called fylkes, and governed by kinglets, or jarls. These rulers were elected and obtained their positions by the grace of the people in convention assembled. But about this time there appeared in Norway a man named Harald Fairhair, who with his prime minister, Guthorm, succeeded in subjugating all the kinglets in Norway, and united the various fylkes into one kingdom. The

[p. 313]

last battle was a naval engagement at Hafursfjord, near Stavanger, in July, 872. In this battle the last of the kinglets was conquered, and Harald became monarch of all Norway. His usurpation of power created great dissatisfaction and resulted in a large emigration to France, to the British Isles, to the Hebrides, Orkneys and Shetland Isles, to the Fareys and particularly to Iceland. Iceland had been discovered in 860, and had been visited several times by Norsemen between that time and 874, in which year the settlement of Iceland began. The flower of the Norwegian people emigrated, and it was not long before Iceland had a population of more than 50,000 souls. In Iceland a republic was organized which flourished for four hundred years; and it was during the time of the republic that the grand old poetic and historic literature of Iceland was produced.

Here it is proper to add that the Norsemen were the discoverers of pelagic navigation. Let me here state with all the emphasis that I am able to compress into so many words, that the navigation of the ocean was discovered by the old Norse Vikings. Before them, the only navigation known was coast navigation. The Norsemen were excellent ship-builders and knew how to calculate time by the sun, moon and stars, and into every history of the world, and into every encyclopedia I would have the fact conspicuously stated that pelagic navigation was discovered by the Norsemen.

Iceland became the hinge upon which the door swings which opened America to Europe. In the voyages between Norway and Iceland--a distance of about 800

[p. 314]

miles--the sailors would occasionally be overtaken by cloudy and stormy weather and drift beyond Iceland, and so they could not help finding their way by accident to Greenland and other countries to the west and southwest of Iceland. And so it happened that in the year 876 a Norwegian mariner, by name Gunbjorn, reported that he had seen land far to the west of Iceland.

If the reader will now go with me to the southwestern part of Norway, about the middle of the tenth century, we shall find living there in a district called Jadern a man called Erik (often spelled Eirik) the Red. He was called the "Red" on account of his red hair and red beard and ruddy complexion. It also appears that he had a somewhat fiery and combative disposition. He now and then quarrelled with his neighbours, and on one occasion he had the misfortune of becoming guilty of manslaughter. For this reason he decided to emigrate from Norway, and he removed with his family to the western part of Iceland. But while he left his neighbors and the dust and sky of Jadern behind him, he carried his fiery nature with him and it was not long before he got into trouble with his new neighbors in Iceland. He therefore decided to emigrate from Iceland also and to go in search of the land seen nearly a hundred years before by Gunbjorn far to the west of Iceland. He left Iceland with a few companions in 982 and found an extensive country far to the west of Iceland. He remained there making explorations for three years and decided to found a colony there. He was anxious to give the country a name that might be attractive to settlers, and in discussing this

[p. 315]

question with his companions, they agreed on naming the country Greenland, reasoning that no name would be better suited to attract immigrants.

Greenland belongs entirely to the Western Hemisphere and is accordingly a part of America. The discovery of Greenland was in fact the discovery of America, and Erik the Red was the first European who ever boomed real estate on the Western Continent, and he boomed it successfully. He succeeded in founding in Greenland a colony which flourished for several hundred years. The Icelandic sagas contain elaborate accounts of this colony and give us the names of a number of the bishops who resided there.

Erik the Red returned to Iceland in 985, and in 986 he, with a considerable number of followers, emigrated to Greenland. Among those who emigrated with Erik the Red was one Herjulf Bardson. Herjulf Bardson had a son, by name Bjarne. Bjarne was a viking merchant. He had a custom of spending one year with his father in Iceland and the next year abroad, acquiring fee and fame, that is, wealth and reputation. In 986 he chanced to be absent on a viking expedition and, on returning to Iceland in the summer, he learned that his father had emigrated with Erik the Red to Greenland. Desiring to spend the next winter with his father, as was his custom, he asked his sailors whether they would go with him. They all said they would. "But we have none of us ever been in the Greenland sea," said Bjarne. "We mind not that," said his men, "we are willing to go wherever you will lead." And so Bjarne and his men at

[p. 316]

once set sail from Iceland. They were overtaken by foggy and stormy weather and sailed on and on, not knowing whither they were sailing. The fog and storm lasted for several weeks, then the sky cleared, the sun shone again, and lo behold they could see land in the distance! They saw that they were much too far south. The land, which was hilly and well wooded, did not correspond to the descriptions which they had received of Greenland. It was getting late in the season, so they did not go ashore, but proceeded northward. On their journey northward they discovered two other countries, but as neither of them could be Greenland they did not land. They hastened on until they finally reached Greenland in safety and happened to land near the colony founded by Erik the Red. We have no time to go into details, but it is evident that the first land seen by Bjarne, Herjulf's son, must have been some part of New England; the second land was probably Nova Scotia, and the third Newfoundland. And thus Bjarne, in the year 986, was the first pale-faced man whose eyes looked upon the American continent.

Erik the Red was the chief of the colony in Greenland. His family consisted of three sons, Leif, Thorvald and Thorstein, all bright, stalwart and enterprising young men.

In the year 1000, the same year as that in which Christianity was adopted as the religion of Iceland, Leif Erikson chanced to be in Norway. Norway had just been converted to Christianity and the ruler at this time was the famous King Olaf Trygvason. Leif Erikson

[p. 317]

met the king, and the king became very fond of him. He persuaded Leif to accept the Christian religion and be baptised. Then King Olaf sent for Leif and told him that he had a double mission for him. "In the first place," said King Olaf, "I want you to go, and look up those lands which were seen by Bjarne and secure more definite information about them, and in the second place, I want you to go as a missionary to Greenland and preach the gospel of the White Christ to the colonists there."

Leif agreed to carry out the king's wishes. In the summer of the year 1000 he set sail for the far West. He decided to investigate the lands seen by Bjarne before going to Greenland. On his way west, he first reached the land which Bjarne reported he had seen, that is, Newfoundland. He anchored his ship off the coast, went ashore, and, exploring the land somewhat, found that it was hilly and extensively covered with large, flat stones. He decided to name the country after its most conspicuous peculiarities, and called it Helluland (land of flat stones). Then he proceeded towards the southwest and reached the second land seen by Bjarne (that is, Nova Scotia), which he also explored somewhat, and found that it was a heavily wooded country. On account of the large forests he called it Markland (timberland). Then he sailed on to the first country seen by Bjarne, that is, some part of New England, and here, the saga tells us, he first entered a bay and then a river, then the river widened into a lake, which he crossed, then he entered a river on the other side of the lake and sailed up this river as far as it was deep enough for his viking

[p. 318]

ship. As the reader will see, this can be applied to the Boston Harbor, to the Charles River between Boston and Cambridgeport, to the Back Bay between Boston and Cambridge and to the Charles River up as far as Gerry's Landing, near which our Professor Horsford. claimed to have found the site of Leif Erikson's house and fireplace.

After having landed, Leif Erikson and his party, thirty-one in number, pulled the vessel ashore and at once went to work to build a house for the winter. The party was divided into two groups to explore the country in different directions on alternate days. On one evening, when the exploring party returned to the camp, one man was missing. This was a German, by name Tyrker, who, though a prisoner of war, was Leif Erikson's special favorite. Leif Erikson became very much alarmed and anxious He feared that Tyrker might have been slain by natives or devoured by wild beasts. Therefore with his men Leif immediately set out in search of Tyrker. But they had not gone far from the camp, when they met their missing fellow mate in a very excited state of mind. The cause of his excitement was the fact that he had found ripe wild-grapes. He had his arms full of grapes, and was devouring the fruit with all his might, and when spoken to by Leif Erikson, he only answered in his native tongue, "Weintrauben! Weintrauben!! Weintrauben!!!" He was born in a country where the grape grew, and, having been absent from Germany for many years, the finding of grapes in this western world overwhelmed him with delight. The

[p. 319]

sagas tell us that grapes were found in great abundance on every hand, and from this circumstance Leif gave the country the name of Vinland, and history at the same time obtained the interesting fact that a German accompanied these daring Argonauts of the Christian era.

The sagas give very full and interesting accounts of the various products of Vinland and of the natives or aborigines with whom our Norse explorers came in contact. This part of the subject is fully treated in preceding chapters of this volume. What I desire particularly to emphasize at this point is the fact that Leif Erikson was the first European and the first Christian who planted his feet on American soil and, as such, he deserves a conspicuous place in the history of our country. He represents the first chapter of civilized and Christian history of America.

In the spring Leif Erikson loaded his vessel with as much timber as it would carry and, in obedience to the instructions of King Olaf, proceeded to Greenland to preach, the gospel of the Gallilean to Erik the Red's colony there. He was successful, and had the good fortune to convert the whole colony to the Christian religion, except the aged Erik the Red. The latter stubbornly refused to be persuaded. He declared that his faith in Odin and Thor, and particularly in his own might and main, had been sufficient for him through his long life, and he would not forsake the Gods of his childhood in his old age. And so Erik the Red died as he had lived, a heathen.

In the Greenland colony there was much talk about

[p. 320]

[paragraph continues] Vinland the Good, and it was the general opinion that the country had been far too little explored. It was therefore agreed in the year 1002 that Leif's brother, Thorwald, should make an expedition to Vinland. He set out with a good crew of men and reached Vinland in safety, where he occupied the house built by Leif two years before. He came into conflicts with the natives, and in one of these he lost his life, an arrow from one of the aborigines piercing his heart. His comrades buried him in Vinland, and Thorwald's was the first Christian grave made in this Western World. His grave was marked by two crosses, one at the head and one at the foot. Then the little band of Norsemen, having lost their leader, returned to Greenland.

Two years later, 1005, it was decided that the youngest brother, Thorstein, should proceed to Vinland, partly for the purpose of bringing back the body of his brother Thorwald. Thorstein's wife was Gudrid, a noble, refined, intelligent and enterprising woman, and an ornament to her sex. Gudrid went with her husband on this expedition, but the party did not reach Vinland. The weather was unfavorable and the vessel drifted far to the north. Thorstein was taken sick and died, and the widow, Gudrid, took the vessel back to Erik's fjord in Greenland.

Leif Erikson and his sister-in-law, Gudrid, lived at the farm Brattahlid in Greenland, and if the reader now will go with me to that northern country in the year 1006 we will find that there had just arrived in the colony a distinguished and wealthy man from Norway. His

[p. 321]

name was Thorfin Karlsefni. He visited frequently at Brattahlid, and with each visit his admiration of Gudrid increased. The spark of love soon grew into an uncontrollable flame and he asked the young widow to become his wife. The matter was referred to Leif Erikson, who had the disposal of his sister-in-law, and he at once consented, and accordingly the nuptials of Gudrid and Thorfin were celebrated in grand style during the Christian holidays of the year 1006. The honeymoon was spent in Greenland, and I fancy that when the sun's rays began to warm the atmosphere the following spring that the young couple took many a walk on the sea shore, and I take it also that much of their conversation turned on Vinland, the Good, and the prospects offered for founding a settlement in that beautiful and fertile country. Gudrid was a bright and enterprising young woman and, while there is no record of the fact, I can imagine that she looked smiling into Thorfin's face and talked to him somewhat in this fashion: "I wonder that you, Thorfin, with all your wealth and with all your splendid men should choose to live in this Godforsaken country instead of seeking out the famous Vinland and planting a colony there. Just think what an agreeable change it would be for all of us! Thick and leafy woods instead of these willow bushes that are good for nothing except to save our cattle from starvation when the hay crop gives out. Longer summers and shorter and less cold winters instead of the barren wastes of this country. Surely, I think this land was woefully misnamed when Erik the Red called it Greenland."

[p. 322]

Of course Gudrid pleaded as only a woman can plead, and Thorfin was persuaded. He resolved to plant a colony in Vinland, and in the summer of 1007 he organized a party of one hundred and fifty-one men and seven women, who sailed in three ships from Greenland to Vinland. That Thorfin and Gudrid intended to make a permanent settlement in Vinland is also, evident from the fact that they took cattle and sheep with them. The party reached Vinland in safety, and remained there three years, but the frequent conflicts with the aborigines made their life a very precarious one, and they finally decided to, abandon the colony, and return to Greenland. Powder and firearms had not yet been invented, and the superior intelligence of the Norsemen was not sufficient to protect them against the swarms of natives that surrounded them and were as well armed as the Norsemen. It is, however, to be recorded that during their stay in Vinland, Thorfin and Gudrid got a son. They named him Snorre. He was born in the summer of 1008, and was the first white and the first Christian child who saw the light of day in America.

The sagas--that is to, say, the histories--written in Iceland, describing these voyages of the Norsemen, give very full accounts of the daily life in the Vinland colony, of the explorations, of the natives of America, of the various kinds of products of the soil, of the climate, etc., and it is interesting to read these first recorded descriptions of a land that has since become so prominent in the history of the world, and which is now so dear to all of us who call it our home.

[p. 323]

The sagas tell of various other voyages to Vinland, particularly of one in the year 1011. In 1121 it is stated, in various places in the sagas, that a bishop named Erik Upse went to find Vinland. It is nowhere stated whether he actually reached Vinland or returned and we are simply left to conjecture as to the purpose and result of his journey. All we know with certainty is that he "started for Vinland." However, it is by no means likely that the church would send a bishop to Vinland before a colony was planted there. We know now by the manuscript reports shown among the Vatican Exhibits at the World's Fair, 1904, that the Catholic See of Greenland extended its jurisdiction over all the new discoveries of Lief and Thorvald, and Karlsefni. It was common for priests to accompany voyages, but bishops took charge of the Church interests of colonies and, therefore, by the sending of bishop Erik Upse to Vinland it is reasonably certain that a colony had been planted there and was maintained for several years. This inevitable conclusion is fortified, if not confirmed, by references contained in official reports made by the bishops of Greenland to the Church at Rome.

The last expedition mentioned in the sagas was in 1347, 145 years before the rediscovery by Columbus. In that year it is stated that a vessel came from Markland (Nova Scotia) to Iceland with a cargo of wood. But this, as the reader will see, carries us down to a memorable period in European history. It brings us to the breaking out of the terrible black plague, or black death. The ravages of the black plague were so enormous, they

[p. 324]

so much decimated the population of all European countries that much time was required for recuperation. It took more than one hundred years for Europe to recover sufficiently to be able to engage in new enterprises either at home or abroad. We can form some conception of the character of the black death when we learn that it reduced the population of Norway alone from 2,000,000 to 300,000. The black death has been handed down in tradition from generation to generation, even to the present time. The Norwegian peasants speak of it as an old hag marching through the country with a rake in one hand and a broom in the other. If she came to a valley in Norway where there were a few good people she used the rake and the virtuous would escape between the fingers of the rake. But when she found a valley where all the people were wicked she used the broom and did not leave a soul to tell the tale of what had happened. Some of the remote valleys thus swept clean have been rediscovered within the last century. The black death also visited Iceland and Greenland and committed similar depredations there. It is evident that this scourge left no surplus population for exploring and colonizing lands beyond the sea.

If the communication between the north of Europe and Greenland and Vinland could have been continued a hundred years longer, that is, until the middle of the fifteenth century, or until the countries had recuperated from the ravages of the black plague and until after the discovery of the compass and of powder and fire arms, then there is no doubt but that the Norse colonies would

[p. 325]

have become permanent, and America would have become the scene of Norse settlements and Norse enterprises. The Norse language would have taken possession of this country from sea to sea and there is little doubt that his article of mine would have been written in the Norse tongue instead of in English. Meanwhile it is certain that Bjarne Herjulfson was the first European whose eyes beheld the American continent, that Leif Erikson was the first pale-faced man whose feet trod on American soil, that his brother Thorvald was the first Christian buried beneath our sod, that Thorfin Karlsefni was the first to attempt the planting of a colony on our shores, that the noble and intelligent Gudrid was the first white woman to honor America with her presence, and that Thorfin's and Gudrid's son Snorre was the first white child born in America.

In this connection it is interesting to note the fact that the first white man to visit the extreme western part of America was the Dane, Vitus Bering, after whom Bering Strait bears its name. Bering discovered the extreme western coast of this country in 1728. The Norwegian, Leif Erikson, stands at the rising, and the Dane, Vitus Bering, at the setting sun, and clasp the great American continent in their strong Scandinavian arms. The Swedes, too, should be remembered, for when this country was in the throes of the great civil war, did not Sweden give us her great son, John Ericsson, who invented for us the Monitor?

"Truth crushed to earth will rise again." The facts of these Norse voyages have long lain darkened and hid

[p. 326]

in old neglected libraries, and so truth may long lie unknown under the dust and rubbish of the ages; but it is like a ray of light from a star in some far-off region of the universe. After thousands of years that ray reaches some other heavenly body and gives it light.

      
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

 

CHAPTER III.

 

COLUMBUS AND THE NORSEMEN.

THERE is no direct evidence on this subject, that is to say, there is no statement either by Columbus or by any one of his contemporaries that he possessed any knowledge of Norse voyages to, the Western continent. But there is a considerable amount of indirect or circumstantial evidence, and it is believed that circumstantial evidence, when a sufficient number of strong links are found, is even more to be relied on than direct evidence. In weighing the circumstantial proofs to be presented I would request my reader not to judge these proofs singly, but rather united. One of the wires in the Brooklyn bridge would not carry a horse, but the thousands of wires twisted together form the strong cables that sustain the great bridge and all that immense traffic between New York and Brooklyn. Thus either one of the arguments which I propose to present, though the steel in it is of excellent quality, may not, when considered alone, be of sufficient strength; but when the various arguments are twisted together by the reader I trust they

[p. 327]

will constitute for him a cable of evidence strong enough to unite the voyages of Columbus with those of the Norsemen.

1. It will be remembered that in the year 1007 Thorfin Karlsefni and his gifted wife, Gudrid, undertook to colonize Vinland; that the emigrants from Greenland, more than 150 in number, remained in Vinland for three years, but that on account of frequent conflicts with the aborigines, making life a very precarious one, the colonists decided to return to Greenland. Some years after their return to Greenland Thorfin Karlsefni died, and then it is related in the sagas that his widow, Gudrid, in accordance with a well established custom in the North, made a pilgrimage to Rome. The sagas emphasize the fact that she was well received in that ancient city and greatly admired for her intelligence, courtesy and dignified manners. Now, does any one of my readers regard it as probable, or even possible, that Gudrid could spend a day, or a week, or a month in Rome and not tell how she had crossed the unexplored Western ocean, called the Sea of Darkness, and that she had spent no less than three years in a land washed by the western waves? Reports of Greenland, Helluland, Markland and Vinland may have come to Rome through other channels, but Gudrid brought personal evidence.

2. I stated in the preceding chapter that Bishop Erik Upse went to find Vinland in the year 1121. At this time the Church in the north of Europe, including Iceland, Greenland and the countries beyond Greenland, was under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Lund, in

[p. 328]

[paragraph continues] Southern Sweden. Rome had been visited by Gudrid and had received information concerning Vinland from another important source, which I shall mention later on, and the Vatican paid much attention to geographical discoveries, and took pains to collect all possible information. Every new discovery meant an enlargement of Christendom--a new field for the preaching of the gospel. I therefore think it highly probable that Bishop Erik set out for Vinland in obedience to instructions from, the Vatican through the Archbishop of Lund.

3. If you will take your 'cyclopedia and look up the name Adam Bremensis, or Adam of Bremen, you will find that this Adam ranks away up as one of the most distinguished writers in Europe in the eleventh century. Adam was superintendent or master of schools in Bremen and a devoted student of history. Space does not permit me to give an extensive account of Adam's life and works. What I desire especially to call attention to here is the fact that he was deeply interested in the ecclesiastical history of the north of Europe, where the Christian religion had recently been introduced, in Denmark by St. Ansgar, in Norway by Olaf Trygvason, in Greenland by Leif Erikson, and he decided to write a book on the propagation of Christianity in the North. In order to equip himself properly for this work he visited Denmark. There he met the Danish king, Svend Estridson, a nephew of Canute the Great. King Svend was himself a very intelligent and scholarly man. "He knew the events of the barbarians by heart, as if they were written." That is to say, he was thoroughly familiar with the history

[p. 329]

of the Norsemen. Adam not only received from the king a gracious and hospitable reception, but also an abundance of valuable information, and the king took pains to introduce him to the best-informed men near his court. On his return to Bremen, Adam wrote his book on the propagation of Christianity in the North of Europe, one of the best works on that subject extant. The volume consists of four books, the first three being devoted to a description of the introduction of Christianity in Denmark, Sweden, Norway, etc. But Adam, fearing that his readers might not be well up in the geography of the countries discussed, devotes the fourth book to a geographical description of the various lands in the North of Europe. In this book he first describes Denmark, then Sweden, then Norway, then Iceland, and then Greenland, and he gives a very satisfactory account of the climate, products and population of these countries. When he has described Iceland, he says that beyond Iceland is Greenland, and when he has completed his description of Greenland, he says, listen! "The same king (Svend Estridson) also informed me about the discovery of one more region in that ocean--a region named Vinland, because the grapes grow there spontaneously, producing the best of wine; and com, too, without being sown, grows there in abundance. This is no fabulous conjecture, but is based on positive statements of the Danes (haec compermus non fabulosa opinione, sed certa relatione Danorum)." This book, written in Latin by Adam of Bremen, was published between the years 1072 and 1076. I say published. Of course, printing was

[p. 330]

not yet invented, but the book was published in the same manner as other books before the invention of the art of printing. The book was read by intelligent people throughout Europe, it being scattered in numerous manuscripts, and we find evidence of its being discussed in the twelfth century by Helmold, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries by Albert of Stade and others, and in the beginning of the sixteenth century by Albert Krantz. Several manuscripts are now in existence, and since 1876 a new one has been found in Leyden and another in Vienna. The fact is that Adam's book was never forgotten between the time of its first publication and the introduction of printing. The biographers of Columbus inform us that he was deeply interested in geographical studies, that be searched with diligence every work within his reach, that in his study he was surrounded by the best historical and geographical works. Can the reader, therefore, for a moment doubt that one of the books read and studied by the distinguished Genoese navigator was this very book above described, and written by the great scholar, Adam of Bremen?

4. In my mind there is not a shadow of doubt that a copy of Adam of Bremen's work must have fallen into the hands of Christopher Columbus, and the reason for this conviction will appear in the next link in this remarkable chain of evidence. The life of Christopher Columbus was written by his own son, Ferdinand, in a volume published in 1521, a book easily found in every well-stocked library. From this book we know positively that while the design of attempting the discovery

[p. 331]

in the West was maturing in his mind, Columbus made a voyage to the North of Europe and visited Iceland. This was in February, 1477, and in his conversation in Iceland with the Bishop, and other learned men there, he must have been informed of the extraordinary fact that their countrymen had discovered Greenland, Helluland, Markland, and Vinland, beyond the western ocean, and that Vinland seemed to extend southward indefinitely. This was a circumstance not likely to rest quietly in the active and speculative mind of the great navigator. My readers will observe that when Columbus was in Iceland, in the year 1477, fifteen years before he rediscovered America, only 130 years had elapsed since the last Norse expedition to Vinland. There were undoubtedly people still living whose grandfathers had crossed the Atlantic, and it would be altogether unreasonable to suppose that he who was constantly talking about geography and navigation could possibly visit Iceland and hear nothing about the land in the West. In the volume by Ferdinand Columbus is quoted a letter received by Ferdinand, the son, from Christopher, the father, narrating that in February, 1477, he had sailed from Bristol, in England, to Iceland. In it he gives his son considerable information in regard to the extent, climate, tides, etc., of Iceland. But Ferdinand does not quote the whole letter. He ends the quotation by "etc." The "etc." may have related to private matters between father and son, and hence of no interest to the public, but the reader will admit the possibility of its containing information in regard to Norse voyages that the son did not think best to publish.

[p. 332]

5. If you will study the life of Columbus, you will find that he persistently maintained a firm conviction that there was land in the West. When, at the Rabida convent, he was forced to give the reasons for his conviction, he stated that he based this conviction, first, on the nature of things; second, on the reports of navigators; and third, on the authority of learned writers. The nature of things doubtless has reference to the rotundity of the earth. The reports of navigators may refer to information scattered throughout Europe concerning the Norse voyages, but more particularly to what Columbus gathered in conversation with people in Iceland. The authority of learned writers would seem to point directly to the work of Adam and Bremen, above described.

Columbus stated before he left Spain that he expected to find land soon after sailing about 700 leagues, hence he knew the breadth of the ocean, and must have had a pretty definite knowledge of the situation of Vinland. His biographers say that he underestimated the size of the earth, and hence guessed accurately the breadth of the ocean. May I ask, is it not equally logical when I say he knew the breadth of the ocean, and hence he underestimated the circumference of the earth? This reasoning will be plain when we consider that the Norsemen furnished no knowledge of the existence of the great Pacific ocean, and hence it was reasonable for Columbus to assume that the Vinland visited by the Norsemen was some part of Eastern Asia. The whole history of the rediscovery by Columbus proves that he must have possessed previous knowledge of America, and it

[p. 333]

makes Columbus a greater man, in my estimation, that he formed his opinion in regard to land in the West by a chain of logical deductions based upon thorough study and research. It is to the credit of Columbus, I say, that he investigated the nature of things; that he paid the closest attention to all reports of navigators, and that he diligently searched the learned writers, including Adam of Bremen. The fact that he was a great genius enabled him to, gather up all those scattered gleams of knowledge that fell without effect upon ordinary minds. With all the above means of knowledge at his command, we can understand how the theory in regard to land in the West was fixed in the mind of Columbus with singular firmness. We can understand how he never spoke in doubt or hesitation, but with as much certainty as if his eyes had already beheld the promised land. It would be absurd for him to hold such firm conviction on merely presumptive evidence, and such a view of Columbus can not be maintained without great damage to him. I hold that I am vindicating the great name of the Genoese navigator by insisting that he based his certainty upon equally certain facts, which he possessed the ability and patience to study out, and the keenness of intellect to put together, and this view gives historical importance to the discovery of America by the Norsemen. Care should always be taken to vindicate great names from accident. The life of Columbus furnishes us an example of what human genius and laudable enterprise can accomplish.

A farmer on the prairies of South Dakota needs water for his cattle. He proceeds to dig a well. When he has

[p. 334]

penetrated seventy-five or a hundred feet into the earth, his pick and shovel come in contact with brick and mortar. He calls the attention of a physician, a clergyman and a lawyer in his neighborhood to this fact. Extensive excavations are undertaken, and lo and behold! an ancient city of the size of Chicago is exhumed. The farmer stumbled on this discovery. It was a mere accident. There was a man in America who was anxious to find the location of ancient Troy. He visited every library in Christendom, examined every volume and manuscript that contained any reference to Troy. Having gathered all the light furnished by the libraries, he said to himself, not unlike our dear Horsford, "If I now search in that particular locality in Asia Minor, I shall find the remains of ancient Troy." This was Henry Schlieman. Guided by all the light supplied to his intelligence, by all the libraries in Christendom, he proceeded to a certain locality in Asia Minor, and lo, and behold! he found in his excavations the remains of the famous Troy. The Columbus in whom you have been believing is like my South Dakota farmer. He stumbles upon America by mere chance and accident, but the Columbus whom I preach unto you with all the ardor and sincerity of my nature is like our Henry Schlieman. He rediscovered America after a systematic study of every avenue of information; and the visit of Gudrid to Rome, the sending of Erik Upse as a bishop to Vinland, the perusal of Adam of Bremen's book, and his own remarkable journey to Iceland in 1477 gave him a torch that lighted his pathway across the Sea of Darkness.

[p. 335]

Further investigations, particularly in the great Vatican library in Rome, has brought forth more evidence. Indeed, there are a number of other points bearing on Columbus' sources of knowledge which, I have not discussed. I have contented myself with giving the five strongest links in the chain of circumstantial evidence, and by these I hope to have made some converts among my readers. And while the knowledge of the discovery by the Norsemen, and of Columbus' relation thereto, lay for a long time hidden or neglected beneath the dust of unstudied libraries, let us take this lesson, that truth will conquer and that honor will at length be given to whom honor is due.

On my suggestion the Norsemen in America have adopted a Leif Erikson or Grape Festival, to be celebrated on the first Wednesday of October in each year. It is a festival to commemorate the first landing of white men upon our shores. It is a festival to commemorate the first chapter of Christian and civilized history in America. As Leif Erikson and his followers found grapes in abundance and called the country Vinland, so grapes are to be the chief emblem at these festivals. The tables are to be decorated with grape leaves and the guests are to feast on grapes. Many of these festivals have already been celebrated during the past seven years.

Let us remember Erik the Red, who founded a settlement in Greenland. Let us remember Bjarne Herjulfson, the first white man whose eyes beheld any part of the American continent. Let us remember Leif Erikson, the first white man and the first Christian who planted

[p. 336]

his feet on American soil. Let us remember Thorwald Erikson, the first Christian buried beneath American sod. Let us remember Thorfin Karlsefni, the first white man who attempted to colonize America. Let us remember his wife Gudrid, the first white and Christian woman to visit our shores. And let us not forget her little son Snorre, the first white child to see the light of day on this continent. Let us recognize the Norsemen in their true capacity as navigators and discoverers, and as the first people to venture out upon the boundless ocean in ships. The Norsemen were the discoverers of pelagic navigation. It is my firm conviction that the more you study the history of the Norse voyages, the history of Columbus, and of the centuries between Leif Erikson and Columbus, the more you will become convinced that Columbus possessed knowledge of the Norse voyages. It certainly was the Norsemen who taught him pelagic navigation. When you rear a monument to Columbus, make the pedestal large enough to supply room for a description of his Norse forerunners. This will give the monument of Columbus a higher and more conspicuous position.

In the next chapter I shall attempt to show that America was visited by the Irish in the tenth and the eleventh centuries. I there propose to show that the subject of discovering in America can not be treated exhaustively without bringing back to the mind fond recollections of the Emerald Isle, which was at one time the school of Western Europe.

     
The Norse Discovery of America, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B. Anderson, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 337]

 

CHAPTER IV.

 

DISCOVERY OF AMERICA BY THE IRISH.

IN the preceding chapter I intimated that the Irish have some claim to the honor of having discovered America before Columbus. It is a large subject, and all I am able to, do at this time is to give the particular facts and traditions, and some hints in regard to their proper interpretation. The name of St. Brendan (or Brandan, as it is sometimes written) is well known, at least it may be found in the larger cyclopedias. He was an Irish monk, famous for his voyages upon the sea to strange lands. The traditions handed down to us from the Middle Ages contain many legends in regard to him. He belongs to the sixth century after Christ, and hence to an age where fact and fiction are strangely mingled. His death is said to have occurred A. D. 577. Report has it that he went on a nine years' voyage, and visited unknown lands. These lands are described in the work "De Fortunatis Insulis," published in the eleventh century, in the Latin language, and translated into French about the year 1120. Versions of his voyages appeared also in German, English and Dutch. Popular tradition has identified the Fortunate Islands of St. Brendan with America, and given this Irish saint the credit of discovering the western continent.

According to one legend, St. Brendan, conducted by

[p. 338]

an angel, descended to the lower world, where he witnessed the torments of the Devil and of the damned, and subsequently he came to, the Fortunate Islands, and finally he visited Paradise. At the end of the nine years he returned to Ireland, and gave an account of his adventures. The less superstitious interpreted St. Brendan's voyages as referring to existing countries, and I now hasten to declare it here as a fact that the reports concerning St. Brendan constituted one of the causes which led the Spanish and Portuguese to undertake voyages of discovery in the western ocean. Thus St. Brendan is one of the links in that chain of influences operating on the mind of the great Genoese navigator.

There is evolution in history, as well as in other things. The voyages of the Phoenicians and of the Greek Pytheas were germs that budded in the explorations of the Irish and of the Welsh, blossomed in the expeditions of the Norsemen, and culminated and bore fruit in the discovery of America by Columbus. The Phoenicians and Columbus are the two ends of the long chain of events in the opening of the new world to civilization. Columbus was a scholar, who studied industriously all books and manuscripts that contained any information about voyages and discoveries. His searching mind sought out the writings of Adam of Bremen and the works relating to St. Brendan. It is in this wise that we are able to explain the firm conviction that Columbus invariably expressed in his reference to land in the west. In that way we are able to account for the absolute certainty and singular firmness with which he talked of land across the

[p. 339]

ocean, and thus, too, we can account for his accurate knowledge of the breadth of the ocean.

It is now my privilege to call the attention of my readers once more to the Icelandic sagas, and show from them corroborations of the above theory concerning the discovery of America by the Irish. There was a powerful  in Iceland, by name Are Marson, and the sagas tell us that in the year 983, that is, three years before Vinland was seen by Bjarne Herjulfson, he was driven to Great Ireland by storms, and was there baptized. The first author of this account was his contemporary, Rafn, surnamed the Limerick Trader, he having long resided in Limerick, Ireland. The illustrious Icelandic sagaman, Are the Wise, descendant in the fourth degree from Are Marson, states on this subject that his uncle, Thorkel Gellerson (whose testimony he on another occasion declares to be worthy of all credit), had been informed by Icelanders, who had their information from Thorfin Sigurdson, Earl of Orkney, that Are Marson had been recognized in Great Ireland, and could not get away from there, but was held there in great respect. This statement, therefore, shows that in those times (about the year 983) there was an occasional intercourse between the western part of Europe, that is to, say, the Orkneys and Ireland, and the Great Ireland or Whitemen's Land of America. The sagas from which we get our information about Leif Erikson expressly state that Great Ireland lies to the west in the sea, near Vinland the Good, six days' sail west from Ireland. Doubtless; the "VI" has arisen through some mistake or carelessness

[p. 340]

of the transcriber of the original manuscript, which is now lost, and was erroneously written for XX, or XI, or perhaps XVI, which would correspond with the distance. Such a mistake might easily have been caused by a blot or defect in the manuscript.

It must have been in this same Great Ireland that Bjorn Asbrandson, surnamed the Champion of Breidavik, spent the latter part of his life. He had been adopted into the celebrated band of Jormsborg warriors, under Palnatoke. His relations with Thurid of Froda, in Iceland, a sister of the powerful official Snorre, drew upon him the enmity and persecution of the latter, in consequence of which he found himself obliged to quit Iceland forever, and in 999 he set sail with a northeast wind.

And now comes the most interesting part of this story. Gudleif Gudlaugson, the ancestor of the celebrated historian, Snorre Sturlason, had made a trading voyage to Dublin, in Ireland, but when he left that place again, with the intention of sailing around Ireland and returning to Iceland, he met with long-continued northeasterly winds, which drove him far to the southwest in the ocean, and late in the summer he and his company came at last to an extensive country, but they knew not what land it was. They went on shore, whereupon a crowd of the natives, several hundred in number, came against them and laid hands on them and bound them. They did not know to what race these people belonged, but it seemed to. them that their language resembled Irish. The natives now took counsel whether they should kill

[p. 341]

the strangers or make slaves of them. While they were deliberating, a large company approached, displaying a banner, close to which rode a man of distinguished appearance, who was far advanced in years and had gray hair. The matter under deliberation was referred to his decision, when to their astonishment it was discovered that he was none other than the above named Bjorn Asbrandson. He caused Gudleif to be brought before him, and addressing him in Icelandic, asked him whence he came. On Gudleif's reply that he was an Icelander, Bjorn made many inquiries about his acquaintances in Iceland, and particularly about his beloved Thurid of Froda and her son, Kjartan, supposed to be his own son, and who at that time was the proprietor of the estate of Froda. In the meantime, the natives becoming impatient and demanding a decision, Bjorn selected twelve of his company as counselors, and took them aside with him, and some time afterward he went toward Gudleif and his companions, and told them that the natives had left the matter to his decision. He thereupon gave them their liberty, and advised them, although the summer was then far advanced, to depart immediately, because the natives were not to be depended upon and were difficult to deal with, and, moreover, conceived that an infringement on their laws had been committed to their disadvantage. He gave them a gold ring for Thurid and a sword for Kjartan, and told them to charge his friends and relations not to come over to him, as he had now become old and might daily expect that old age would get the better of him; that the country was large, having

[p. 342]

but few harbors, and that strangers must everywhere expect a hostile reception. Gudleif and his company accordingly set sail again, and found their way back to Dublin, where they spent the winter; but the next summer they repaired to Iceland and delivered the presents, and everybody was convinced that it was really Bjorn Asbrandson, the Champion of Breidavik, that they had met with in this far-off country.

The date of Gudleif's voyage is the year 1029, and my readers may easily find the account in chapter 64 of the Eyrbyggja Saga. The portion of America here referred to is supposed to be situated south of the Chesapeake Bay, and includes North and South Carolina, Georgia and East Florida. In the saga of Thorfin Karlsefni, chapter 13, it is distinctly called "Irland-it-Milka;" that is, Great Ireland. The presumption is that the name Great Ireland arose from the fact that the inhabitants seemed to Gudlaugson's party to speak Irish; that the country presumably had been colonized by the Irish long before Gudlaugson's visit, and that they, coming from their own green island to a vast continent possessing many of the fertile qualities of their own native soil, found such an appellation natural and appropriate. I see nothing improbable in this conclusion; for the Irish, who visited and inhabited Iceland toward the close of the eighth century, to accomplish which they had to traverse a stormy ocean to the extent of eight hundred miles; who as early as 725 were found upon the Fareys (voyages between Ireland and Iceland in the tenth century were of ordinary occurrence)--a people so familiar

Click to enlarge
MAP OF ICELAND

[p. 343]

with the sea were certainly capable of making a voyage across the Atlantic Ocean.

The geography of the western world, according to the old Norsemen, consisted of (1) Helluland (Newfoundland), (2) Markland (Nova Scotia), (3) Vinland ( or some part of New England), and then (4) stretching far to the south of Vinland lay Whitemen's Land or Great Ireland.

 


===== BOOK: nop.txt =====



Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

  

NUMBERS

  

THEIR

  

OCCULT POWER AND MYSTIC VIRTUES

  

BY

  

W. WYNN WESTCOTT

  

SUPREME MAGUS OF THE ROSICRUCIAN SOCIETY OF ENGLAND

  

London, Benares: Theosophical Pub. society

  

3rd Edition

  

[1911]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, August 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

CONTENTS

         

       PAGE

     
      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

       <page 5>

     
      " " SECOND EDITION

       <page 7>

     
      " " THIRD EDITION

       <page 9>

     
      PART I.

        

     
      PYTHAGORAS, HIS TENETS AND HIS FOLLOWERS

       <page 11>

     
      PART II.

        

     
      PYTHAGOREAN VIEWS ON NUMBERS

       <page 16>

     
      PART III.

        

     
      KABALISTIC VIEW ON NUMBERS

       <page 22>

     
      PART IV.

        

     
      PROPERTIES OF THE NUMBERS ACCORDING TO THE BIBLE, THE TALMUDS, THE PYTHAGOREANS,   THE ROMANS, CHALDEANS, EGYPTIANS, HINDOOS, MEDIaeVAL MAGICIANS, HERMETIC   STUDENTS AND THE ROSICRUCIANS:--

        

     
          1. Monad

       <page 33>

     
          2. Dyad

       <page 36>

     
          3. Triad

       <page 41>

     
          3 1/2. Three and a Half

       <page 49>

     
          4. Tetrad

       <page 50>

     
          5. Pentad

       <page 59>

     
          6. Hexad

       <page 66>

     
          7. Heptad

       <page 72>

     
          8. Ogdoad

       <page 85>

     
          9. Ennead

       <page 88>

     
          10. Decad

       <page 93>

     
          11. Eleven

       <page 100>

     
          12. Twelve

       <page 102>

     
          13. Thirteen

       <page 109>

     
          Some Hindoo Uses of Numbers

       <page 110>

     
          Other Higher Numbers

       <page 111>

     
          Numbers of the Apocalypse

       <page 126>

     
 

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION, 1890.

SEVEN years have passed since this essay was written, and the MSS. pages have been lent to many friends and students of mystic lore and occult meanings. It is only at the earnest request of these kindly critics that I have consented to publish this volume. The contents are necessarily of a fragmentary character, and have been collected from an immense number of sources; the original matter has been intentionally reduced to the least possible quantity, so as to obtain space for the inclusion of the utmost amount of ancient, quaint and occult learning. It is impossible to give even an approximate list of works which have been consulted; direct quotations have been acknowledged in numerous instances, and (perhaps naturally) many a statement might have been equally well quoted from the book of a contemporary author, a mediaeval monk, a Roman historian, a Greek poet, or a Hindoo Adept: to give the credit to the modern author would not be fair to the ancient sage, to refer the reader to a Sanskrit tome would be in most cases only loss of time and waste of paper. My great difficulty has been to supply information mystic enough to match the ideal of the work, and yet not so esoteric as to convey truths which Adepts have still concealed.

I must apologise for the barbarous appearance of foreign words, but it was not found practicable to supply Sanskrit, Coptic, Chaldee and Greek type, so the words have had

[p. 6]

to be transliterated. Hebrew and Chaldee should of course be read from right to left, and it was at first intended so to print them in their converted form, but the appearance of Hebrew in English letters reversed was too grotesque; ADNI is a representation of the Aleph, daleth, nun, yod, of "Adonai," but INDA would have been sheer barbarity: in the case of Hebrew words I have often added the pronunciation.

The "Secret Doctrine" of H. P. Blavatsky, a work of erudition containing a vast fund of archaic doctrine, has supplied me with valuable quotations. If any readers desire a deeper insight into the analogies between numbers and ideas, I refer them in addition to the works of Eliphaz Levi, Athanasius Kircher, Godfrey Higgins, Michael Maier, and John Heydon; I have quoted from each of these authorities, and Thomas Taylor's "Theoretic Arithmetic" has supplied me with a great part of the purely arithmetical notions of the Pythagoreans, the elucidation of which was mainly due to him. In conclusion, I request my readers,--

Aut perlege et recte intellige,
 Aut abstine a censura.

W. WYNN WESTCOTT.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION, 1902.

THE first edition of this little book has been long out of print, and for several years I have been asked to enlarge it, but until the present time sufficient leisure has not been found to collect the additional matter which seemed desirable.

This essay on Numbers now appears as Volume IX. of my Series entitled "Collectanea Hermetica," of which it seems to form a suitable part, and I am hopeful that it may be as well received by students of mystic philosophy as the previous volumes which treated of Alchemy, in the Hermetic Arcanum, Hermetic Art, Euphrates and Aesch Metzareph; the Dream of Scipio and the Golden verses of the Pythagoreans, the Pymander of Hermes and Egyptian Magic.

I have added in this edition many notes on the notions of the Rabbis of Israel, both from those who contributed to the Mishnah and Gemara of the Talmuds of Jerusalem and of Babylon, and from the Rabbis who made special study of the Kabalah. Only a few Talmudic treatises have as yet appeared in the English language, and hardly any Kabalistic tracts, except three from the Zohar or Book of Splendour, viz., the Siphra Dtzenioutha, the Idra Rabba and the Idra Suta. A few others are to be read in German and French translations. Many Talmudic and Kabalistic quotations may, however, be found in J. P. Stehelin's Rabbinical Literature of 1748; in John Allen's "Modern

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Judaism," 1816, and in works on the Kabalah by Adolph Franck and Christian Ginsburg, while Hershon has published Hebraic lore in his "Talmudic Miscellany," and "Genesis according to the Talmud."

The "Midrash ha Zohar" of D. H. Joel, Leipzig, 1849, narrates the relation between the Kabalah and Platonism, Neo-Platonism, Greek philosophy and the Zoroastrian doctrines of the Parsees.

Perhaps the oldest extant Kabalistic Book is the "Sepher Yetzirah," or "Book of Formation," an English translation of which has appeared in three editions from the Author's own pen. The fundamentals of the numerical Kabalistic ideas on creation are laid down in that treatise; it has also been printed both in French and German, and there is an American edition.

Upon the mathematical aspect of Numbers, readers may consult for further detail the works of Gauss, "Disquisitiones Arithmeticae," 1801; Legendre, "Theorie des Nombres," 1830; W. G. O. Smith, "Reports on the Theory of Numbers," in the "Transactions of the British Association," 1859; James Ozanam, "Mathematical Recreations," 1710, translated by Hutton in 1814; Snart, "The Power of Numbers"; and Barlow's "Investigations of the Theory of Numbers."

For further information on Hindoo philosophy, see "The Theosophical Glossary" of H. P. Blavatsky, the works of Tukaram Tatya, and modern translations of the Vedas, Puranas and Upanishads, also Rama Prasad's "Nature's Finer Forces."

"Lamaism in Tibet," 1895, by Dr Laurence Austine Waddell, is a very learned work; it contains a vast store of information on the numerical occult lore of the Lamas and Buddhists.

Upon Egyptian Numbers consult the works of E. A. Wallis Budge; Flinders Petrie; Sir John Gardner Wilkinson; "Life in Ancient Egypt," by Adolf Erman; and "Egyptian Belief," by James Bonwick. Mystics will find much food for thought in the Yi-King, a very curious product of ancient Chinese lore. The Gnostic philosophy

[p. 9]

has a deep numerical basis, and the works of C. W. King and G. R. S. Mead may be suitably studied.

Many volumes of "Bijou Notes and Queries" have been published by S. C. Gould of Manchester, U.S.A., and these are full of numerical ideas.

I am prepared to find that critics will declare this volume to be an undigested collection of heterogeneous information, still I prefer to leave the data in their present form; for there is a scheme of instruction running through it, which will be recognised by students of certain schools, and others will be able to find a basis for a general knowledge of numbers viewed from the standpoint of occult science.

W. W. W.

  

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION, 1911.

A FEW corrections have been made, and interesting notes have been added; many of these have been supplied by my pupils and fellow-students of the Rosicrucian Society.

W. W. W.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10] [p. 11]

  

NUMBERS

  

THEIR OCCULT POWER AND MYSTIC VIRTUES

  

PART I.

  

PYTHAGORAS, HIS TENETS AND HIS FOLLOWERS.

PYTHAGORAS, one of the greatest philosophers of ancient Europe, was the son of Mnesarchus, an engraver. He was born about the year 580 B.C., either at Samos, an island in the Aegean Sea, or, as some say, at Sidon in Phoenicia. Very little is known of his early life, beyond the fact that he won prizes for feats of agility at the Olympic Games. Having attained manhood and feeling dissatisfied with the amount of knowledge to be gained at home, he left his native land and spent many years in travel, visiting in turn most of the great centres of Learning. History narrates that his pilgrimage in search of wisdom extended to Egypt, Hindostan, Persia, Crete and Palestine, and that he gathered from each country fresh stores of information, and succeeded in becoming well acquainted with the Esoteric Wisdom as well as with the popular exoteric knowledge of each.

He returned with his mind well stored and his judgment matured, to his home, intending to open there a College of learning, but this he found to be impracticable owing to the opposition of its turbulent ruler Polycrates. Failing in

[p. 12]

this design, he migrated to Crotona, a noted city in Magna Graecia, which was a colony founded by Dorians on the South coast of Italy. It was here that this ever-famous Philosopher founded his College or Society of Students, which became known all over the civilized world as the central assembly of the learned of Europe; and here it was in secret conclave that Pythagoras taught that occult wisdom which he had gathered from the Gymnosophists and Brahmins of India, from the Hierophants of Egypt, the Oracle of Delphi, the Idaean cave, and from the Kabalah of the Hebrew Rabbis and Chaldean Magi. For nearly forty years he taught his pupils, and exhibited his wonderful powers; but an end was put to his institution, and he himself was forced to flee from the city, owing to a conspiracy and rebellion which arose on account of a quarrel between the people of Crotona and the inhabitants of Sybaris: he succeeded in reaching Metapontum, where he is said to have died about the year 500 B.C.

Among the ancient authors from whom we derive our knowledge of the life and doctrines of Pythagoras and his successors, the following are notable:--

B.C. 450.--Herodotus, who speaks of the mysteries of the Pythagoreans as similar to those of Orpheus.

B.C. 394.--Archytas of Tarentum, who left a fragment upon Pythagorean Arithmetic.

B.C. 380.--Theon of Smyrna.

B.C. 370.--Philolaus. From three books of this author it is believed that Plato compiled his book Timaeus; he was probably the first who committed to writing the doctrines of Pythagoras.

B.C. 322.--Aristotle. Refer to his "Metaphysica," "Moralia Magna," and "Nicomachean Ethics." Nicomachus of Stagyra was his father.

B.C. 276.--Eratosthenes, author of a work entitled "Kokkinon" or "Cribrum," a "Sieve to separate Prime from Composite Numbers."

B.C. 40.--Cicero. Refer to his works "De Finibus" and "De natura Deorum."

[p. 13]

50 A.D.--Nicomachus of Gerasa; Treatises on Arithmetic and Harmony.

300 A.D.--Porphyry of Tyre, a great philosopher, sometimes named in Syriac, Melekh or King, was the pupil of Longinus and Plotinus.

340 A.D.--Jamblicus wrote "De mysteriis," "De vita Pythagorica," "The Arithmetic of Nicomachus of Gerasa," and "The Theological Properties of Numbers."

450 A.D.--Proclus, in his commentary on the "Works and Days" of Hesiod, gives information concerning the Pythagorean views of numbers.

560 A.D.--Simplicius of Cilicia, a contemporary of Justinian.

850 A.D.--Photius of Constantinople has left a Bibliotheca of the ideas of the older philosophers.

Coming down to more recent times, the following authors should be consulted:--Meursius, Johannes, 1620; Meibomius, Marcus, 1650; and Kircher, Athanasius, 1660. They collected and epitomized all that was extant of previous authors concerning the doctrines of the Pythagoreans. The first eminent follower of Pythagoras was Aristaeus, who married Theano, the widow of his master: next followed Mnesarchus, the son of Pythagoras; and later Bulagoras, Tidas, and Diodorus the Aspendian. After the original school was dispersed, the chief instructors became Clinias and Philolaus at Heraclea; Theorides and Eurytus at Metapontum; and Archytas, the sage of Tarentum.

The school of Pythagoras had several peculiar characteristics. Every new member was obliged to pass a period of five years of contemplation in perfect silence; the members held everything in common, and rejected animal food; they were believers in the doctrine of metempsychosis, and were inspired with an ardent and implicit faith in their founder and teacher. So much did the element of faith enter into their training, that "autos epha"--"He said it"--was to them complete proof. Intense fraternal affection between the pupils was also a marked feature of the school; hence their

[p. 14]

saying, "my friend is my other self," has become a by-word to this day. The teaching was in a great measure secret, and certain studies and knowledge were allotted to each class and grade of instruction: merit and ability alone sufficed to enable anyone to pass to the higher classes and to a knowledge of the more recondite mysteries. No person was permitted to commit to writing any tenet, or secret doctrine, and, so far as is known, no pupil ever broke the rule until after his death and the dispersion of the school.

We are thus entirely dependent on the scraps of information which have been handed down to us from his successors, and from his and their critics. A considerable amount of uncertainty, therefore, is inseparable from any consideration of the real doctrines of Pythagoras himself, but we are on surer ground when we investigate the opinions of his followers.

It is recorded that his instruction to his followers was formulated into two great divisions--the science of numbers and the theory of magnitude. The former division included two branches, arithmetic and musical harmony; the latter was further subdivided into the consideration of magnitude at rest--geometry, and magnitude in motion--astronomy.

The most striking peculiarities of his doctrines are dependent on the mathematical conceptions, numerical ideas, and impersonations upon which his philosophy was founded.

The principles governing Numbers were supposed to be the principles of all Real Existences; and as Numbers are the primary constituents of Mathematical Quantities, and at the same time present many analogies to various realities, it was further inferred that the elements of Numbers were the elements of Realities. To Pythagoras himself it is believed that the natives of Europe owe the first teaching of the properties of Numbers, of the principles of music, and of physics; but there is evidence that he had visited Central Asia, and there had acquired the mathematical ideas which form the basis of his doctrine. The modes of thought introduced by Pythagoras, and followed by his successor Jamblicus and others, became known later on

[p. 15]

by the titles of the "Italian school," or the "Doric school."

The followers of Pythagoras delivered their knowledge to pupils, fitted by selection and by training to receive it, in secret; but to others by numerical and mathematical names and notions. Hence they called forms, numbers; a point, the monad; a line, the dyad; a superficies, the triad; and a solid, the tetrad.

Intuitive knowledge was referred to the Monad type.

Reason and causation " " Dyad type.

Imagination (form or rupa) " " Triad type.

Sensation of material objects " " Tetrad type.

Indeed, they referred every object, planet, man, idea and essence to some number or other, in a way which to most moderns must seem curious and mystical in the highest degree.

"The numerals of Pythagoras," says Porphyry, who lived about 300 A. D., "were hieroglyphic symbols, by means whereof he explained all ideas concerning the nature of things," and the same method of explaining the secrets of nature is once again being insisted upon in the new revelation of the "Secret Doctrine," by H. P. Blavatsky.

"Numbers are a key to the ancient views of cosmogony--in its broad sense, spiritually as well as physically considered, and to the evolution of the present human race; all systems of religious mysticism are based upon numerals. The sacredness of numbers begins with the Great First Cause, the One, and ends only with the nought or zero--symbol of the infinite and boundless universe." "Isis Unveiled," vol. ii. 407.

Tradition narrates that the students of the Pythagorean school, at first classed as Exoterici or Auscultantes, listeners, were privileged to rise by merit and ability to the higher grades of Genuini, Perfecti, Mathematici or the most coveted title of Esoterici.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

  

PART II.

  

PYTHAGOREAN VIEWS ON NUMBERS.

THE foundation of Pythagorean Mathematics was as follows:

The first natural division of Numbers is into EVEN and ODD, an EVEN number being one which is divisible into two equal parts, without leaving a monad between them. The ODD number, when divided into two equal parts, leaves the monad in the middle between the parts.

All even numbers also (except the dyad--two--which is simply two unities) may be divided into two equal parts, and also into two unequal parts, yet so that in neither division will either parity be mingled with imparity, nor imparity with parity. The binary number two cannot be divided into two unequal parts.

Thus io divides into 5 and 5, equal parts, also into 3 and 7, both imparities, and into 6 and 4, both parities; and 8 divides into 4 and 4, equals and parities, and into 5 and 3, both imparities.

But the ODD number is only divisible into uneven parts, and one part is also a parity and the other part an imparity; thus 7 into 4 and 3, or 5 and 2, in both cases unequal, and odd and even.

The ancients also remarked the monad to be "odd," and to be the first "odd number," because it cannot be divided into two equal numbers. Another reason they saw was that the monad, added to an even number, became an odd number, but if evens are added to evens the result is an even number.

[p. 17]

Aristotle, in his Pythagoric treatise, remarks that the monad partakes also of the nature of the even number, because when added to the odd it makes the even, and added to the even the odd is formed.

Hence it is called "evenly odd." Archytas of Tarentum was of the same opinion.

The Monad, then, is the first idea of the odd number; and so the Pythagoreans speak of the "two" as the "first idea of the indefinite dyad," and attribute the number 2 to that which is indefinite, unknown, and inordinate in the world; just as they adapt the monad to all that is definite and orderly. They noted also that in the series of numbers from unity, the terms are increased each by the monad once added, and so their ratios to each other are lessened; thus 2 is 1 + 1, or double its predecessor; 3 is not double 2, but 2 and the monad, sesquialter; 4 to 3 is 3 and the monad, and the ratio is sesquitertian; the sesquiquintan 6 to 5 is less also than its forerunner, the sesquiquartan 5 and 4, and so on through the series.

They also noted that every number is one half of the total of the numbers about it, in the natural series; thus 5 is half of 6 and 4. And also of the sum of the numbers again above and below this pair; thus 5 is also half of 7 and 3, and so on till unity is reached; for the monad alone has not two terms, one below and one above; it has one above it only, and hence it is said to be the "source of all multitude."

"Evenly even" is another term applied anciently to one sort of even numbers. Such are those which divide into two equal parts, and each part divides evenly, and the even division is continued until unity is reached; such a number is 64. These numbers form a series, in a duple ratio from unity; thus 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32. "Evenly odd," applied to an even number, points out that like 6, so, 14, and 28, when divided into two equal parts, these are found to be indivisible into equal parts. A series of these numbers is formed by doubling the items of a series of odd numbers, thus:

1, 3, 5, 7, 9 produce 2, 6, 10, 14, 18.

[p. 18]

Unevenly even numbers may be parted into two equal divisions, and these parts again equally divided, but the process does not proceed until unity is reached; such numbers are 24 and 28.

Odd numbers also are susceptible of being looked upon from three points of view, thus:

"First and incomposite"; such are 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 19, 23, 29, 31; no other number measures them but unity; they are not composed of other numbers, but are generated from unity alone.

"Second and composite" are indeed "odd," but contain and are composed from other numbers; such are 9, 15, 21, 25, 27, 33, and 39. These have parts which are denominated from a foreign number, or word, as well as proper unity, thus 9 has a third part which is 3; 15 has a third part which is 5; and a fifth part 3; hence as containing a foreign part, it is called second, and as containing a divisibility, it is composite.

The Third Variety of odd numbers is more complex, and is of itself second and composite, but with reference to another is first and incomposite; such are 9 and 25. These are divisible, each of them that is second and composite, yet have no common measure; thus 3 which divides the 9 does not divide the 25.

Odd numbers are sorted out into these three classes by a device, called the "Sieve of Eratosthenes," which is of too complex a nature to form part of a monograph so discursive as this must be.

Even numbers have also been divided by the ancient sages into Perfect, Deficient and Superabundant.

Superperfect or Superabundant are such as 12 and 24.

Deficient are such as 8 and 14.

Perfect are such as 6 and 28; equal to the number of their parts; as 28--half is 14, a fourth is 7, a seventh is 4, a fourteenth part is 2, and the twenty-eighth is 1, which quotients added together are 28.

In Deficient numbers, such as 14, the parts are surpassed

[p. 19]

by the whole: one seventh is 2, a half is 7, a fourteenth is 1; the aggregate is 10, or less than 14.

In Superabundant, as 12, the whole surpasses the aggregate of its parts; thus the sixth is 2, a fourth is 3, a third is 4, a half is 6, and a twelfth is 1; and the aggregate is 16, or more than 12.

Superperfect numbers they looked on as similar to Briareus, the hundred-handed giant: his parts were too numerous; the deficient numbers resembled Cyclops, who had but one eye; whilst the perfect numbers have the temperament of a middle limit, and are the emulators of Virtue, a medium between excess and defect, not the summit, as some ancients falsely thought.

Evil is indeed opposed to evil, but both to one good. Good, however, is never opposed to good, but to two evils.

The Perfect numbers are also like the virtues, few in number; whilst the other two classes are like the vices--numerous, inordinate, and indefinite.

There is but one perfect number between 1 and 10, that is 6; only one between 10 and 100, that is 28; only one between 100 and 1000, that is 496; and between 1000 and 10,000 only one, that is 8128.

Odd numbers they called Gnomons, because, being added to squares, they keep the same figures as in Geometry: see Simplicius, liber 3.

A number which is formed by the multiplication of an odd and an even number together they called Hermaphrodite, or "arrenothelus."

In connection with these notes on parity and imparity, definite and indefinite numbers, it is to be noted that the old philosophers were deeply imbued with the union of numerical ideas with Nature--in its common acceptation, and also to the natures, essences or substrata of things.

The nature of good to them was definite, that of evil indefinite; and the more indefinite the nature of the evil, the worse it was. Goodness alone can define or bound the indefinite. In the human soul exists a certain vestige of

[p. 20]

divine goodness (Buddhi); this bounds and moderates the indefiniteness and inequality of its desires.

It may be demonstrated that all inequality arises from equality, so that obtaining, as it were, the power of a mother and a root, she pours forth with exuberant fertility all sorts of inequality; and did space and time allow, it could be also shown that all inequality may be reduced to equality.

Iamblichus, in his treatise on the Arithmetic of Nicomachus, throws another light on numbers; he says some are like friends, they are Amicable numbers, as 284 and 220.

Pythagoras, being asked what a friend was, said eteros egu = "another I." Now this is demonstrated to be the case in these numbers; the parts of each are generative of each other, according to the nature of friendship.

Ozanam, a French mathematician, A.D. 1710, gives examples in his "Mathematical Recreations" of such Amicable Numbers. He remarks that 220 is equal to the sum of the aliquot parts of 284; thus 1 + 2 + 4 + 71 + 142 = 220: and 284 is equal to the sum of the aliquot parts of 220; thus 1 + 2 + 4 + 5 + 10 + 11 + 20 + 22 + 44 + 55 + 110 = 284.

Another such pair of numbers are 17,296 and 18,416.

Very curious speculations as to the relation between Numbers and marriage, and the character of offspring from it, are to be found scattered through the writings of the Philosophers. Plato, in his "Republic," has a passage concerning a geometric number, which, divinely generated, will be fortunate or unfortunate. Nicomachus also speaks of this same number, and he calls it the Nuptial Number; and he passes from it to state that from two good parents only good offspring can come; from two bad parents only bad; and from a good and a bad parent only bad; whence he warns the Republic against wedlock in a confused or disorderly manner, from which, the progeny being depraved, discord will result. Simplicius, in his commentary on the 2nd Book of Aristotle, "On the Heavens," remarks that Pythagoras and his followers claimed to have heard the Music of the Spheres, to have heard an harmonic sound produced by the motion of the planets, and from the sound

[p. 21]

to have calculated by numbers the ratio of distance and size of the Sun, Moon, Venus and Mercury. To this Aristotle objected, but perhaps the difficulty might be solved: in this sublunary sphere all things are not commensurate, nor is everything sensible to every body alike. Animals can be scented, and their presence definitely known, by dogs when at great distances from them, and when man is in complete ignorance of their existence. Some of the ancients thought the soul had three vehicles--the terrestrial body, an aerial one in which it is punished, and an ethereal one, luminous and celestial, in which the soul abides when in a state of bliss. It may be that some one, by purification of the senses, by hereditary magical power, or by probity, or by the sacred operations of his religion, may perceive, with a terrestrial body laid aside, things imperceptible to us, and hear sounds inaudible to us still in bondage; or with mantle partly unfolded, some adept or truth-seeker may perceive, with eyes upraised, sights invisible to mortals, whilst yet his ears are deaf to the sounds beyond us both. For why do we see the stars, while yet we hear not their motion:

Why come not angels from the realms of glory
 To visit earth, as in the days of old?
 Is heaven more distant
 Or has earth grown cold?

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

PART III.

  

THE KABALAH ON NUMBERS.

MANY nations of antiquity made use of the letters of their alphabets as substitutes for any independent signs to typify numerical conceptions. It is with the Hebrew letters as numerals that we are chiefly concerned, and to a smaller extent with the Greek. Ancient records show that the Greeks used their numbers almost exclusively for everyday purposes; while the Jewish Rabbis added to their practical value special peculiar purposes, and looked to them to furnish deeper views of nature, existence and doctrine. No doubt can exist that the ancient Egyptians were fully aware of the wondrous mysteries which numbers are able to disclose, so, considering that Greece, and neither Judea nor Babylon, succeeded to the empires of ancient Egypt, it is a curious fact how little knowledge of the dogmas of the Hierophants of Sais, Memphis and Thebes Greek literature has transmitted to us.

The Jewish Rabbis discovered so much of interest and importance behind the merely superficial value of numbers, and of words as their representatives, that they gradually developed a complete science of numerical conceptions apart from mathematics; this took the name of Kabalah or Qabalah, Cabbala, or even Cabala, words variously misspelt from QBLH--the Received doctrine, from the root QBL, meaning to Receive.

The Greeks as aforesaid did not develop nor use their letters as numbers for mental conceptions, yet in the Middle

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Ages we often find Greek letters used to transliterate Hebrew similars, and so there was formed a bastard Greek Kabalah on the Hebrew type.

It must be constantly borne in mind that all Hebrew words or numbers are read from right to left, or the reverse of English words; but in their English transliteration they are here in English order.

The corresponding numerals, Greek and Hebrew letters, are here given with their English names, and the English synonymous letters are also added.

          A

       B

       G

       D

       H

       U or V

       Z

     
      Aleph

       Beth

       Gimel

       Daleth

       Heh

       Vau

       Zain

     
      `

       b

       g

       d

       h

       w

       z

     
      1

       2

       3

       4

       5

       6

       7

     
      Alpha

       Beta

       Gamma

       Delta

       Epsilon

       Episemon

       Zeta

     
      a

       b

       g

       d

       e

       s

       z

     
       

        

        

        

        

        

        

     
      Ch

       Th

       Y or I or J

       K

       L

       M

       N

     
      Heth

       Teth

       Yod

       Kaph

       Lamed

       Mem

       Nun

     
      ch

       t

       y

       k

       l

       m

       n

     
      8

       9

       10

       20

       30

       40

       50

     
      Eta

       Theta

       Iota

       Kappa

       Lambda

       Mu

       Nu

     
      e

       th

       i

       k

       l

       m

       n

     
       

        

        

        

        

        

        

     
      S

       O

       P

       Tz

       Q

       R

        

     
      Samekh

       Ayin

       Peh

       Tzaddi

       Qoph

       Resh

        

     
      s

       `

       p

       tz

       q

       r

        

     
      60

       70

       80

       90

       100

       200

        

     
      Xi

       Omicron

       Pi

       Koppa

       Rho

       Sigma

        

     
      x

       o

       p

       q

       s or s

        

        

     
       

        

        

        

        

        

        

     
      [p. 24]

        

        

        

        

        

        

     
      Sh

       T

       K

       M

       N

        

        

     
      Shin

       Tau

       Final

       Kaph

       Final Mem

       Final Nun

        

     
      sh

       th

       k

       m

       n

        

        

     
      300

       400

       500

       600

       700

        

        

     
      Tau

       Upsilon

       Phi

       Chi

       Psi

        

        

     
      t

       y

       f

       x

       ps

        

        

     
       

        

        

        

        

        

        

     
      P

       Tz

        

        

        

        

        

     
      Final Peh

       Final Tzaddi

       Dotted Aleph

        

        

        

        

     
      800

       900

       1000

        

        

        

        

     
      Omega

       Sanpi

       Alpha dashed

        

        

        

        

     
      u

       ###992###

       ai

        

        

        

        

     
   Note that there were no proper Greek Letters for 6, 90, and 900, so they used special symbols--episemon (vau, or bau, digamma) for 6; koppa for 90; and sanpi for 900--s q ###992###).

At some periods the five finals were not used for the hundreds, but instead Tau was written for 400 and other hundreds added; thus 500 was TQ. Another point of importance is that the Jews never write JH Jah for 15, because it is a Deity title, they use instead 9, 6 thus TV, teth vau. The Kabalists used JH only when they desired to call attention to the Holy Name in the number.

In certain Kabalistic numerical computations many Rabbis deemed it permissible to add an Aleph, one, and this they called the Colel.

In some cases we find the Greeks to have used their letters in direct order for purposes of numeration, as may be seen in some copies of very old poems (the 24 books of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, for example), in which the stanzas bear the letters consecutively, in a similar manner to the Hebrew letters heading the portions of the 119th Psalm in our Bibles.

The word Kabalah includes the Hebrew Doctrines of Cosmogony and Theology as well as the Science of

[p. 25]

[paragraph continues] Numbers. The former is specified as the Dogmatic Kabalah, the latter as the Literal Kabalah.

By means of associating the ancient doctrines of Numbers with the letters of the alphabet, the Planets, Stars, Zodiacal signs and other astronomical terms, a form of divination became practised, by which the professors attempted to foretell the future, life and death, good and evil Fortune, detection of theft, etc., an ample explanation of which may be studied by the curious in the "Holy Guide" of John Heydon.

With this system is associated the practice of pure Astrology, the divination of Fate by means of the Heavenly bodies, especially the formation of the so-called Horoscopes--schemes of the arrangement of the Planets at the moment of Birth, from which all the important phases of the life can be inferred--by some few persons. The Kabalah became a means of handing down from one generation to another hidden truths, religious notions, secrets of nature, ideas of Cosmogony, and facts of history, in a form which was unintelligible to the uninitiated; and the revealing of the secrets, and the methods of interpretation were veiled in mystery, and only to be approached through Religion.

The more practical part of the system was involved in the three processes of:--

GEMATRIA, NOTARICON, and TEMURA.

Gematria, a method depending on the fact that each Hebrew letter had a numerical value. When the sum of the numbers of the letters composing a word was the same as the sum of the letters of another word, however different, they perceived an analogy between them, and considered them to have a necessary connection. Thus certain numbers got to be well known as meaning certain things; and not words only, but sentences were treated in this manner; thus, as an example referring to Genesis xviii. v. 2, we find the words, "and lo, three men," Vehennah, shalisha, VHNH SHLSHH; this set down in numbers becomes 6, 5, 50, 5, 300, 30, 300, 5, which amount to 701: now the words, "these are Michael, Gabriel, and Raphael,"

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] "Alu Mikhael Gabriel ve Raphael," ALU MIKAL GBRIAL V RPAL converted are, 1, 30, 6, 40, 10, 20, 1, 30, 3, 2, 200, 10, 1, 30, 6, 200, 80, 1, 30, also amounting to 701, and the Rabbis argued that these two sets of three beings were identical. Some Christian Kabalists point out that in Genesis xlix. v. 10 we find "Yebah Shiloh," YBA SHILH, "Shiloh shall come," which amount to 358; and that the word "Messiah," MShVCh is 40, 300, to, 8, or 358; but so is also Nachash, the Serpent of Moses, NChSh, 50, 8, 300; and I must remark that the claim to translate ShILh, or, as some ancient Hebrew MSS. write it, ShLh, by "Shiloh," in the sense of Jesus Christ, is far-fetched. The word is simply "rest," or "peace," in its simplest meaning, but also is the Scorpio of the Chaldean zodiac (related to Nachash, serpent); and "Judah," of whom Jacob is talking in the prophecy, is the sign of the zodiac; Leo for "Judah is a lion's whelp" (the Chaldean zodiac has a lion couchant), "he crouches as a lion." In this sense, then, "the sceptre shall not depart from Judah," i.e., power shall not leave Leo, until Shelah, Shiloh or Scorpio shall come up or rise. Astronomy teaches that as Leo passes away from the meridian, Scorpio rises. The title "Comforter," "Menachem," MNChM, 40, 50, 8, 40, amounting to 138, and the title "The Branch," applied to the Messiah in Zechariah iii. v. 8, namely, TzMCh, 90, 40, 8, also 138, are of the same number. Metatron, the great angel MThRThN, and ShADDAI ShDI, translated "Almighty," are both 314. The letter Shin, Sh, = 300, is used as a glyph of "the spirit of the living gods," Ruach Elohim RUCh ALhIM, which transmutes into 200, 6, 8, 1, 30, 5, 10, 40, or 300.

The Kabalists sometimes considered the units to refer to Divine Beings, the tens to celestial bodies, hundreds to things of earth, and thousands to future events.

Notaricon, a word derived from the Latin notarius, a shorthand writer, means the construction of a word from the initial or final letters of the several words of a sentence; or vice versa the construction of a sentence of which each word

[p. 27]

in order begins with the several letters composing a given word: processes of contraction and expansion, therefore.

Refer to Deuteronomy xxx. V. 12, and find that Moses asks, "Who shall go up for us to heaven?" the initials of the words of the sentence, MY YOLh LNU HShMYMH, read "My yeolah lenu hashemimha," form the word MYLH or "Mylah," which means "Circumcision," and the final letters form the word Jehovah, YHUH or IHVH, suggesting that Jehovah pointed out the way, by circumcision, to heaven. Again the first six letters of the book of Genesis, BRAShIT, Berasit, translated "In the beginning," but more properly "In wisdom," are the initials of the words BRAShIT RAH ALHIM ShYQBLU IShRAL TURH, read "Berasit rauah Elohim shyequebelu Israel torah," which mean "In the beginning, God saw that Israel would accept the Law."

The famous Rabbinic name of power, "AGLA," is formed of the initials of the sentence, "Tu potens in saeculum Domine," ATH GBUR LOULM ADNI, Ateh gibur loulam Adonai. The word "Amen" is from AMN, the initials of "Adonai melekh namen," ADNI MLK NAMN, meaning "The Lord and Faithful King."

Temura means Permutation; sometimes the letters of a word are transposed according to certain rules, and with certain limitations; at others each letter of a word is replaced by another according to a definite scheme, forming a new word, of which permutation there are many recognised forms. For example, the alphabet of 22 letters is halved and the two sets placed one over the other in reverse order, thus:--

          A

       B

       G

       D

       H

       V

       Z

       Ch

       Th

       Y

       K

     
      T

       Sh

       R

       Q

       Tz

       P

       O

       S

       N

       M

       L

     
   then A is changed to T, and V to P, and so on; so Babel = BBL becomes Sheshak, i.e., ShShx used by Jeremiah xxv. v. 26. This form is called Atbash or AT-BSh; it will be seen that there must be 21 other possible forms, and these were named in order, thus, Albat, Agdat, etc.; the complete set was called "the combinations of Tziruph." Other Permutations were named Rational, Right, Averse

[p. 28]

and Irregular; these are produced by forming a square and subdividing it by 21 lines in each direction into 484 smaller squares, and then writing in each square a letter in order successively from right to left, or from above down, or the reverse. The most popular mode of permutation has however been the form called "Kabalah of the Nine Chambers," produced by the intersection of two horizontal and two vertical lines, forming nine spaces, a central square, and 4 three-sided figures, and 4 two-sided figures, to each of which are allotted certain letters; there are several modes even of this arrangement, and there is a mystical mode of allotting the Sephiroth to this figure, but this is a Rosicrucian secret.

This method is used in a superficial manner in Mark Master Masonry.

A further development of the Numerical Kabalah consists of arithmetical processes of Extension and Contraction; thus Tetragrammaton is considered as Y 10, H 5, V 6, H 5, or 26, but also may be spelled in full YVD 20, HA 6, VV 12, HA 6, or 44.

Again, the Kabalists extended a number by series. Zain Z or 7 becomes 1 and 2 and 3 and 4 and 5 and 6 and 7, or 28. After another manner they contracted, as 28 was equal to 2 and 8, or ro. Again, Tetragrammaton 26 became 2 and 6, or 8, so every number was reducible to a primary numeral. In this manner, within certain restrictive laws, every word had analogies with certain others; thus AB father 1 and 2 are 3, IHV Jehu 10 and 5 and 6 are 21, 2 and 1 are 3. AL ShDI, Al Shaddai, God Almighty, 1, 30, 300, 4, 10, or 345, becomes 12, and then 2 and 1 are 3; HVA or HOA 5, 6, 1, are 12, and then 3; and GDVLH Gedulah 3, 4, 6, 30, 5 are 48, and are 12 and 3.

Another method of substitution leading to results of an opposite character is the substitution in any word of similar letters of another group, hard for soft, or sibilant for dental; thus in TM = perfect, exchange Th for T, and obtain ThM, meaning defiled: ShAN, secure, tranquil, becomes SAN, battle; ShKL, wisdom, becomes SKL, foolish. In the word Shaddai, Sher, Almighty, with soft sibilant and soft

[p. 29]

dental is Shiddah, a wife; if we replace with a hard dental, a partial change of meaning is effected, ShThH, Sittah, an adulterous wife; both letters hardened completely change the sense, STh, Seth, a fallen man, a backslider; SThN, Satan, adversary.

I cannot, without Hebrew letters, explain well the change of sound in the Shin SH, from SH to S, but it is marked by a dot over the right or left tooth of the three teeth of the letter.

A deep mystery is concealed in the Genetic account of the conversion of the names of Abram, ABRM, into Abraham, ABRHM, and that of his wife Sarai, ShRI, into Sarah, SHRH, see Genesis xvii. v. 5-15, on the occasion of the conception of Isaac, YTZChQ or YShChQ, from the root ShChQ or TzChQ, "laugh," when Sarah was 90 and Abraham 100 years old. This was on the occasion of the covenant made by Jehovah with Abram, and the institution of circumcision of males in token thereof. Now here we have the addition of an H or 5, the essentially Female Letter, to the name of Abraham, and a conversion of a Yod into He, Y into H, in the case of Sarah; and then their sterility is destroyed.

Some learned men consider Abraham to be a conversion of Brahma, the Hindoo Deity. The name splits up curiously. AB is father, BR is son, AM is like OM or AUM, a deific name of Power; RM meant "he is lifted up." Blavatsky remarks that Abraham and Saturn were identical in Astro-symbology; the Father of the Pharisees was Jehovah, and they were of the seed of Abraham.

The number of ABRM is 1, 2, 200, 40 or 243, the number of the man figure, Seir Anpin, representing Microprosopus.

Read Pistorius, "Ars Cabalistica," for the effect of adding H 5 to men's names, see page 969; also Inman, "Ancient Faiths," article Abraham; "Secret Doctrine," i. 578, ii. 77; also C. W. King, "The Gnostics."

The name Sarah also has a curious set of similars in Hebrew--SRH, princess; SAR, flesh; SOR, gate; SChR, black; SUR, hairy seir; SRT, incision; SR and SRR, navel;

[p. 30]

and note the Sacti of Brahma is Sara-swati, watery; Sara refers to SRI, Lakhsmi, Aphrodite, and all are related to Water and Luna, Vach, Sophia of the Gnostics, and the ideal Holy Ghost, all feminine.

The 243 of Abram becomes 248 by adding H, and Sarai 510 becomes 505 by taking 5 off, putting H for Y, and the total of the two names is unaltered, being 753; 248 is the number of the members of Microprosopus and of RChM, rechem or Mercy.

Before leaving this subject, a reference must be made to the Magic Squares, of the Planets, etc.; to each planet belongs a special unit, and secondarily other numbers.

Thus the Square of Saturn has three compartments each way, and in each subdivision is a unit, 1 to 9, so arranged that the columns add up to 15 every way, the total being 45. The Square of Jupiter has a side of four divisions, total 16; each line adds up to 34, and the total is 136.

The Square of Mars is given here as an example, each side 5, total squares 25, each side counting 65, and total 325.

          11

       24

       7

       20

       3

     
      4

       12

       25

       8

       16

     
      17

       5

       13

       21

       9

     
      10

       18

       1

       14

       22

     
      23

       6

       19

       2

       15

     
   Similarly the four several numbers of Sol are 6, 36, 111, 666. Of Venus, 7, 49, 175, 1225. Of Mercury, 8, 64, 260, 2080.

Of Luna, 9, 81, 369, 3321. Each number then becomes a name. Take the case of Mercury; 64 is alike DIN and DNI, Din and Doni; 260 is Tiriel, TIRIAL; and 2080 is Taphthartharath, TPTRTRT.

Rawlinson, in his volumes on the Ancient Monarchies, states that the Chaldeans associated mystic numbers with their Deities; thus to Anu, Pluto, 60; Bel, Jupiter, 50; Hoa,

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Neptune, 40; Sin, the Moon, 30; Shamash, the Sun, 20; Nergal (Mars), 12; and Beltis or Mylitta, 15; and Nin is Saturn, 10.

It will be noticed that the great number of Sol is 666, called Sorath, SURT, the number of the Beast, about which so much folly has been written. One famous square of five times five divisions, amounting in most directions to 666, is formed of the mystic words sator, arepo, tenet, opera, rotas. Of these the first, third, and last number 666, but opera and its reverse number only 356. The number 608 is notable, being in Coptic, PhRE, the sun 500, 100, 8; and in Greek we find VHS, 400, 8, 200, which becomes IHS in Latin, for the Greek Upsilon changes to Y and I in Latin, and so we obtain the anagram of "Iesus hominum Salvator."

Kircher points out a Greek example of magic squares; the names Jesus and Mary, and IESOUS MARIA have a curious relation. Iesous is 10, 8, 200, 70, 400, 200 = 888. Now take Maria, 40, 1, 100, 10, 1 = 152. Set 152 in a Magic Square of Three, i.e., nine compartments, thus, 1--5--2, 5--2--1, 2--1--5, then the totals are all 888. The letters of Iesous also make a magic square of 36 divisions, adding every way to 888. Consult the "Arithmologia" of Kircher.

Remember "illius meminit Sybilla de nomina ejus vaticinando," "onoma Sou monades, dekades, ekaton tades okto," or "nomen tuum 8 unitates, 8 denarii, 8 centenarii."--See St. Augustine, De Civitate Dei.

Note the mystic word Abraxas is 1, 2, 100, 1, 60, 1, 200 = 365 in Greek letters.

As a curiosity, note that the Roman X for 10 is two V's, which are each 5; C, or, squarely drawn, , for 100 consists of two L's which are each 50. Priscian says I for 1 was taken from i in the middle of the Greek mia, female of eis, 1, and V for 5 because it was the fifth vowel. To remember Hebrew numerals note A, I, Q = 1, 10, 100; and in Greek A, I, R, A= 1, 10, 100, 1,000.

According to "The Canon," of 1897, an anonymous work,

[p. 32]

a Vesica piscis (the figure formed by the intersection of two equal circles) whose dimensions are 26 and 15, is a symbol of the hidden rule or canon by which Natural laws were represented to Initiates in the secret wisdom of the Ancient Mysteries. The Greek gods Zeus, Jupiter and Apollo, the Sun god, have the same numerical relation.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

PART IV.

  

THE INDIVIDUAL NUMERALS.

  

THE MONAD. 1.

THE number One or the Monad has been defined by the mathematician Theon of Smyrna as "the principal and element of numbers, which while multitute can be lessened by subtraction, is itself deprived of every number and remains stable and firm"; hence as number it is indivisible, it remains immutable, and even multiplied into itself remains itself only, since once one is still one, and the monad multiplied by the monad remains the immutable monad to infinity. It remains by itself among numbers, for no number can be taken from it, or separated from its unity. Proclus observed: "The first monad is the world itself; the second is the inerratic sphere; then thirdly succeed the spheres of the planets, each a unity; then lastly are the spheres of the elements which are also Monads"; and these as they have a perpetual subsistence are called wholenesses--holotetes in Greek.

The Monad, Unity, or the number One received very numerous meanings. Photius tells us that the Pythagoreans gave it the following names:--

1. God, the First of all things, the maker of all things.

2. Intellect, the source of all ideas.

3. Male and Female--both together produce all things; from the odd proceed both odd and even.

4. Matter, the last development of universality.

5. Chaos, which resembles the infinite, indifferentiation.

6. Confusion. 7. Commixion. 8. Obscurity, because

[p. 34]

in the Ineffable principle of things, of which it is the image, all is confused, vague and in darkness.

9. A Chasm, as a void.

10. Tartarus, from its being at the lowest extremity, is dissimilarly similar to God, at the highest end of the series.

11. The Styx, from its immutable nature.

12. Horror, the ineffable, is perfectly unknown and is therefore terrible.

13. Void of Mixture, from the simplicity of the nature of the ineffable.

14. Lethe, oblivion, ignorance.

15. A Virgin, from the purity of its nature.

16. Atlas, it connects, supports, and separates all things.

17. The Sun. 18. Apollo. 19. Pyralios, dweller in fire. 20. Morpho. 21. The Axis. 22. Vesta, or the fire in the centre of the earth. 23. Spermatic Reason. 24. "The point within a circle," "the Central Fire Deity."

The lingam, an upright pillar, was its Hindoo symbol.

The Monad being esteemed the Father of numbers is the reason for the universal prejudice in favour of Odd Numbers over Even ones, which are but copies of the first even number the Dyad, or universal Mother; the father being more esteemed than the mother, for "Might."

Odd numbers were given to the greater Gods, and even ones to the inferior and terrestrial deities.

The number one is represented in the Roman and Arabic systems, by an upright simple line, but in many old systems whose numerals were their letters, we find that almost universally the letter A, from being chosen to commence the set of letters, had the task of representing the Monad.

In Numeration, note that the Romans began with lines, I, II, III, IIII, and then followed the Acute Angle V for 5, then for ten this was doubled X, for fifty the angle was laid down and became L, for a hundred, two fifties, one inverted became C, for five hundred C and L became D.

Hermias, the Christian philosopher, author of "Ridicule of the Gentile Philosophers," quotes from the Pythagoreans;

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] "The Monad is the Beginning of all things"--"arche ton panton he monas."

The figure of one signifies identity, equality, existence and preservation, it signifies living man" alone among animals "erect"; on adding a head we make of it P, the sign of creative Power (paternity, phallus, Pan, the Greek gods and Priapus, all commencing with the vocable P).

Another dash added, and we have man walking, advancing, with foot set forward, in the letter R, which signifies "fens," "iturus," or "advancing."

Compare Unity, solus, alone, the unique principle of good; with Sol, Sun God, the emblem of supreme power; and they are identical.

The Hebrew word for One is AChD, achad, and it is often put for God; God's One voice to man is the Bath Kol, the echo or daughter of the Divine Voice.

The Talmud in Berachoth vi. 1 says that the Shekinah shall rest even upon One who studies the Law. One pang of remorse is of more avail for reformation than many stripes.

One thing obtained with difficulty is more valued than a hundred obtained with ease. Talmud.

It is indiscreet for one man to sleep in a house alone, for fear that he may be attacked by Lilith, who was said to have been Adam's first wife; she is the Night Spectre, and has also power over newly-born infants who are not protected by an Amulet.

Rabbi Nathan exhorted--"Repent One day before thy death"; a wise maxim inculcating the duty of being ever prepared; every day some advance in knowledge and goodness should be attained.

Ever work and ever pray, "for the road winds upward all the way," as the Lord Buddha taught in ancient India.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

THE DYAD. 2.

AS was the case with the Monad so the Dyad also was said to represent a large number of different objects and ideas; things indeed so dissimilar that it is difficult to understand how such multiplicity of opinion arose.

And first it is the general opposite to the Monad, the cause of dissimilitude, the interval between multitude and the Monad. Of figures, those which are characterised by equality and sameness have relation to the Monad; but those in which inequality and difference predominate are allied to the Dyad. Monad and Dyad are also called Bound and Infinity.

1. It was called "Audacity," from its being the earliest number to separate itself from the Divine One; from the "Adytum of God-nourished Silence," as the Chaldean oracles say.

2. It was called "Matter" as being definite and the cause of bulk and division.

3. It is called "the interval between Multitude and the Monad," because it is not yet perfect multitude, but is parturient with it. Of this we see an image in the Dyad of Arithmetic, for, as Proclus observes, "The dyad is the medium between unity and number, for unity by addition produces more than by multiplication, but number by addition produces less than by multiplication; whilst the Dyad, whether added to itself or multiplied by itself, produces the same."

4. "Fountain of Symphony," and "Harmony."

5. Erato, because it attracts the Monad, like Love, and another number is formed.

[p. 37]

6. Patience, because it is the first number that endures separation from the Monad.

7. Phanes, or Intelligible Intellect.

8. It is the fountain of all Female divinities, and hence Nature, Rhea and Isis.

9. Cupid, just as Erato, from desiring its opposite for a partner.

In Astronomy, we speak of 2 nodes, Caput and Cauda Draconis; and in Astrology of 2 aspects of the planets, Benefic and Malefic.

The Two Pillars IKIN and BOZ at the entrance of King Solomon's Temple are notable symbols of Strength and Stability; they are comparable to the Two Beings, Kratos and Bia, who appear in the Play by Aeschylus, as a male and a female potency, who bind Prometheus.

The Chinese speak of Blue as the colour of Heaven, because made up of Red, Male, and Black, Female; of the active and the passive; the brilliant and the obscure.

The followers of Pythagoras spoke of two kinds of enjoyment. First, lasciviousness and indulgence of the belly, like the murderous songs of Sirens; second, honest and just indulgences, which bring on no repentance.

Hierocles says 2 things are necessary to life, the aid of kindred, and benevolent sympathy of one's neighbours.

A notable ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic was formed of two serpents in connection with a globe or egg, representing the world. Another celebrated pair, in connection with worship, is the association of a tree and a serpent, referring as some say to the Mosaic account of the Tree of Knowledge and the Tempter Serpent. Some have supposed that it is only since the condemnation "on thy Belly shalt thou go" that the Serpent has been limbless, and obliged to crawl.

Note, it has been argued, and by a great churchman too, that the whole tale rests on error, and that for serpent we should read "Ape" (Rev. Adam Clarke). This is substituting one error for another.

In the orgies of Bacchus Maenades, the worshippers had

[p. 38]

snakes twined in their hair and danced, singing "Eve, Eve, by whom came the sin." See Clemens Alexandrinus, Protrept. 9.

Duality introduces us to the fatal alternative to Unity or Good, namely EVIL; and to many other human and natural contrasts--night and day, light and darkness, wet and dry, hot and cold, health and disease, truth and error, male and female, which man having fallen from his high estate, from spirit to matter, cannot avoid associating himself with. Two is a number of Mourning and Death, misfortunes are apt to follow; turn to our History of England, see the unhappiness of Kings numbered the second of each name--William II., Edward II., and Richard II. of England were all murdered.

The Romans dedicated the 2nd month to Pluto, God of Hades, and on the 2nd day of it they offered sacrifices to the Manes.

Pope John XIX. instituted the Fete des Trepasses (All Souls' Day) on November 2nd, the second month of Autumn.

The Two Talmuds of the Jews, among other quaint notions, have the following ideas of the number Two.

It is not every man who deserves to have two tables; this meant that very few deserve to have the best of the next life, as well as the good things of this one.

There are two important things; first, that one's bed should be placed north to south, and that one should pray in front of his bed. There are two ways before a man, one leads to Paradise and one to Gai-hinnom, the place of punishment.

There are only two Jewish laws, the written law of Moses, and the oral law of the Kabalah.

Every Jew who goes from the Synagogue to his house on the eve of the Sabbath is accompanied by two angels, one good and one bad, and if the house is all in order the good angel confirms a blessing, but if it be in disorder the good angel has to say Amen to the condemnation spoken by the evil angel.

[p. 39]

Two are better than three; this means youth is better than old age with its staff of support.

There were two women notorious for their pride, and their names were contemptible; Deborah meant wasp, and Hulda weasel. Many persons nowadays believe that birth names somehow affect their owners, as names given are prophetic of the nature and fate of the person.

Speech may be worth one Selah (a Jewish coin), but silence is worth Two.

A certain man had two wives, one young and one old; when he was forty and inclined to become grey, the young one pulled out all the grey hairs, and the old wife pulled out all his black hairs; so he became bald. Which things point a moral as well as adorn a tale.

Given two dry firebrands of wood and one of green, the dry will destroy the green.

Two dogs once killed a lion, so the minority must at last always give way to a majority.

The Talmud argues that Adam had two faces; some say one before and one behind, while others say one looked to right and one to the left. Others say that Adam was both a male and a female. Others say that Eve was made from his thirteenth rib, and was not drawn out from his head, lest she should be vain; not from his eyes, lest she should be wanton; not from his mouth, lest she should talk too much; not from his ears, lest she should be an eavesdropper; not from his feet, lest she should be a gadabout; and not from his heart, lest she should be jealous: yet in spite of all these precautions woman has developed all these faults.

Of two who quarrel, he or she who first gives in shows the noblest nature.

Two negatives or affirmatives are as good as an oath. Shevuoth, 36, 1.

The Twos of the Two Testaments are two Tables of the Law; the Disciples were sent out two and two; two disciples were sent by Jesus to fetch the ass's colt; two to make ready the Passover; two disciples buried Jesus; Caleb and Joshua were the two spies; two angels rescued

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Lot; there were two witnesses of the Resurrection, and two of the Ascension.

The Book of Revelation of St. John the Divine speaks of Two Witnesses, two olive trees and two candlesticks.

If a dream was dreamed two times it foretold a truth; as in Genesis xli., Judges vi., First Book of Kings, chapters ix. and xi.

The animal kingdom shows all sexual generation to arise from pairs of contrasted beings, the male and female; the microscope now discovers to us the spermatozoon and the ovum, but the truth was known of old to philosophers of India, Egypt and the Gnostics, in whose lore we find human generation to spring from the Serpent and the Egg.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

THE TRIAD. 3.

PHOTIUS observes that the Triad is the first odd number in energy, is the first perfect number, and is a middle and analogy.

The Pythagoreans referred it to Physiology; it is the cause of all that has the triple dimension.

It is also the cause of good counsel, intelligence, and knowledge, and is a Mistress of Music, mistress also of Geometry, possesses authority in whatever pertains to Astronomy and the nature and knowledge of the heavenly bodies, connects and leads them into effects.

Every virtue also is suspended from it, and proceeds from it.

In Mythology it is referred by Nicomachus to:

1. Saturn, Time, past, present, and future. 2. Latona. 3. The Horn of Amalthea, the nurse of Jupiter. 4. Polyhymnia, among the Muses.

Number being more increased by multiplication than it is by addition, the number 3 is, properly speaking, the first number, as neither the Dyad nor Monad are so increased.

It is a "Middle and Analogy," because all comparisons consist of three terms, at least; and analogies were called by the ancients "middles."

It was considered the Mistress of Geometry because the triangle is the principal of Figures.

With. regard to the Heavenly bodies, the number Three is important; there are 3 quaternions of the celestial signs, the fixed, the movable, and the common.

In every Zodiacal sign also there are 3 faces, and 3

[p. 42]

decans, and 3 Lords of their Triplicity; and among the planets there are 3 Fortunes and 3 Infortunes; according to the Chaldeans also, there are 3 Ethereal words prior to the sphere of our Fixed Stars.

On account of the perfection of the Triad, oracles were delivered from a Tripod, as is related of the Oracle at Delphi.

With regard to Music, 3 is said to be Mistress, because Harmony contains 3 symphonies, the Diapason, the Diapente, and the Diatessaron.

Ezekiel xiv. v. 14 mentions 3 men who saw a creation, destruction, and a restoration; Noah of the whole world, Daniel of the Jewish world Jerusalem, and Job of his. personal world.

Note the Hindoo Trinity of Brahma, who consists of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva; Creator, Preserver, and Changer: in India each has still a special sect of worshippers, who mark themselves with particular emblems; the Vaishnavas are much the most numerous.

The living were of old called "the 3 times blessed" (the dead 4 times blessed).

There were Three cities of Refuge on the East side of the Jordan: Bezer, Ramoth Gilead, and Gozan; and Three on the West: Hebron, Shechem, and Kedesh Naphtali.

Three Fates: Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos.

   "    Furies: Tisiphone, Alecto, Megaera.

   "    Graces: Euphrosyne, Aglaia, Thalia, says Hesiod.

   "    Judges of Hades: Minos, Aeacus, Rhadamanthus.

   "    Horae: Hesiod says they were Eunomia (Order), Dike (Justice), Eirene (Peace).

Jupiter's thunder is "triformis." Hecate is always called "triple."

Neptune's spear is a trident, and so has Siva the Trisula.

Pluto's dog Cerberus had 3 heads.

There were Three founders of the Roman Empire: Romulus, B.C. 753, Camillus, B.C. 389, expelled the Gauls; and Caius Marius, B.C. 102, who overthrew the hordes of Cambrians and Teutons.

[p. 43]

The Jewish Rabbis say that the Sword of Death has 3 drops of Gall, one drops in the mouth and the man dies, from the second comes the pallor of death, and the third turns the carcase to dust. See Purchas, "The Pilgrimage," 1613.

A letter Yod within an equilateral triangle was a symbol of the ineffable name Jehovah and was so used by the Jews. The moderns have pointed out that this form suggests the idea that they knew something of a Triune God. Other monograms of Jehovah were also triple; thus 3 rays, and the Shin, and three yods in a triangle.

Under the number 3 also we may in passing mention the Royal Arch sign, the "Triple Tau," three T's united: the manner of its explanation, and the ideas which it represents, are not fit matters for description in his work. Note also 3 stones of the arch, 3 Principals and 3 Sojourners; 3 Veils; and in the Craft Lodges, 3 officers, 3 degrees, 3 perambulations.

In the Roman Cultus, the number 3 is of constant occurrence, as for example see Virgil, Eclogue 8, The Pharmaceutria; the priests used a cord of 3 coloured strands, and an image was carried 3 times round an altar.

"Terna tibi haec primum triplici diversa colore."

The Druids also paid a constant respect to this number; and even their poems are noted as being composed in Triads. It is not necessary here to enlarge upon the transcendent importance of the Christian Trinity. In old paintings we often see a Trinity of Jesus with John and Mary.

In the "Timaeus" of Plato, the Divine Triad is called Theos--God, Logos--The Word, and Psyche--the Soul. Indeed it is impossible to study any single system of worship throughout the world, without being struck by the peculiar persistence of the triple number in regard to divinity; whether as a group of deities, a triformed or 3-headed god, a Mysterious Triunity, a deity of 3 powers, or a family relationship of 3 Persons, such as the Father, Mother and Son of the Egyptians, Osiris, Isis and Horus.

And again in the various faiths we see the chief Dignity

[p. 44]

given in turn to each person of the Triad: some rejoice in the patriarchal Unity, some in the greater glory of the Son, and others again lavish all their adoration on the Great Mother; even in trinities of coequal males, each has his own special worshippers; note this especially among the Hindoos, where for example the followers of Vishnu are called Vaishnavas: to complicate matters too, in this case each deity has his female potency or sakti, and these also have their own adherents.

Under this notice of the Triad we may refer to the emblem of the Isle of Man, three legs united at the hips; this is supposed to have been derived from Sicilian Mariners at an early date, for the same emblem is found at Palermo in Sicily, and this design is there to be seen on an old public building. Sicily was anciently named Trinacria, from its three promontories.

Three is a notable number in the mythology of the Norseman: the great Ash-tree Yggdrasil supported the world; it had three roots; one extended into Asgard, the abode of the Gods; one into Jotenheim, the home of the Giants, and the third into Nifleheim, the region of the Unknown. The three Norns (Fates) attend to the root in Asgard: they were Urda--the past; Verdandi--the present; and Skulda--the future.

 

The Talmuds are crowded with quaint conceits concerning the Triad, and many are very curious.

The ancient Hebrews said there are three night watches, in the first the ass brays, in the second the dog barks, in the third the mother suckles her infant and converses with her husband.

He who three times daily repeats the 114th Psalm is sure of future happiness.

Three precious gifts were given to the Jews; the Law of Moses, the Land of Israel, and Paradise.

In three sorts of dreams there is truth; the last dream of the morning, the dream which is also dreamed by a neighbour, and a dream twice repeated.

[p. 45]

Three things calm a man; melody, scenery and sweet scent: and three things improve a man; a fine house, a handsome wife, and good furniture.

He who is born on the Third day of the week will be rich and amorous.

Three despise their fellows; cooks, fortune-tellers and dogs.

Three love their fellows; proselytes, slaves and ravens.

Three persons live a life which is no life; he who lives at another man's table, he who is ruled by his wife, and he who is incapable from bodily affliction.

Orthodox Jews were very particular about the cuttings from the nails; a pious man buries them, an orderly man burns them, but he who throws them away is wicked; for if a woman step over them, mischance may follow. Moed Katon, 18. 1. The nails should be trimmed on a Friday and never on a Thursday.

There are three keys which God keeps to himself, and which no man can gain nor use; the key of life, the key of rain and the key of the resuscitation of the dead. Taanith, 2; 1 and 2.

The Jewish butcher of Kosher meat must use three knives; one to slaughter the animal, another to cut it up, and a third to remove the suet which was unlawful food; as pork is.

Three acolytes must attend the High Priest when he went in to worship; one at his right, one at his left, and one had to hold up the gems on the train of his vestment.

There are three parts of a man. The father gives the white parts, bones, nails, brain and the whites of the eyes; the mother gives the red parts, skin, flesh, etc.: while God gives the breath, soul, mind and senses.

The Sanhedrim could order as a punishment three degrees of Excommunication--separation for an undefined time, exclusion for 60 days, and execration for 30 days. Moed Katon, 17. 1.

The name of Adam is of three letters, A, D and M: these are the initials of Adam, David and Messiah, and the Soul of the first passed to David and then to the Messiah. Nishmath Chajim, 152. 2.

[p. 46]

The Soul of Cain passed to Jethro, his spirit into Korah, and his body to an Egyptian. Yalkut Reuben, 9. 18. 24.

The Soul of Eve passed to Sarah, to Hannah the Shunamite, and then to the widow of Zarepta. The Soul of Rahab passed to Heber the Kenite. The Soul of Jael passed to Eli. Some Souls of pious Jews pass into the persons of the Gentiles, so that they shall plead for Israel. Some evil Hebrew souls have passed into animals, as that of Ishmael into the she-ass of Balaam, and later into the ass of Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair. The Soul of a slanderer may be transmigrated into a stone, so as to become silent; and the Soul of a murderer into water. Emeh Hemelech, 153. 1. 2.

 

There are three causes of dropsy, depending on diseases of the breast, the liver and the kidneys.

There are three forms of coma, that is insensibility; due to brain injury, brain disease and brain poisoning.

There are three modes of death, beginning either at the brain, the lungs or the heart. Bichat, Physiologie.

One Zodiacal Sign, that of Scorpio, has three emblems; the eagle in the highest symbolism, the snake, and the scorpion in evil aspects only.

Astrologic Natal Figures are often erroneous by reason of the alleged moment of birth being incorrect: there are three modes of Rectification, two are ancient, the Animodar of Ptolemy and the Trutine of Hermes; and there is one modern method, the Natal Epoch of W. R. Old.

In both the Old and the New Testaments we find the Day was divided into three day watches and four night watches. The mediaeval occultists divided the days into Planetary hours, the scheme of alternation occupied a week, 7 days * 24 hours= 168 hours, so 168 hours are divisible among the Seven Planets, each day beginning with its own different one; see Harleian MSS. 6483, and "The Herbal," Culpepper, 1814.

There is also another scheme in which the planets are related to a six-hour period by Ragon and Blavatsky.

[p. 47]

Among the Brahmins there were three great Vedas; three Margas or ways of salvation; three Gunas, the Satva, quiescence; Rajas, desire; and Tamas, decay. Three Lokas, Swarga, Bhumi and Patala; heaven, earth and hell. Three Jewels of wisdom, the Tri-ratnas; Buddha, Dharma and Sanga. The three Fires being the three aspects of the human soul, Atma, Buddhi and Manas. There were three prongs of the trident, and three eyes in the forehead of Siva. Note also the 3-syllabled Holy Word AUM.

At the Oblation of the Elements in the Celtic Church, 3 drops of Wine and 3 drops of water were poured into the chalice. In the present Christian Church we notice 3 crossings with water at Baptism, 3 Creeds; the Banns of Marriage are published 3 times; and a Bishop in benediction makes the sign of the Cross 3 times.

In Roman Catholic churches, the Angelus Bell is rung three times a day, a peal of 3 times 3 for the heavenly hierarchies of angels: Pope John XXII. ordered that the faithful should say 3 Aves on each occasion.

In civil life the usher of a court 3 times repeats the warning Oyez, Oyez, Oyez, which word means "hear" or "listen."

Note also the emblem of the Irish nation, the Shamrock, which has a three-lobed leaf, the Oxalis acefosella.

The Trigrams of Fo-hi should be studied in "The Yi-King," a book of Ancient China said to have been the production of King Wan and his son, Kau. The great Confucius wrote a supplement to it. This book is a mystical work on Symbolism referring to Cosmogony, to Man, and to the purposes of life. The initial symbols are the Yang, male, and the Yin, female. Then follow 8 trigrams, formed of emblematical lines; they are:--khien, tui, li, chan, sien, khan, kan and kwan; each expressed by figures of one long and two short lines. Some say that one Fo-Hi invented these symbols. A later Mystic expanded the system into 64 figures, each composed of 6 lines of whole and half lines. With these were associated two diagrams formed of circles, named the "River Horse," and the "Writing of

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] Lo": these will repay the contemplation of modern occultists. Yang, male, is also associated with Heaven, the Sun, Light and 25 the total of the odd units. Yin, female, with the Moon, the Earth, darkness and the number 30, the total of the even numbers to ten. See "Sacred Books of the East"; "The Yi-King."

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

THREE AND A HALF. 3 1/2.

W. F. SHAW calls attention to the number 3 1/2 as being of mystical importance, as the half of seven, typifying present suffering as compared with future joy. The famine in the time of Elias, when Israel was persecuted by Ahab and Jezebel, lasted 3 1/2 years. Antiochus Epiphanes persecuted the church 3 1/2 years. Forty-two months, or 3 1/2 years, are symbolical of times of trouble. Jesus preached 3 1/2 years.

In the Revelations, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, suffers 1260 days in the wilderness, being a time, times, and a half, Rev. xii. 6-14. Again the Holy City is said to be trodden under foot forty-two months, or 3 1/2 years. The two witnesses testify 3 1/2 years, and their dead bodies remain unburied 3 1/2 days: so also the scattering of the holy people as mentioned in Daniel xii. 7 is for three times and a half, by which we were to understand a period of suffering.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

THE TETRAD. 4.

THE Pythagoreans, said Nicomachus, call the number four "the greatest miracle," "a God after another manner," "a manifold divinity," the "fountain of Nature," and its "key bearer." It is the "introducer and cause of the permanency of the Mathematical discipline." It is "most masculine" and "robust"; it is Hercules and Aeolus. It is Mercury, Vulcan, and Bacchus. Among the Muses, Urania. They also called it Feminine, effective of Virility, and an Exciter of Bacchic fury. In harmony, it was said to form by the quadruple ratio the symphony dis-diapason. They called it Justice, as the first evenly even number.

As a type of Deity, we all know of the famous Hebrew title Tetra-grammaton or unpronounceable name we call Jehovah IHVH: this Name was used by the Kabalistic Rabbis to hide their secret tenets of the Divine Essence of the Creator God.

Almost all the peoples of Antiquity possessed a name for Deity consisting of four letters, and many of them considered 4 to be a Divine number, thus:--

In Hebrew we find also IHIH called Eheie; and AHIH called Aheie.

Assyrian ADAD, Egyptian AMUN, Persians SYRE or SIRE, Greek ThEos, Latin DEUS, German GOTT, French DIEU, Turkish ESAR, Tartar ITGA, Arabian ALLH, Allah, Samaritan JABE, Egyptian TEUT, TAUT, THOTh.

In Sanchoniathon we find the Deity called IEVO.

In Clemens Alexandrinus " " " JAOU.

Attention should be paid to the Sanscrit holy phrase,

[p. 51]

aspiration or prayer of Four syllables--"Aum mani padme hum"--literally, "Oh, the Jewel in the Lotus" (meaning "the Divine spark within man").

Theon of Smyrna, in the edition of Ismael Bullialdo, 1644, page 147, says, "The Tetractys was not only principally honoured by the Pythagoreans because all symphonies exist within it, but also because it appears to contain the nature of all things," hence their oath, "Not by him who delivered to our souls the Tetractys" (that is Pythagoras), this tetractys is seen in the COMPOSITION of the first numbers 1. 2. 3. 4.

But the 2nd Tetractys arises from the increase by MULTIPLICATION of odd and even numbers beginning from the Monad.

The 3rd subsists according to Magnitude.

The 4th is in simple Bodies, Monad-Fire, Dyad-Air, Triad-Water, Tetrad-Earth.

The 5th is of the figures of Bodies, Pyramid-Fire, Octahedron-Air, Icosahedron-Water, Cube-Earth.

The 6th of Vegetative Life, Seed-Monad or point; if it increase in length--dyad-line; in breadth--triad-superficies; in thickness--tetrad-solid.

The 7th is of Communities; as Man, House, Street, City.

The 8th is the Judicial power: Intellect, Science, Opinion, Sense.

The 9th is of the parts of the Animal, the Rational, Irascible and Epithymetic soul, and the Body they live in.

The 10th Tetractys is of the Seasons of the Year, spring, summer, autumn, winter.

The 11th Tetractys is of the Ages of Man, the infant, the lad, the man, and the senex.

And all are proportional one to another, and hence they said "all things are assimilated to number."

They also gave a four-fold distribution of goods to the Soul and Body, to the Soul, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, Justice; and to the Body, Acuteness of senses, Health, Strength, Beauty.

[p. 52]

The Objects of desire are 4: viz., Prosperity, Renown, Power, Friendship.

The celebrated 4 Causes of Aristotle may be mentioned here:

Divinity as the cause--by which; yp' oy up ou.

Matter--from which; ex oy ex ou.

Form--through which; di oy di' ou.

Effect with reference to which; pros oy pros ou.

The Dead also are called 4 times Blessed; and the Living but thrice blessed.

The number 4 being the completion of the quaternary group of point, line, superficies and body, has also this character that its elements 1, 2, 3, and 4 when summed up are equal to 1 0, which is so perfect that we can go no further, but to increase we must return to the Monad.

It was also called Kosmos, the World, because it formed the number 36, when its digits were thus combined:

1 + 2 = 3

3 + 4= 7

5 + 6 = 11

7 + 8 = 15

        __
         36

being the sum of the first four odd numbers with the first

four even numbers.

Plutarch, "De Anim. Procr." 1027, says the world consists of a double Quaternary; 4 of the intellectual World, T'Agathon, Nous, Psyche and Hyle; that is Supreme Wisdom or Goodness, Mind, Soul, Matter, and four of the Sensible World, forming the Kosmos of Elements, Fire, Air, Earth and Water; pur, aer, ge and pyr, aeir, ge, ydur.

Four is the number of the moons or satellites of Jupiter and Uranus.

The Arabians analysed Female Beauty into nine fours; as:

Four Black--Hair, eyebrows, eyelashes, eyes.

Four White--Skin, white of the eyes, teeth, legs.

[p. 53]

Four Red--Tongue, lips, cheeks, gums.

Four Round--Head, neck, forearms, ancles.

Four Long--Back, fingers, arms, legs.

Four Wide--Forehead, eyes, seat, lips.

Four Fine--Eyebrows, nose, lips, fingers.

Four Thick--Buttocks, thighs, calves, knees.

Four Small--Breasts, ears, hands, feet.

See Lane's edition of the "Arabian Nights."

In the Rosicrucian writings of Behmen, Fludd and Maier, we find the occult dogma that the four elements are peopled by spirits, beings who may have influence on the destiny of Man; thus the Earth was inhabited by Gnomes; the Air was inhabited by Sylphs; the Fire was inhabited by Salamanders; and the Water by Undines; these are now commonly called "Elementals." See "Lives of the Necromancers," W. Godwin; Michael Maier; Jacob Behmen's Works.

The existence of Elementals, scoffed at by modern education, is really suggested in a large number of places in both Old and New 'Testaments, the inspired volume of the Christians: examine, for example, Judges ix. 23; 1 Samuel xvi. 14; Psalm lxxviii. 49; Acts xvi. 16, xix. 13, xxvii. 23; Ephesians vi. 12, ii. 2.

But above all consider the meaning of the Canticle "Benedicite omnia opera" in the book of Common Prayer, "O ye stars, O ye showers and dew, O ye fire and heat, O ye winds, O ye green things, O ye mountains and hills, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever." These phrases are either folly, or else they recognise the spiritual essences or beings inherent in the elements and created things. Again, read hymn 269 in Hymns Ancient and Modern, a most orthodox volume. "Principalities and powers, watch for thy unguarded hours," and Hymn 91, "Christian, dost thou see them, on the holy ground, How the troops of Midian compass thee around?" If these are not the evil elementals, what are they?

Francis Barrett mentions the 4 Consecrated Animals, Lion, Eagle, Man and Calf, emblems of the Kerubim on

[p. 54]

the terrestrial plane; 4 Archangels, Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, Raphael; note, all end in the Deity name, el, i.e. AL, of the Hebrews.

The Gnostics said that all their edifice rested on a 4-pillared Basis; Truth, Intelligence, Silence, Bathos.

Note the earth was formed on the 4th day, according to the allegory found in the Jewish "Genesis," and is the 4th world in a chain of spheres, say the Hindoos.

The figure of 4, as Ragon remarks, is the upright man, carrying the triangle or Divinity, a type of the Trinity of Godhead.

On the Hebrew Magical word AGLA, see the chapter on the Kabalah, page 27.

Note 4 elements, 4 sides of a square and 4 angles;

4 qualities, cold, hot, dry, damp, 4 humours;

4 seasons of the year; 4 quarters of the horizon;

4 Rivers of Eden; Euphrates, Gihon, Hiddekel and Pison;

4 Rivers of the Infernal Regions according to the Greeks, Phlegethon, Cocytus, Styx and Acheron;

4 elements of Metaphysics; Being, essence, virtue, action.

4 Masonic virtues.

4 Evangelists and Gospels; Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, related to the Four Kerubic forms of the Man, Lion, Bull and Eagle, and thus to the Zodiacal Signs--Aquarius, Leo, Taurus and Scorpio (the relation of Aquila to Scorpio is a Rosicrucian secret).

One of the abstruse dogmas of the Kabalah concerns the Four Worlds of Emanation; Atziluth, Briah, Yetzirah and Assiah; these are not worlds in any ordinary sense, but rather planes of development and existence, the former the most diaphanous and exalted, the others becoming more and more concrete and manifest; the ten Sephiroth exist on each plane, those of the higher planes being more sublime than those of the lowest; each world has a secret name and number.

Man displays 4 evil tendencies, one in opposition to each of these 4 Worlds; an evil inclination, evil thoughts, evil words, and evil actions. (Isaac Myer.)

Vulcan gave Apollo and Diana arrows on the 4th day of

[p. 55]

their Nativity: this, says Sir Thomas Browne, is the Gentile equivalent to the Creation of the Sun and Moon on the 4th day.

The Talmud lays down the law as to a woman's drinking, saying one cup of wine is good for her, two do her harm, three demoralize her, and the fourth converts her into a female animal. There are 4 persons who are little better than dead; the blind, the leper, the pauper and he who has no sons.

There are 4 sorts of passionate men; he who is easily provoked and is as easily pacified, he loses more than he gains; he who is not readily provoked and is difficult to appease, he gains more than he loses; the pious man, who is not easily provoked but is easily pacified; and he who is easily provoked and is with difficulty appeased, he is a wicked man.

There are 4 sorts of pupils in occult science; he who learns and then will not teach; he who wants to teach and does not learn; he who learns and then teaches; and lastly, he who listens and won't learn and can't teach.

Four things deter a man from sin: the thought of whence he comes, the fear of where he may go, the conception of who his judge will be, and what his fate may be at the Judgment.

Four persons should offer up thank offerings; he who returns safe from a sea voyage, he who has safely crossed a desert, he who has recovered from an illness, and he who is released from prison. These are referred to in Psalm cvii.

Four men have died from original sin, the work of the Serpent, for they themselves did no ill; Benjamin, Amram the father of Moses, Jesse the father of David, and Chilah the son of David. Sabbat. 55. 2.

At the end of the Passion Fast every Hebrew should drink 4 glasses of wine, even if the price robs him of other necessaries.

The Talmud says that only 4 men had entered Paradise (Pardes, the Garden of Holiness); this meant the state of supernal communion with God, the Beatific Vision, by profound abstraction of mind. These were the Rabbis Ben Azai, Ben Zoma, Asher and Akiba.

[p. 56]

The tractate Yoma says God will pardon a man three times for a sin, but the fourth occasion is fatal.

The Jewish Sanhedrin had power to order 4 sorts of death penalty; by stoning, beheading, burning and strangling. The Sanhedrin as a Court of Justice ceased with the Second Temple, but the Rabbis taught that if a man incurs the death penalty of either form he still dies in these ways fortuitously, as if he would have been executed by strangling, he will be found to die of drowning or some other form of suffocation. See Sanhedrin, 37. 2.

Job had four entrances to his house, north, south, east and west; so that the poor might enter and find relief from whichever quarter they came.

Four things God repented that he had made; man's evil passions, the Ishmaelites, the Chaldeans and the Captivity.

God has made only 4 women perfect in beauty; Sarah, Abigail, Rahab and Esther; Eve is not included because she was not born of woman. Esther is said to have had golden coloured hair.

Of the 4 Cardinal points, God left the North Pole unfinished, saying, "if there be any my equal let him finish it like the others." This corner is the home of demons, ghosts, devils and storms. Pirke of Rabbi Eleazar, cap. 3.

The number 4 is related to Jacob, the Lesser Light, which is the Moon. Jacob was spelled IOQB, and its initials are those of epithets IUTzR the Former; OUShU the Maker, QUNA the Possessor, and BVRA, the Creator. See Amos vii. 2, where Jacob is called the "small."

In Christian dogma, Christ the triple deity on the Cross of 4 limbs, is the descent of Spirit into Matter: or, as the Theosophists say, the Triad of "Atma-Buddhi-Manas descends into the Quaternary of personal Man, the Kama, Prana, Linga and Sthula Sarira."

The 4 Cabeiri, or great deities of Syro-Phenicia, were Axieros, Axiokersos, Axiokersa and Kasmillos, children of Sydyk, are named by Sanchoniathon and quoted by Eusebius.

In the ancient Egyptian form of burial, while the body was made into a swathed mummy, the internal organs of the

[p. 57]

chest and abdomen were removed and preserved in 4 jars, often called the Canopic Jars; they were dedicated to the 4 Genii of the Cardinal points, who were at times called the Children of Horus. The jar of Amset, Amesheth or Mestha, the South, was man-shaped, and in it were put the stomach and large intestines; in the jar of Hapi, or Ahephi, the North, dog-headed, were the small intestines; in the jar of Tuamutef or Toumath-path, the East, jackal-headed, were the heart and lungs, and in the jar of Khebsenuf or Kabexnuf, hawk-headed, the West, were the liver and gall bladder. These Vases appear in tombs of the 18th dynasty, and remained in use until the 26th dynasty; according to E. A. Wallis Budge.

These 4 Genii of the dead in Amenti were guarded by 4 Goddesses, viz., by Isis, Nephthys, Neith and Serquet.

The Squares of the Periodic times of the Planets are the Cubes of their mean distance from the Sun.

The Christian Church recognises 4 great Councils, those of Nicaea in A.D. 325; Constantinople, 381; Ephesus, 431; and Chalcedon in 451.

The Western Church recognises 4 great Doctors; St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and St. Gregory the Great; and the Eastern Church 4,--St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory of Nazianzen, and St. John Chrysostom.

There is a vast fund of mystic lore, known to some Fratres Rosae Crucis, concerning the Chariot of Ezekiel described in the Mosheh Merkavah or Vision of Ezekiel. The Chagigah of the Talmud says it were better never to have been born than to pry into the 4 sides thereof, what is above and below, before and behind it.

The Ancient Legend of the Four Crowned Martyrs, who were masons, who refused to disclaim their Christian faith and refused to build an idol, has led in our own time to the consecration of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge of Freemasons, which has a corresponding Membership of 3000 brethren: the present author is a Past Master of this Lodge of literary Freemasons.

The "Four Masters" of Ireland of the first half of the

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] 17th century compiled a History of Ireland from B.C. 2242 to A. D. 1616.

Magic Squares were first known by the work of a Greek, Emanuel Moscopulos, still existing in MSS. of the 16th century in the National Library of Paris. Cornelius Agrippa then gave the Planetary Squares, which have been many times copied in subsequent books. From a more mathematical point of view, they have been much studied in France by M. Bachet and M. Frenicle, M. Poignard of Brussels, and de la Hire. M. de la Loubere gives information of the use of Magic Squares by the Indians of Surat.

To the number 4 belong the several forms of the cross, Maltese, Greek, Passional, St. Andrew's and the Fylfot cross--the Swastika. Hermetic philosophy teaches how to view the last as composed from a magic square of 5, giving 25 squares, of which the Fylfot takes 17, referring to the Sun, Signs and Elements. There is a quaint Hebrew association between the name Tetragrammaton, IHVH, the God name, and man formed in his image for if Yod, y: Heh, h, Vau, w, Heh, h be drawn one over the other, the Yod will look like the head above, the Heh will look like the two arms, the Vau will be upright body, and the final Heh will show the two legs.

It is stated in some ancient Persian works that 4 bright stars were placed as guardians at the 4 cardinal points. At the beginning of the Kali Yuga, at Crishna's death at 3102 B.C., the astronomers say that Aldebaran, the eye of Taurus, and Antares, the heart of Scorpio, were as the equinoctial points, and Regulus, the heart of Leo, and Fomalhaut, the eye of the Southern Fish, were near the solstitial points: this was 5003 years ago.

The pack of common playing cards has 4 suits; of diamonds, hearts, clubs and spades; the old Tarot or Tarocchi cards had 4 suits; Wands, Cups, Swords and Pentacles; occult science relates these to the Yod, Heh, Vau, Heh of the Tetragrammaton: the Tarot pack has also 4 Court cards, Cavalier, King, Queen and Violet or Knave; also called Knight, King, Queen and Princess by some mystics.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

THE PENTAD. 5.

FROM the Nicomachean Extracts we derive our knowledge of the Pythagorean doctrine of the number five.

It is an eminently spherical and circular number, because in every multiplication it restores itself and is found terminating the number; it is change of Quality, because it changes what has three dimensions into the sameness of a sphere by moving circularly and producing light: and hence "Light" is referred to the number 5.

Also it is the "Privation of Strife," because it unites in friendship the two forms of number even and odd; the 2 and 3. Also Justice from throwing things into the light.

Also the "Unconquered" from a geometrical reason which may be found in Alexander Aphrodisiensis, Commentaries on the 1st Book of Aristotle's Metaphysics.

Also the "Smallest extremity of Vitality," because there are three powers of Life, vegetable, psychical, and rational: and as the Rational is arranged according to the hebdomad, and the Psychical according to the hexad, so the Vegetative power falls under the control of the Pentad.

Proclus on Hesiod gives two reasons for its semblance to Justice, "because it punishes wrong, and takes away inequality of possession, and also equalizes what is less, to benefit."

Also named Nemesis, for it arranges in an appropriate manner all things celestial, divine and natural.

[p. 60]

And Venus, because the male 3 triad and the female 2 or dual, odd and even are conjoined in it: Venus was sometimes considered hermaphrodite, and was bearded as well as full-bosomed.

And Gamelia, that is referring to marriage.

And Androgynia, being odd and masculine, yet containing an even female part.

Also a "Demi-goddess," because it is half of the Decad, which is a divinity. And "Didymus," because it divides the Decad into two equal parts. But they called it Pallas, and Immortal, because Pallas presides over the Ether, or 5th Element (akasa) which is indestructible, and is not material to our present senses. And Cardiatis or Cordialis, because like a heart it is in the middle of the body of the numbers, thus:--

          1

       4

       7

     
      2

       5

       8

     
      3

       6

       9

     
   The ancients had a maxim, "Pass not above the beam of the balance," that is--be not cause of injury; for they said, let the members in a series form a Balance Beam. Thus when a weight depresses the Beam, an obtuse angle is formed by the Depressed side and the Tongue Vertical, and an acute angle on the other. Hence it is worse to do than to suffer injury, and the authors of injury sink down to the infernal regions, but the injured rise to the gods. Since, however, injustice pertains to inequality, equalization is necessary which is effected by addition and subtraction.

Plutarch, in his treatise on the Generation of the Soul according to Plato, states that the Pentad is called "trophos," which equals Sound, because the first of the intervals of a Tone which is capable of producing a sound is the fifth; it is also a type of "Nature."

The Pentalpha or 5-pointed star, an endless complex set of angles, was the emblem of Health, Hygeia; it forms 5 copies of the capital letter A. It is also called the Pentagram, and

[p. 61]

the Seal of Solomon, and is said to have been the device on the signet-ring of this ancient Grand Master of the Mysteries.

Kenneth Mackenzie remarks that, being formed by the union of the first odd and even numbers, 5 was considered of peculiar value and used as an Amulet or Talisman powerful to preserve from evil, and when inscribed on a portal, could keep out evil spirits; it is found almost everywhere in Greece and Egypt.

Diodorus calls five "the union of the four elements with Ether." There are 5 orders of Architecture; and 5 Senses of the human body now commonly known and described (but the whole are seven). Geometry is technically called the 5th Science. In Masonry the grand scheme is the 5 points of Fellowship, and note also 5 Brethren can hold a Fellowcrafts lodge. It is also called the Pyramid, from the arrangement of Monads, thus three below, then two, then one above them. Note the system of 5 regular Euclidean bodies, tetrahedron, hexahedron or cube, octohedron, dodekahedron and icosahedron.

The Pentagram was the emblem of safety. The Pentacle, the Masons' signet mark (according to Stukeley), was the device borne by Antiochus Soter on a war-banner, to which was ascribed the signal victory he obtained.

The Ancients esteemed this number as a measure for drinking; they mixed 5 parts of water with their wine, and Hippocrates added 1/5 of water to milk as a medical draught.

Phintys, the daughter of Callicrates, describes the Five virtues of a Wife: mental and bodily purity; abstaining from excess of ornament in dress; staying at home; refraining, as females then did, from celebrating public mysteries; piety and temperance.

In Roman marriage ceremonies it was customary to light 5 tapers and to admit the guests by fives; see Plato in Leg. IV.

Theology displays 5 modes of the Conception of God; Pantheism, Polytheism, Dualism, Unitarianism and Trinitarianism.

Jewish references to five are many--5 gifts to the priests,

[p. 62]

[paragraph continues] 5 things which might only be eaten in the camp. Not to eat fruit from a tree until it was five years old. The trespass offering imposed on the Philistines, 5 golden emerods and 5 golden mice. Joseph gave Benjamin 5 suits of raiment--Joseph presented only 5 of his brethren to Pharaoh. David took 5 pebbles when he went to fight Goliath.

The Jews classed a Bride's attendants by fives--five wise and five foolish virgins.

There are Five Articles of Belief in the Mahometan faith--in Allah, in Angels, in the prophet, the day of judgment, and predestination.

The Five duties of a Member of the Christian church were stated by the Fathers: To keep holy the festivals; to observe the fasts; to attend public worship; to receive the Sacraments; and to adhere to the customs of the church.

St. Paul said he preferred to speak 5 words in a language understood by his hearers than 10,000 in an unknown tongue.

In arranging an Horoscope some astrologers use only 5 aspects of the planets--the conjunction, the opposition, sextile, trine and square; and the evil or good fortune of the person seems to depend on them.

Among the Romans a display of 5 Wax Candles indicated that a Marriage was being celebrated; and special prayers were also made on such occasions to these 5 deities, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Pitho, and Diana. See Rabelais, 3. 20.

One of the two main divisions of Flowering Plants is characterised by a predominance of the numbers 4 and 5; these plants have almost a total absence of the numbers 3 and 6 in the component parts of their flowers. These are the Exogens or Dicotyledons; on the other hand the Monocotyledons or Endogens have a constant predominance of the numbers 3 and 6, and a total absence of 4 and 5 symmetry.

There are 5 kinds of intercolumniations in Architecture, mentioned by Vitruvius, determined by the proportions of height and diameter, viz., Pycnostyle, systyle, eustyle, diastyle, and aerostyle.

[p. 63]

The Triad Society of China, concerning which we find an article in the Freemasons' Quarterly Review, 1845, p. 165, boasts of great antiquity; it resembles Freemasonry in some points: five is a chief mystical number in its concerns. Its seal is pentangular, on its angles are 5 characters representing TOO or Saturn, MUH or Jupiter, SHWUV or Mercury, KIN or Venus, and HO or Mars.

In the Infernal World are 5 terrors and torments; Deadly bitterness, horrible howling, terrible darkness, unquenchable heat and thirst, and a penetrating stench; says old John Heydon, quoting some mediaeval father of the Church. He was admitted an Adept among the Fratres Rosae Crucis, but was never received among the Magistri.

Five styles of architectural columns are described: Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Composite.

Sir Thomas Browne, 1658, notes an ancient Greek division of vegetables into five classes:--

Dendron, Arbor, Tree; Thamnos, Frutex, Bush; Phruganon, Suffrutex, herb; Poa, Herba, grass; and Askion or gymnon, fungus, mushroom and seaweed.

Note the Quintuple section of a Cone--Circle, Ellipse, Parabola, Hyperbola and Triangle. Agathe tuche, that is Good fortune, is the old title of Astrologers for the 5th house (succedent) of the Heavens, as shown in an Astrological Figure, and which refers to offspring, success in hazardous schemes of fortune or pleasure, and wealth.

Joshua hanged 5 kings on 5 trees, they were found hidden in a cave, and were the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish and Eglon.

Every important measurement of the Jewish Tabernacle was 5 or a multiple of 5.

The Hebrew letter H, Heh, 5, was in occult Kabalah always deemed of female potency.

There were 5 principal parts of Solomon's Temple.

David Blesses the Lord 5 times in Psalms ciii., civ.

The Talmud says that there are 5 little things which are a terror to 5 strong things; the mosquito to the lion; the gnat to the elephant; the ichneumon fly to the scorpion;

[p. 64]

the flycatcher bird to the eagle, and the stickleback to the leviathan. Lewisohn, "Zoology of the Talmud."

Five things have in them a one-sixtieth part of 5 other things; fire is one-sixtieth of hell; honey one-sixtieth of manna; the Sabbath one-sixtieth of the Sabbath hereafter; sleep of death; and a dream one-sixtieth of prophecy. Talmud, Berachoth, 57. 2.

Even on the Sabbath you may kill 5 things--the fly in Egypt; the wasp in Nineveh; the scorpion of Hadabia; the serpent of Israel, and the mad dog anywhere. Talmud, Sabbat, 121. 2.

In the First Temple of Solomon were 5 things which were not in the second Temple; the Cherubic Ark; the Shekinah; the Holy Spirit, and the Urim and Thummim. Talmud, Yoma, 21. 2.

Rabies in the dog has 5 symptoms; its mouth gapes; it drops spittle; its ears hang down; it carries its tail between its legs, and it keeps to the side of any path. Yoma, 83. 2.

For suckling mothers there are 5 things which are injurious; garlic, cucumber, melon, leeks and onions: said Rashi.

If one study 5 years and then has found no profit in it; he will never profit by it. Talmud, Chullin, 24. 1.

Five is the number of expiation and of sacrifice, the number of the passions, and the 5 wounds of Christ. These were commemorated anciently by 5 crosses inscribed on the Altar tables, and the Priest made 5 crosses on himself at the canon in the Liturgy. W. F. Shaw.

Jesus 5 times foretold His passion, and gave 5 particulars concerning it, and received 5 wounds.

The Brahmins speak of 5 skandhas, or attributes of men; they are rupa, form; vidana, perception; sanina, consciousness; sanskara, action; and vidyana, knowledge.

In China 5 means Shangti or Thian, the God in Heaven: the Chinese speak of 5 Blessings--longevity, riches, health, virtue and a natural death.

The ancient Chinese spoke of 5 Elements--earth, wood,

[p. 65]

fire, metal and water; and of 5 primary colours--yellow, red, white, green and black.

The 5th Element, the Quintessence of the Alchymist, was derivable from the four, by progression--At first the Ens, then the Two Contraries, then the Three Principles, then the Four Elements. Separate the pure from the impure, gently and with judgment, and so you obtain the Quintessence, the Son of the Sun. Similarly note the progression; stone, plant, animal, man, God. The old authors added,--Talia si jungere possis, sit tibi scire satis; to which this Author adds,--sed Quod scis, nescis.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

THE HEXAD. 6.

NICOMACHUS calls it "the form of form, the only number adapted to the Soul, the distinct union of the parts of the universe, the fabricator of the Soul, also Harmony," and it is properly "Venus" herself.

It is also Zygeia and Nuptialia, and the Androgynae who Pliny tells us were an African tribe who had "dextra mamma virilis, laeva muliebris." Among the Fates it is Lachesis. Among the Muses it is Thalia.

Six is also Benevolence, Peace, and Health, Acmon, one of the Cyclops (akmon, an anvil), and Truth.

By the Pythagoreans it was called "the Perfection of parts."

As to "Marriage," it is a number equal to its parts, and marriage is a ceremony to sanction the production of offspring similar to the parent.

It is formed by the multiplication of the first (beyond unity) odd number and the first even, it resembles the union of Male and Female, as in Marriage or in Androgyneity, Health and Beauty, on account of its symmetry.

It was called "all-sufficient," panarkeia, panarkeia.

According to the Pythagoreans, after a period of 216 years, which number is the cube of 6, all things are regenerated, and they said this was the periodic time of the Metempsychosis or the re-birth of man after each death.

When multiplied into itself, like the pentad, six has also always itself in the unit place, thus, 6, 36, 216, 1296, 7776.

On the 6th day Man was created according to Genesis. On the 6th day of the week Jesus died on the cross.

[p. 67]

The Israelites had 6 cities of Refuge. Numbers xxxv. v. 6. There were six things hated by Jehovah. Prov. vi. v. 16. The Seraphim of Isaiah had each 6 wings.

In a Freemasons' Lodge there are 6 Jewels, three of which are immovable and lie open in the lodge for the Brethren to moralize upon, while the other three jewels are transferable from one Brother to another at the periodical changes of officers.

In the Hebrew "Book of Creation," the "Sepher Yetzirah," the Hexad is spoken of: the units representing the four quarters of the World; North, South, East, and West, and also height and depth, and in the midst of all is the Holy Temple. See my translation; cap. i. v. 11, and notes. Third Edition. 1911.

The Druids had a mysterious religious preference for the number 6. They performed their principal ceremonies on the 6th day of the moon, and on the 6th day of the moon began their year. They went 6 together to gather the sacred mistletoe (misseltoe), and in monuments and plates now extant we often find 6 of their priests grouped together. See Mayo, ii. 239.

An astronomical period of 600 years, spoken of as the "Naros," the Cycle of the Sun, the Luni-Solar period or Sibylline year, consisting of 31 periods of 19 years, and one of 11 years, is often referred to in old works on the Mysteries. It seems to have been known by the Chaldeans and ancient Indians; it is a period of peculiar properties. Cassini, a great astronomer, declares it the most perfect of all astronomic periods.

If on a certain day at noon, a new moon took place at any certain point in the heavens, it would take place again at the expiration of 600 years, at the same place and time, and with the planets all in similar positions.

It is supposed that one recurrence of this period is referred to in the 4th Eclogue of Virgil, the poem, which, as is well known, has been spoken of as containing an allusion to the Messiah, Jesus.

"The period sung by the Cumaean Sibyl has now arrived,

[p. 68]

and the grand series of ages (that series which occurs again and again in the course of a mundane revolution) begins afresh. The virgin Astraea returns, another reign of Saturn commences, and a new progeny descends from heaven."

It has been calculated by the late Dr. Kenealy that a Messiah, or divine teacher, has been sent to the world every 600 years, thus:--

Adam, the first messenger from the Gods to our race on earth.

Enoch, the second, 600 years after.

Fo-hi, the third, to China in particular.

Brighou, a Hindoo prophet.

Zaratusht, Zoroaster, the fifth, to Persia.

Thoth, Taautus, or Hermes Trismegistus, sent to the Egyptians.

Amosis, or Moses the Jewish law-giver, the seventh.

Lao Tseu, a second to China, 600 B.C., the eighth.

Jesus the ninth, to the Jews first and then to the Gentiles.

Mohammed the tenth; he flourished about A.D. 600.

Chengiz Khan the eleventh, A.D. 1 zoo, conquered Persia.

Who the special messenger of 1800 was, the author is ignorant.

The secrets of the Naros of the Apocalypse and of the Mediatorial Sacrifice have been considered the secrets of the Ancient Mysteries. Circumcision was possibly an outward sign of Initiation in the earliest times.

Jesus, at any rate, writes the Author of the "Book of God," appeared at the 9th Naros, and no one can deny that such a messenger was expected. Juvenal, oddly enough too, mentions in Satire XI II. v. 28, "Nona aetas igitur"--"now is the ninth age"--which indeed it was, though how he knew it, is a mystery.

The Sothic Cycle was 1461 years, containing 18,000 lunations.

N.B.--Naros is not to be confused with "Saros," a cycle of the moon of 18 years and 10 days, which was known to the Chaldeans and Greeks, a period after the expiry of

[p. 69]

which the eclipses of the moon recur similarly: it consists of 223 lunations.

The circumference of a globe has been fixed at 360 degrees, six sixties; the hour divided into 60 minutes, each of 60 seconds. The Tartars had a period of 60 days, the Chinese also; and the Asiatics generally a period of 60 years. The Babylonian great period was 3600 years, the Naros multiplied by 6.

The "Lily" which in all the old Annunciation pictures Gabriel presents to the Virgin has 6 leaves, and the flower shows 6 petals all alike, around a central three-headed stigma, as is botanically correct. One of the three main divisions into which plants are arranged by Botanists, is typified by a predominance of the numbers 3 and 6, in all parts of the flowers, 6 leaves forming a perianth, 6 stamens, and a 3-lobed stigma with a 3- or 6-celled ovary is the common arrangement.

Berosus, one of the Chaldean Priests, mentions three periods of time, a Sossus of 60 years; a Naros, or Neros, of 600 years, and the Saros, 3600 years. There seems some confusion here with the Saros of 18 years and 10 days.

Bailly, in his "Astronomie Ancienne," p. 31, says: The Brahmins used the numbers 60 and 3600 in computing time. The Chaldeans also did so. The Brahmins have also an Antediluvian period of 600 years. The Tartars and Chinese also used a period of 60 years in their computations of time.

Under the number, Six, too, we must not omit to mention the symbol of the double triangle, Hexapla, or Hexalpha, the Shield of David, it is used at present as a sign in the Degree of the Royal Arch in England. It must not be confused with the Pentalpha which is the true Solomon's seal. In Christian Churches we find the Hexalpha used to express the union of the Divine and human natures, deemed to exist in Jesus, the Christ of the New Testament. The blending of the two triangles has also been used to typify the union of Fire and Water; for the early symbol of Fire was the triangle apex upward, and that of Water the same

[p. 70]

apex downward: the symbols of Air and Earth were two similar triangles, each with a cross bar.

The Talmud says:--

Six things are disgraceful to a wise man; to walk alone at night; to scent oneself for walking by day; to talk with a strange woman in the street; to talk at table with the ignorant; to wear ragged shoes, and to be late at the house of prayer. Berachoth, 43. 2.

Six things lay up capital for hereafter, and also bear interest in this world; hospitality well ordered; comfort to the sick; prayerful meditation; early instruction of children; training in the Mosaic law, and charitable treatment of a neighbour. Sabbat. 127. 1.

Evil Demons have 6 characters; like men they take food and drink, they beget and they die; like angels, they have wings, they pass from one end of the world to the other, and they can learn the future. Talmud.

Solomon is called by six names; Solomon, Jedidiah, Koheleth, son of Jakeh, Agur and Lemuel: see "The Fathers," "Aboth," by Rabbi Nathan.

There are 6 kinds of Fire,--common fire which eats and does not drink; fire that drinks and does not eat, as fever; fire that eats and drinks, that of Elijah, 1 Kings xviii. 38; the fire on the Altar which consumed both moist and dry; the fire of Gabriel which consumed other fire, and the Essential fire of God which consumed evil angels. Yoma, 21. 2.

The Tables of Moses were said to have been 6 hands-breadths long, 6 wide and 3 thick. Talmud; Nedarim, 38. 8. Hershon reckons that if cut out of Sinaitic stone, each Table would have weighed 28 tons, but he is in error, reckoning hands-breadths as ells, as 18 inches instead of 4 inches.

The Angel of Death had no power over 6 holy persons; Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron and Miriam. Bava Bathra, 17. 1. These died by the Divine Kiss of death, but it is not so definitely stated in the case of Miriam, for fear of scandal.

[p. 71]

The Lion has 6 names in the Book of Job; ARI, ShchL, KPIR, LISh, LBIA and ShChTz.

The Serpent has 6 names; NChSh, OKShUB, APOH, TzPOUNI, TNIN and ShRP. Nachash the Brazen Serpent; Okeshub, an asp, Psalm cxxiv. 4; Opoh, an adder, Isaiah xli. 24; Tzephouni, the basilisk, Isaiah xiv. 29; Tanin, the serpent or crocodile; and Seraph, a serpent of fire. See Rabbi Nathan, cap. 29.

Six blasts of the Horn were blown on the eve of the Sabbath, and then the Sabbath had begun.

 

W. F. Shaw says that 6 is the number of temptation and sin, for at the 6th hour of the 6th day the first temptation came into the world. Six is the number of toil and work, for 6 days the Israelites had to collect manna; at the 6th hour of-the 6th day Jesus was sentenced to death, and in the Revelations the 6th seal, trumpet and vial were all emblematic of woe. The Flood came when Noah was 600 years old.

The number 666 was an emblem of the Great Wicked One, still without identification, but he is implied in a prototype, Schechem ben Hamor, whose name is 666 by Gematria, ShKM BN ChMVR, he was the corruptor of Dinah. See Genesis xxxiv. verse 2.

The Jews expected that the end of the present dispensation of the world would arrive after 6000 years, and St. Barnabas repeats this as a reasonable belief of the ancient Christian Church.

The Ancient Egyptians had for their highest Priests a College of 6, of which hardly any information has come down to us; but one Aseshra is mentioned as Master of the Mysterious Words of the 6, and a statue has been found of one Ei-meri, whose engraved title is Chief of the Dwelling of the Great Six.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

THE HEPTAD. 7.

THE Heptad, say the followers of "Pythagoras," was so called from the Greek verb "sebo," to venerate (and from the Hebrew ShBO, seven, or satisfied, abundance), being Septos, "Holy," "divine," and "motherless," and a "Virgin."

From Nicomachus we learn that it was called "Minerva," being unmarried and virginal, begotten neither by a mother, i.e., even number, nor from a father, i.e., odd number: but proceeding from the summit of the Father of all things, the Monad; even as Minerva sprang all armed from the Forehead of Jove or Zeus.

Hence also Obrimopatre, or daughter of a mighty father, and Glaucopis, shining-eyed, and ametur and ageleia, Ametor and Ageleia, she that carries off the spoil.

And "Fortune," for it decides mortal affairs.

And "Voice," for there are seven tones in every voice, human and instrumental: because they are emitted by the seven planets, and form the Music of the Spheres.

Also Tritogenia, because there are 3 parts of the Soul, the Intellectual, Irascible and Epithymetic (desiring), and 4 most perfect virtues are produced. Just as of the three intervals, length, breadth, and depth, there are four boundaries in corporeal existence--point, line, superficies and solid.

It is called "Agelia," from Agelai, herds, as groups of stars were called by the Babylonian sages, over which herds ruled 7 angels.

Also Phylakikos, fylakikos = preserving, "guardian," because the Seven Planets direct and guide our universe.

[p. 73]

Also Aegis, from Pallas Athene, or Minerva, the bearer of the breast-plate or aegis, also Telesphoros, leading to the end, because the 7th month is prolific; and Judgment, because their Physicians looked for a crisis on the 7th day in many diseases.

Among other curious problems and speculations, the Pythagorean philosophers attempted to prove that offspring born at the full term, 9 months, or at 7 months, were viable, i.e., might be reared, but not those born at 8 months, because 8 consists of two odd numbers (male only) 5 and 3; but in 9 and 7, male and female numbers are united, as 5 + 4 = 9 and 4 + 3 = 7, whilst eight can only be divided into two odd or two evens, i.e., similar sexed numbers.

In respect to life and its divisions, they remarked the ages are measured by the number 7.

In the first 7 years the teeth are erupted.

second 7 years comes on ability to emit prolific seed.

third 7 years, the growth of the beard as manhood.

fourth 7 years, strength reaches its maximum.

fifth 7 years is the season for marriage.

sixth 7 years, the height of intelligence arrives.

seventh 7 years, the maturity of reason.

eighth 7 years, perfection of both.

ninth 7 years, equity and mildness, passions become gentle.

tenth 7 years, the end of desirable life.

Solon the Athenian Lawgiver, and Hippocrates the physician, also used this 7-year division of life.

The Pleiades, a group of seven stars in the constellation Taurus, was thought of mighty power over earthly destiny; there were seven also of the Hyades, daughters of Atlas; and the seven stars which guided the sailors. Ursa Major, in which the Hindoos locate the Sapta Rishi, seven sages of primitive wisdom, are a group of the first importance and are easily recognised.

Duncan, in his "Astro-Theology," gives 7 stages of life with

[p. 74]

associated planets; thus, Infancy, Moon, Luna; Childhood, Mercury, Knowledge; Youth, Venus, Love; Manhood, Sol; Full Strength, Mars; Maturity of Judgment, Jupiter; and Old Age, Saturn.

Some philosophers have said that our souls have 7 foci in the material body, viz., the five senses, the voice, and the generative power.

The body has seven obvious parts, the head, chest, abdomen, two legs and two arms.

There are seven internal organs, stomach, liver, heart, lungs, spleen and two kidneys.

The ruling part, the head, has seven parts for external use, two eyes, two ears, two nostrils and a mouth.

There are seven things seen, body, interval, magnitude, colour, motion and permanency.

There are seven inflections of the voice, the acute, grave, circumflex, rough, smooth, the long and the short sounds.

The hand makes seven motions; up and down, to the right and left, before and behind, and circular.

There are seven evacuations;--tears from the eyes, mucus of the nostrils, the saliva, the semen, two excretions and the perspiration.

Modern medical knowledge corroborates the ancient dictum that in the seventh month the human offspring becomes viable.

Menstruation tends to occur in series of four times seven days, and is certainly related to Luna in an occult manner.

The lyre has 7 strings, corresponding to the planets.

There are 7 vowels in English and some other tongues.

Theon of Smyrna also notices that an average length of an adult's intestine is 28 feet, four times seven, and 28 also is a perfect number.

The number 7 is also associated with Voice and Sound, with Clio the Muse; with Osiris the Egyptian deity; with Nemesis, Fate,--Adrastia, not to be escaped from; and with Mars.

As to the sacredness of the number 7, note among the Hebrews, oaths were confirmed by seven witnesses; or by

[p. 75]

seven victims offered in sacrifice; as see the covenant between Abraham and Abimelech with seven lambs, Genesis, chap. xxi. vv. 28, 21-28; the Hebrew word seven, also Sh B O H, is derived from, or is a similar to Sh B O, to swear.

Clean beasts were admitted into the ark by sevens, whilst the unclean only in pairs.

The Goths had 7 Deities from whom come our names of week days; Sun, Moon, Tuisco, Wotan, Thor, Friga, Seatur, corresponding, of course, to the planets.

Apollo, the Sun God, had a Greek title Ebdomaios, sevenfold.

The Persian Mithras, a Sun God, had the number 7 sacred to him.

Note the Mysterious Kadosh Ladder of 7 steps ascent and 7 steps descent, the one side Oheb Eloah, Love of God; the other Oheb Kerobo, love of the neighbour.

Plato, in his "Timaeus," teaches that from the number seven was generated the Soul of the World, Anima Mundana (Adam Kadmon).

The seven wise men of Greece were:

Bias who said, "Most men are bad," B.C. 550.

Chilo " "Consider the end," B.C. 590.

Cleobulos " "Avoid Extremes," B.C. 580.

Periander " "Nothing is impossible to perseverance," B.C. 600.

Pittacus " "Know thy opportunity," B.C. 569.

Solon " "Know thyself," B.C. 600.

Thales " "Suretyship is ruin," B.C. 550.

The Seven Wonders of the World are thus enumerated:

1. Pyramids of Egypt.

2. The hanging Gardens of Babylon, for Semiramis.

3. Tomb of Mausolus, King of Caria, at Halicarnassus, built by Artemisia, his Queen.

4. Temple of Diana at Ephesus, 552 B.C. Ctesiphon was the chief architect.

5. Colossus of Rhodes, an image of the sun god, Apollo, of brass, 290 B.C.

[p. 76]

6. Statue of Zeus, at Athens, by Phidias.

7. Pharos of Egypt, built by Ptolemy Philadelphus, of white marble, 283 B.C.; or the Palace of Cyrus which is sometimes substituted.

Sanskrit lore has very frequent reference to this number: note:--

Sapta Rishi, seven sages; Sapta Kula, 7 castes; Sapta Loka, seven worlds; Sapta Para, 7 cities; Sapta Dwipa, seven holy islands; Sapta Arania, 7 deserts; Sapta Parna, 7 human principles; Sapta Samudra, seven holy seas; Sapta Vruksha, 7 holy trees.

The Assyrian Tablets also teem with groups of sevens--7 gods of sky; 7 gods of earth; 7 gods of fiery spheres: seven gods maleficent; seven phantoms; spirits of' seven heavens; spirits of seven earths.

The Chaldean notion seems to have been that 7 was a holy number which became nefast under certain conditions. The opposite sides of a die added together are always seven in total numeration, the 4 opposite 3, 6 opposite 1, and so on.

It used to be asserted, says John Heydon, that every seventh Male born without any female coming between, can cure the King's Evil, by Word, or Touch.

St. James iii. 17 gives the 7 characters of wisdom.

After Birth the 7th hour decides whether the child will live, in 7 days the cord falls off, in twice 7 days the eyes follow a light, thrice 7 days turns the head, 7 months gets teeth, twice 7 months sits firmly, thrice 7 months begins to talk, after 4 times 7 months walks strongly.

After 7 years, teeth of second set appear.

After 14 years is the arrival of generative power. After 2i the hair of Manhood is completed.

After 28 we cease to grow, at 35 is greatest strength, at 49 is the greatest discretion, and 70 is the natural end of Life.

The Moon passes through stages of 7 days in increase, full, decrease, and renewal.

Naaman was ordered by Elisha (an Adept) to take seven dips in Jordan, to cleanse himself from Leprosy.

[p. 77]

The Golden Candlestick of Seven Branches was a notable emblematic ornament of the Tabernacle of Moses, Exodus xxv. 31.

Note the seven years for Repentance; 7 churches of Asia (or Assiah), 7 Angels with Trumpets, 7 candlesticks of the Holy Places, 7 seals, 7 trumpets, 7 kings, 7 thousands slain, 7 vials of wrath to be poured out, pace the Apocalypse. 7 members make a Freemasons' lodge perfect, although 5 may hold one.

Francis Barrett, in his "Magus," catalogues 7 Birds, Fishes, Animals, metals, stones, and members of the body.

It has been said there are seven apertures of the skull to correspond with the planets.

There are Seven Degrees in the Oriental Order of Sikha and the Sat Bhai (7 Brothers); but I have doubts of the Brahmanic authenticity of the present Order of the name, which was introduced by J. H. Lawrence Archer.

From the relative length of their courses the ancients constructed a Planetary Ladder, with Vowel Symbols, thus:

          Moon

       Merc.

       Venus

       Sun

       Mars

       Jupit.

       Saturn

     
      a

       e

       ee

       i

       o

       u

       oo

     
   These symbols were used in mystical knowledge, As an Inscription at the Temple of Apollo at Delphi shows, where E I meant the Sun and its nearest Planet, i.e., Sun and Mercury; and Mercury was often represented as a Dog, following a Sun Man.

The Oracle of Claros (Macrobius, Saturnalia, 1. 18) said that IAU (the Gnostic Deity) was the Sun and the first and last of the planetary set, hence the 7 Concentric spheres.

Duncan assigns these Minerals and Animals to the 7 Heavenly Bodies known to the ancient world.

Moon, Bull, Silver

Mercury, Serpent, Quicksilver

Venus, Dove, Copper

Sun, Lion, Gold

Mars, Wolf, Iron

Jupiter, Eagle, Pewter

Saturn, Ass, Lead

Note also the number of 7 pipes in the Musical instrument at the mouth of the old deity Pan, the Great Whole, a Sun God (not the later Rural Pan).

[p. 78]

An ancient symbol of the universe was a Ship with seven pilots, in the centre of the ship, a Lion; possibly from an idea that the Sun first rose in Leo.

Note Aries supplanted Taurus, as the constellation in which the sun rises at the Vernal equinox; Taurus was the sign at the early fabulous periods of the earth--it was displaced about 300 B.C. The sign becomes changed every 2150 years by the precession of the equinoxes: Pisces has now followed Aries; but the Sun is still said to enter the sign Aries at the Vernal Equinox about March 21st. Its actual position in March 1900 was near omega Pisces.

T. Subba Row describes the Seven Primary Forces of Nature as six powers resumed in a seventh. These are called Sakti (Mahamaya) and are related to Kanya, i.e., Virgo, as the 6th Zodiacal Sign; they are Parasakti, force of light and heat; Inanasakti, intellect; Itchasakti, cause of voluntary movements; Kriyasakti, energy of will; Kundalini sakti, the life force shown in attraction and repulsion, positive and negative; Mantrika sakti, the power of sounds, vibration, music, words and speech; these are summarized in Daivi prakriti = the Light of the Logos.

Our physical senses known as 5, are an incomplete set, there are indeed 7 forms or modes of perception, as appears in the highest developments of the "Chabrat zereh aur bokher," and as described in the oldest Sanskrit occult science of the Upanishads:--smell, taste, sight, touch, hearing--and 6th, Mental , with 7th, spiritual understanding: the two latter were not dwarfed and materialized into noticeable organs in this fifth Race of beings, to which Man now belongs. For a fuller explanation see the "Secret Doctrine" of H. P. Blavatsky. The Archaic scheme recognized Seven States of Matter;--homogeneous, aeriform, nebulous or curdlike, atomic, germinal fiery elemental, fourfold vapoury, and lastly that which is cold and dependent on a vivifying Sun for light and heat.

Our Earth, symbolised by MALKUTH of the Kabalah, is the seventh of a series, and is on the Fourth plane; it is

[p. 79]

generated by Jesod, the foundation the Sixth World, and after complete purification will in the 7th Race of the 7th Cycle become re-united to the Spiritual Logos and in the end to the Absolute. Our earth has been already thrice changed, and each cycle sees seven kings (as of Edom). There were Seven Kings of Edom, Genesis, xxxvi. v. 31; the Kabalists consider these as types of primordial worlds which failed to survive their creation. Seven is the key to the Mosaic creation, as to the symbols of every religion. There are Seven Planes of being, the upper three are subjective and unknowable to mankind, the lower four are objective and may be contemplated by man as metaphysical abstractions: so there are the seven Principles in Man, and the upper triad are parted from the lower group of four at dissolution.

The Seven Principles constituting man are variously named by the Esoteric Buddhism, by the Vedantic scheme, and by other philosophies, but they correspond in idea; first from above come Atma, a ray from the Absolute; Buddhi, spiritual soul; and Manas, human soul; these are the superior triad, which separates at human death from the lower tetrad of principles. The lower four are Kama rupa, the passions; Linga Sarira, tile astral body; Prana, life essence; and Sthula Sarira, the lower body; see the dogmas of Esoteric Buddhism.

The Kabalah divides these into four planes of the Soul, which are further separated by adepts; these are Chiah, Neshamah, Ruach and Nephesh, which correspond to the symbolical worlds of Atziluth, Briah, Yetzirah and Assiah.

There is an occult reference in the Seven stars in the head of Taurus called the Pleiades, six present and one hidden--said to be daughters of Atlas, who, pursued by Orion, were changed by Zeus in mercy into pigeons (peleia). The missing one is Merope, who married the mortal Sisyphus, and hides herself for shame.

Seven was the number of the Rabbis who left the "Greater Holy Assembly"; ten had formed it, three had

[p. 80]

passed away from the "Sod," SVD, mystery. See "The Greater" and "Lesser Holy Assembly," or the Ha Idra Rabba Quadisha and Ha Idra Suta Quadisha.

Athanasius Kircher the Jesuit states that the ancient Egyptians associated numbers to the planets as follows:--

          Saturn

       3, 9, 15, 45

     
      Jupiter

       4, 16, 34, 136

     
      Mars

       5, 25, 65, 325

     
      Sol

       6, 36, 111, 666

     
      Venus

       7, 49, 145, 1225

     
      Mercury

       8, 64, 260, 2080

     
      Luna

       9, 81, 369, 3521

     
   In this matter see also Francis Barrett, "The Magus."

The later Coptic names of the 7 Gods and planets and Genii of the World of the Ancient Egyptians are: Saturn, Rephan, God of time; Jupiter, Picheus, God of life; Mars, Moloch, God of destruction; Sol, Phre or Pire, meaning Holy Lord; Venus, Suroth, lady of love; Mercury, Hermes, Hermanubis, God of speech; and Luna, Piooh, lady of the waters.

In China 7 is the number of Death, and their days of mourning are 7 times 7: the Seven Star Plank is the name of the bottom plank of a coffin in which they bore 7 holes.

The Hindoos speak of 7 Tatwas, the abstract principles of existence, metaphysical and physical, the subtle elements and the corresponding human senses, of which only five are yet developed. So there are five exoteric, Akasa, Vayu, Tejas, Apas and Prithwi; the first two esoteric yet unknown are Ani and Anupadaka. The first name means One, Unity, the Atom, and is a name of Brahma; the latter means parentless, self-existent. The first five are referred to primeval Aether, Air, Fire, Water and Earth: and to Hearing, Touch, Sight, Taste and Smell; note Air is not Hearing. See Rama Prasad on "The Tatwas."

The Sanscrit names of the Seven Planets used in Hindoo Astrology are Surya for the Sun, Chandra for Moon, Kuja for Mars, Budhan for Mercury, Guru for Jupiter, Sukra for Venus, and Shani for Saturn: then there are

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] Rahu, the upper Lunar Node, and Ketu for the lower. Jupiter is also named Brihaspati.

The word Septemtriones refers to the north, and is so called from its reference to the 7 stars of Ursa Major, also called the Plough, and seen in the Zodiac of Denderah as the Thigh.

The Talmudic Berachoth, 14. 1, says he who passes 7 nights without dreaming deserves to be called wicked.

The Kabalists describe Seven classes of Angels: Ishim, Arelim, Chashmalim, Melakim, Auphanim, Seraphim and Kerubim.

The Judaic Hell was given seven names by the Kabalists; Sheol, Abaddon, Tihahion, Bar Shacheth, Tzelmuth, Shaari Muth, and Gehinnom.

Seven things were formed before the world; Law, Repentance, Paradise, Gehenna (that is Gai hinnom), the Throne of Glory, and the Messiah. The Targum Yerushalmi says these were formed 2000 years before the World's creation. Talmud, Pesachim, 54. 1.

Seven things were hidden from man; the day of death, the time of the resurrection, the final judgment, the opinion of his fellow-man, the time of the Jewish restoration, and the Fall of Persia (whatever that may mean). Pesachim, 54. 2.

The Talmud in "Chagijah" names 7 Heavens, and Occultists recognize 7 Planetary Heavens; Raquie, Zebul, Makum, Maon, Sagun, Ghereboth, and Shamaim.

In Micah, chapter v. verse 5, we read that 7 shepherds shall waste Assyria; the Talmud says they were Adam, Jacob and Methuselah, Abraham, Jacob and Moses, and David. Succah. 52. 2

Of Prophetesses there were 7;--Sarah, Miriam, Deborah, Hannah, Abigail, Huldah and Esther.

In the Talmud, Kethuboth, 17. 1, it is said that it is permissible to the Jew to look into his wife's face for 7 days after marriage; after this it is presumably wrong, in their opinion.

On the 7th day of the month Adar, Moses died and the rain of manna ceased, says the Talmud, but this appears to

[p. 82]

be contradicted in Joshua v. verses 10-12. He was born on the same day of the same month.

The Bava Kama says that after 7 years a male hyaena becomes a bat, in another 7 years a Vampire, after another a Thorn, and after another is turned into a demon. If a man fails to pray devoutly for 7 years, his spine after death becomes a serpent.

Besides those who prophesied for Israel, there were 7 other prophets, Beor, Balaam, Job, Eliphaz, Bildad, Zohar, and Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite.

The Bava Bathra says that 7 men form an unbroken series to this day. Adam was seen by Methuselah, then Shem, Jacob, Amram, Ahijah the Shilonite, and Elijah, who saw him, and Elijah is still alive until to-day.

Even 7 years of pestilence will not cause a man to die before his allotted time. This dictum of the treatise Sanhedrin is a statement of predestination.

A Ram has but one voice while alive, but after death his body makes 7 sounds; his horns make two trumpets, his thigh bones two pipes, his skin will cover a drum, the large intestines are formed into strings for the lyre, and the small intestines will make the small strings for the harp.

In the Sabbat, 152. 2, of the Talmud it is said that the Soul of a man watches over his corpse for 7 days. Compare this with the Theosophic teaching that the Linga Sarira broods over the body for a week after death.

Rabbi Nathan says that 7 good qualities avail at the Judgment; wisdom, righteousness, good opinions, mercy, truth, grace, and peace. Seven epithets are applied to the Earth in the Hebrew tongue; Aretz, Adamah, Arequa, Gia, Tziah, Yabeshah, Cheled or Thebel. The mystical River Sambatyon flowed all the week, but was still on the 7th day, says Rashi. Hershon, Talmudic Miscellany, 154.

The 7 Catholic Deadly Sins are Pride, covetousness, lust, anger, gluttony, envy and sloth.

The 7 Gifts of the Holy Spirit, Isaiah xi. v. 2, are Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel, Fortitude, Knowledge,

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] Piety and Fear of the Lord; these are seven of the Kabalistic Sephiroth.

Seven is the token of Union between God, who is Triune, and Man, who is Quaternary. W. F. Shaw.

The Holy Ghost is said to impart a 7-fold gift; 7 Lamps burn before the Throne of God.

The Council of Arles declared that 1 Bishops ought to take part in the Ordination of a Bishop.

There was a 7 years' probation for admission to the Celtic Order of the Culdees. There are 7 Vestments of the Christian priesthood, and Bishops should wear 7 others, Sandals, Dalmatic, Rational, Mitre, Gloves, Ring and Staff.

The 7 Champions of Christendom were St. George for England, St. Denis of France, St. James of Spain, St. Andrew of Scotland, St. David of Wales, St. Patrick of Ireland, and St. Antonio of Italy.

The 7 Sleepers of Ephesus, according to the monkish legend, were Christians who hid in a cave under the persecutions of Decius in the Third Century; they fell into a trance and slept 200 years. They awaked in A.D. 447 and going to the Emperor Theodosius II., they convinced him of the truth of the Life beyond the grave: this done, they returned to the cave to sleep until the Last Judgment.

The 7 Dolours of the Virgin Mary is the name of a Roman Catholic Fast Day held on the Friday before Palm Sunday.

The 7 Wise Masters were officers of King Kurush who tell stories to save the life of the King's son: they exist in Greek, Syriac, Hebrew, Persian, and in English are called The Book of Sindibad, edited by Clouston.

The Coptic Gnostics represented the Jehovah of the Hebrews by a curious arrangement of the 7 vowels, without a consonant; thus IEHOOUA (the H is the Greek eta, long e; and the first O is the Greek long O, omega).

In the Zoroastrian theology we read of the highest beings the 7 Amshaspands; Ormuzd, source of life; Bahman, the king of this world; Ardibehest, fire producer; Shahrivar, the former of metals; Spandarmat, queen of the earth (the Gnostic Sophia); Khordad, the ruler of times and seasons;

[p. 84]

and Amerdad, ruling over the vegetable world. Below there are the 27 Izeds, ruled over by Mithras; in opposition to these were powers of darkness, the 7 arch devs, and the 27 devs, or devils as we call them.

The historic city of Rome, pagan before it was Christian, was built upon Seven Hills; the Palatine, Coelian, Aventine, Viminal, Quirinal, Esquiline, and the Capitol. In Latin times it was called Urbs Septicollis. Some old authors speak of "Valentia" as a secret name for Rome.

The "Bijou Notes and Queries," vol. xiv., p. 235, says that the 7 days of the week have all been used as sacred days; Sunday by Christians; Monday by the Greeks; Tuesday by the Persians; Wednesday by the Assyrians; Thursday by the Egyptians; Friday by the Turks; and Saturday by the Jews.

The number 7 was curiously related to H. P. Blavatsky and the Theosophical Society. "Lucifer" was first published in 1887, and 1887 is the sum of 17 hundreds, 17 tens, and 17 units; H. P. B. lived at 17 Lansdowne Road, and 17 Avenue Road; "Lucifer" was published at 7 Duke Street; 7 volumes were completed at her death; Colonel Olcott first met her at 7 Beckman Street, and later at 71 Broadway, New York. Anna Kingsford was elected president first of the London T. S. Lodge on 7th January 1883; "Isis Unveiled" was published in 1877, and the Third volume of the "Secret Doctrine" was published in 1897, after her death.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

THE OGDOAD. 8.

Is the first cube of energy, and is the only evenly even number within the decad. The Greeks thought it an all-powerful number; they had a Proverb "all things are eight."

Camerarius, in his edition of the Arithmetic of Nicomachus, calls it Universal Harmony, because musical ratios are distinguished by this number.

The Ratio of 9 to 8 is sesquioctave, this forms a tone and is attributed to the Moon.

Mercury.

12 to 9 is sesquitertian

12 to 8 is sesquialter

Venus.

16 to 12 is sesquitertian

16 to 8 is duple

Sun.

18 to 12 is sesquialter.

18 to 9 is duple

Mars.

21 to 9 is duple sesquitertian

Attributed to Jupiter.

24 to 18 is sesquitertian

24 to 12 is duple.

24 to 8 is triple

18 to 12 sesquialter

12 to 8 sesquialter

Saturn.

32 to 24 sesquitertian

32 to 8 quadruple

Are ascribed to the 8th or Inerratic Sphere which comprehends all the rest.

36 to 24. sesquialter

36 to 18 duple

36 to 8 quadruple

24 to 18 sesquitertian

[p. 86]

Hence the Ogdoad was also called "Cadmeia," because Harmony was looked upon as the wife of Cadmus; and Cadmus meant the Sub-lunary World, as Olympiodorus says. Eight was called also Mother, and Rhea, Cybele and Dindymene, from being the first cube, and a cube representing the earth.

The eight persons saved from the flood of Xisuthrus are synonyms of many octaves of gods, such as the 8 Cabiri great gods of Samothrace; see Bryant and Faber on this myth.

There are 8 Beatitudes of the Christian religion, Matthew, chap. v.

Eight is the number of the Moons of Saturn.

There have been several Masonic orders concerned with this Noachite Ogdoad, as the Prussian masons, Knights of the Royal Axe, or Prince of Libanus, the Noachites, and the Royal Ark Mariners, which is a subsidiary order to the Mark Master Masons.

Macrobius says the Ogdoad was the type of Justice, because it consists of evenly even numbers, and on account of its equal divisions.

John Heydon tells us that 8 Events befall the Damned, and that there are 8 rewards of the Blessed.

The number 8 was sacred to Dionysos, who was born at the 8th month; the isle of Naxos was dedicated to him and it was granted to the women of Naxos, that their children born in the 8th month should live, whereas it is usual for such to die, although those born in either the 7th or the 9th month are usually reared.

The Jews were accustomed to practise Circumcision on male infants upon the 8th day after birth.

The Jews at the Chanucah or Feast of Dedication lit 8 candles, and it lasted 8 days. This is the Engkainia of John x. 22. As to conjuring among the ancient Jews, it is said in Talmud, Succah. 53. 1, that Levi played with 8 knives; Samuel in the presence of the King Sapor of Persia used 8 cups, and Abaji before Rabbi Rava used 8 eggs.

Eight prophets were descended from Rahab the Harlot,

[p. 87]

viz., Neraiah, Seraiah, Maasiah, Jeremiah, Hilkiah, Hannemeel, and Shallum. Note also that Huldah the prophetess was the grandchild of Rahab.

The last 8 verses of Deuteronomy, The Mosaic Law, The Pentateuch, were written by Joshua. Bava Bathra, 14. 1.

Rabbi Nathan states that there were 8 sects of the Pharisees: but both of the Talmuds (Jerusalem and Babylon) name only seven. It is prophesied that the Harps which will be played on earth before the Messiah will have 8 strings. Erachin, 13. 2.

As seven was the number of the original Creation, so 8, says W. F. Shaw, may be considered as the Day of Regeneration. Eight souls were saved in the Ark of Noah, and Noah was the 8th in descent, his name was NVCh = 8 times 8 = 64.

888 is the special number of Jesus Christ as "He who is the Resurrection and the Life." He is the great opponent of the 666, the number of the Beast, the number of a Man.

The ancient Chinese writings refer to 8 musical sounds, the Pah-yin. (G. Schlegel.)

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

THE ENNEAD. 9.

THE Ennead is the first square of an odd number, it was said to be like the Ocean flowing around the other numbers within the Decad; no further elementary number is possible, hence it is like the Horizon because all the numbers are bounded by it. We find that it was called Prometheus, and "Freedom from Strife," and "Vulcan," because the ascent of numbers is as far as 9, just as the ascent of things decomposed by fire is as far as the sphere of Fire (the summit of the air), and Juno, because the Sphere of the air is arranged according to the novenary system, and "sister and wife to Jupiter" from its conjunction with the Monad. And "Telesphoros" or "Bringing to an end" because the human offspring is carried 9 calendar months by the parent. And teleios or perfect for the same reason, and also called "Perfect" because it is generated from the Triad, which is called "Perfect."

Attention is called to its being an emblem of Matter, which, ever varying, is never destroyed; so the number 9 when multiplied by any number always reproduces itself, thus:--9 times 2 are 18 and 8 plus 1 are nine: and so on as below:

          9 * 3 = 27; 2 + 7 = 9

       9 * 12 = 108; 1 + 8 + 0 = 9

     
      9 * 4 = 36; 3 + 6 = 9

       9 * 13 = 117; 7 + 1 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 5 = 45; 4 + 5 = 9

       9 * 14 = 126; 6 + 2 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 6 = 54; 5 + 4 = 9

       9 * 15 = 135; 5 + 3 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 7 = 63; 6 + 3 = 9

       9 * 16 = 144; 4 + 4 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 8 = 72; 7 + 2 = 9

       9 * 17 = 153; 3 + 5 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 9 = 81; 8 + 1 = 9

       9 * 18 = 162; 2 + 6 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 10 = 90; 9 + 0 = 9

       9 * 19 = 171; 1 + 7 + 1 = 9

     
      9 * 11 = 99;

       9 * 20 = 180; 8 + 1 + 0 = 9

     
   [p. 89]

In John Heydon's "Holy Guide," 1662, we find that he asserts the number 9 to have other curious properties:--"If writ or engraved on Silver, or Sardis, and carried with one, the wearer becomes invisible, as Caleron, the Brother-in-law of Alexander, did, and by this means lay with his Brother's concubines as often as he did himself. Nine also obtaineth the love of Women. At the 9th hour our Saviour breathed his last; on the ninth day the ancients buried their dead; after 9 years Numa received his laws from Jove; note the 9 cubits length of the iron bedstead of the giant Og, king of Basan, who is a type of the Devil, and there are 9 orders of Devils in Sheol (what we call Hell). It prevails against Plagues and Fevers; it causes Long life and Health, and by it Plato so ordered events that he died at the age of nine times 9."

There are nine orders of Angels, says Gregory, A.D. 381, in Homily 34: Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominions, Virtues, Powers, Principalities, Archangels and Angels.

From a Christian point of view the numbers represent:--

1. Unity of the Godhead.

2. The hypostatic union of Christ.

3. Trinity.

4. Evangelists.

5. Wounds of Jesus.

6. Is the number of sin.

7. Gifts of the spirit, Rev. i. 12; and Jesus 7 times spoke on the cross.

8. Beatitudes.

9. Orders of Angels.

10. Commandments.

11. Apostles besides Judas.

12. Original Apostolic College

13. College completed by St. Paul.

The Nine Muses of ancient Greece were called daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (Memory), and were Calliope, poetry; Clio, history; Melpomene, tragedy; Euterpe, music; Erato, love, inspiration and pantomime; Terpsichore, dancing; Urania, astronomy; Thalia, comedy, and Polyhymnia, eloquence.

The Novensiles are the nine Sabine Gods: viz.--Hercules, Romulus, Aesculapius, Bacchus, Aeneas, Vesta,

[p. 90]

[paragraph continues] Santa, Fortuna and Fides. The Sabines became merged with the Romans about 266 B.C.

The Nine gods of the Etruscans were Juno, Minerva, Tinia, Vulcan, Mars, Saturn, Hercules, Summanus and Vedius; the Etruscans also became united with the Romans.

Note in Macaulay's poem of "Horatius," "Lars Porsena of Clusium by the nine gods he swore," in 596 B.C. Lars Porsena led the Etruscans; they were then most powerful: from the Etruscans the Romans took much of their law, custom and superstition.

It is by nines that Eastern presents are given, when they would extend their magnificence to the greatest degree, as mentioned in Comte de Caylus, "Oriental Tales." 1743.

Barrett's "Magus" notes also 9 precious stones, 9 orders of devils, 9 choirs of angels--he copies from John Heydon.

Note in this connection the Nundinals of the Romans, who marked the days by letters into parcels of 8 days, and on every 9th day the people left their pursuits and went to the towns to market; hence the jocular Latin saying, Tres mulieres Nundinas faciunt. These nundinals are a type of our Dominical letters, a set of seven marking out the 8th days. The Romans also held a purification ceremony on male infants on the 9th day of life, hence the presiding goddess of this rite was called Nundina.

The Nones were one of the sets of days composing each calendar month. The Roman Novennalia was a feast in memory of the dead celebrated every 9th year. The Novendiale was an occasional Roman Catholic fast to avert calamities, from this arose the R.C. system of Neuvaines.

There is a Masonic order of "Nine Elected Knights," in which 9 roses, 9 lights and 9 knocks are used.

The Mahometans have 99 names of the deity. Some Jews have taught that God has 9 times descended to earth; 1st in Eden, 2nd at the confusion of tongues, 3rd at the destruction of Sodom, 4th to Moses at Horeb, 5th at Sinai, 6th to Balaam, 7th to Elisha, 8th in the Tabernacle,

[p. 91]

and 9th in the Temple at Jerusalem; and that his 10th coming as the Messiah will be final.

The ancients had a fear of the number Nine and its multiples, especially 81; they thought them of evil presage, indicating change and fragility.

At the 9th hour Jesus the Saviour died.

Nine is also "the earth under evil influences."

John Heydon in the "Holy Guide," and J. M. Ragon, in his "Maconnerie Occulte," thus associate numbers with the Planets.

Sun 1 and 4, Moon 2 and 7, Jupiter 3, Mercury 5, Venus 6, Saturn 8, Mars 9.

and the Zodiacal Signs thus:--

1 Leo

2 Aquarius

3 Capricornus

4 Sagittarius

5 Cancer

6 Taurus

7 Aries

8 Libra

9 Scorpio

10 Virgo

11 Pisces

12 Gemini.

The First and the Second Temples of the Jews were both destroyed on the 9th day of the Jewish month Ab. On the 9th day of Ab modern Jews do not wear the Talith and Phylacteries until evening. The day should be spent in tears, and no good comes of work done on that day.

The Talmud in Soteh, 20. 1, says that a woman prefers one measure of fun to 9 of Pharisaic professional goodness.

Nine persons have entered Alive into the Jews' Paradise; Enoch, Elijah, Messiah, Eliezer the servant of Abraham, Hiram king of Tyre, Ebed Melek the Ethiop, Jabez the son of Jehuda the Prince, Bathia daughter of Pharaoh, and Sarah the daughter of Asher. Some Rabbis add Rabbi Yoshua son of Levi, but he entered not at the door, but climbed over the wall. See Kethuboth, 7. 2.

In the 145th Psalm we find 9 reasons for praising God.

The Great Eleusinian Mysteries were the successors of the Egyptian Mysteries of Isis and Osiris, and were celebrated at Eleusis and possibly also at Athens, in honour of Demeter or Ceres; they occupied 9 days, and were commenced

[p. 92]

on the fifteenth day of the third Attic month, Boedromion, September: they took place once in every five years.

The Lesser Mysteries were performed in the month Elaphebolion, March, at Agrae on the River Ilyssus in honour of Persephone or Proserpine, daughter of Ceres.

Candidates after reception became Mystae: in the Greater Mysteries they became Epoptae. The ceremonies were called Teletai, perfectings. They remained in use for 1800 years, and were only ceased in the time of the Emperor Theodosius, A.D. 395.

Mention of 9 Worthies is found in literature; they were 3 Gentiles--Hector son of King Priam, Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar; 3 Jews--Joshua, David and Judas Maccabeus; 3 Christians--King Arthur of Britain, Charlemagne and Godfrey de Bouillon.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

  

THE DECAD. 10.

THE Decad, number Ten, or PANTELEIA, which meant "All complete" or fully accomplished," is the grand summit of numbers, which once reached cannot be passed; to increase the sum we must retrograde to the Monad.

The Pythagoreans were entranced with its virtues and called it Deity, Heaven, Eternity and the Sun.

Ten being the recipient or receptacle of all numbers was called Decad, from dechomai = to receive, and hence Heaven, which was ordained to receive all men.

Like the Deity it is a Circle, with visible centre, but its circumference too vast for sight.

It is the sum of the units of the number four as previously mentioned, a holy and Deistic number, thus 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 are 10, and thus ten gains splendour from its parentage.

Also spoken of as "Eternity," which is infinite life, because it contains every number in itself, and number is infinite.

It is also called Kosmos, that is the "Universe." Proclus says: The decad is mundane also, it is the world which receives the images of all the divine numbers, which are supernaturally imparted to it.

It is called "the fountain of eternal nature," because if we take the half, five as the middle number, and add together the next above and the next below, viz., 6 and 4, we make to, and the next two in a similar manner 7 and 3 are 10; and so on 8 and 2 and 9 and 1 give the same result.

All nations reckon by the Decimal scale of notation, to

[p. 94]

which they were no doubt led from the convenience of counting the ten digits of the hands.

It is also spoken of as Kleidoukos, that is, "having custody of others," the magazine of the other numbers, because other numbers are branches from it: also called Fate, which comprises all sorts of events: Age, Power; Atlas, because it supports the to spheres of Heaven; Phanes; Memory; Urania; and "The first Square, because it consists of the first four numbers."

Two old conceits were that the Tenth wave of the sea is always larger than others; and that birds laid the 10th egg of a larger size than the others.

The word Ten was used by the Hebrews, instead of "a large number," so that care must be exercised in translating this; thus Nehemiah interprets "ten generations" of Deuteronomy xxiii. v. 3 to mean "for ever." Nehemiah xiii. 1.

The Kabalists called 5, 6 and 10 circular numbers, because when squared, the result shows the same number in the unit figure, thus:

5 times 5 are 25 and 5 times 25 are 125

6 times 6 are 36    6 times 36 are 216

10 times 10 are 100   10 times 100 are 1000

An old periphrasis mentioned by Shakespeare is, "I'd set my ten commandments in your face," meaning the finger nails for scratching. See 2 Henry VI. i. 3.

The Mahometans say that ten animals were admitted to Paradise.

1. Kratim, the dog of the Seven Sleepers.

2. Ass of Balaam.

3. Ant of Solomon.

4. Whale of Jonah.

5. The Calf (not Ram) offered to Jehovah by Abraham instead of Isaac, his son.

6. The Ox of Moses.

7. The Camel of the prophet Salech.

[p. 95]

8. The Cuckoo of Belkis.

9. The Ram of Ishmael.

10. Al Borek, the Animal which conveyed Mahomet to heaven.

"We find to generations from Adam to Noah, 10 from Shem to Abraham. The 10 spiritual graces of Christianity are Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, prudence, meekness, and temperance," says Dr. G. Oliver; although where he gets 10 generations from Adam to Noah, I know not.

Under to also falls the mention of the Pythagorean Triangle, Tetractys, consisting of an equilateral triangle enclosing ten YODS: thus the upper is the Monad, the second line the Dyad, the third the Triad, and the fourth the Quaternary or Tetrad: representing the four forms of point, line, superficies and solid. A similar form is given by Hebrew Kabalists to form 72, the deity number, by placing in a triangle four Yods, three Hehs, two Vaus and one Heh final, being the letters IHVH of the Tetragrammaton; or they may be put conversely.

Note that ten is used as a sign of fellowship, love, peace, and Union, in the Masonic third token, the union of two five points of Fellowship.

In the Bible we notice to Commandments, to instruments to which Jewish Psalms were sung, to strings in the Psaltery, and that the Holy Ghost descended ten days after the Ascension.

Tucer, Rabanus and Raymond Lully associate the numbers 8 to Air, 5 to Fire, 6 to Earth and 12 to Water.

Apuleius states that among the Egyptians it was customary to fast to days before sacrificing, and Budge says that they used a to-day week.

The Ten Sephiroth form the essence of the Hebrew dogmatic Kabalah, a subject which is too vast and complex to be entered upon in this volume on numerals. A mere glance at the Sephirotic emanations of the Absolute Deity from the mathematical point of view is all that can be

[p. 96]

attempted; my "Introduction to the Kabalah" may be referred to.

From the Absolute Passive Negativity AIN, proceeds AIN SUPH the Limitless, and then AIN SUPH AUR Boundless Light, which concentrates in the first manifestation of the Sephiroth, which is the Crown, KTR, Kether: from Kether proceeds ChKMH, Chochmah, Wisdom, an active masculine potency, and BINH, Binah, Understanding, a passive feminine power.

These three form the Supernal Triad. The fourth and fifth are ChSD, Chesed, Mercy, active and male, and GBVRH, Geburah, Strength, passive and female.

The sixth Sephira is the notable TPART, Tiphereth, Beauty, the central sun, the Logos, the Manifested Son: this completes a second triangle, the reflection of the former.

Number seven is NTZCh, Netzach, Victory, active, and the eighth is HVD, Hod, Splendour, passive; the ninth is YSVD, Yesod, the Foundation, completing the third trinity, or triangle.

MLKT, Malkuth, the Tenth Sephira, completes the emanations. She is the Bride of Microprosopus the Son, the Sun, Logos; she is the Inferior Mother, Queen, and the Manifested Universe.

The whole Ten are viewed as reigning over Four Worlds or Planes of Existence; these are the Worlds of Aziluth, Briah, Yetzirah and Assiah. Malkuth on the plane of Assiah alone is the visible tangible universe.

These Ten Sephiroth are the prototypes of everything spiritual, and also of every part of creation: they are traced in the angelic host and in our universe: three superior, and seven succedent exist in all things; the lower seven are obvious to the uninitiated, but in these manifestations the supernal triad is veiled to the profane.

Some occultists phrase it thus--three are subjective and incomprehensible to man; seven are objective and comprehensible; thus Seven archangels are commonly named, and we have known only of Seven great planets of our system.

[p. 97]

But in some cases even the whole of seven are unknown; we acknowledge but five senses in man, but there are two more awaiting perception by process of evolution.

These Ten Sephiroth are not only viewed as triads from above below, but are also imaged in three columns entitled the Pillars of Severity and Mercy, with the median of Benignity or Mildness. But this scheme is not for this treatise, nor can the Sephirotic alliance with the Planetary symbols, the angelic host, the divine names, and the Book of Thoth, or Tarot be here described; these subjects present a mine of wisdom concealed in the rituals of the Kabalistic "Chabrath zereh aur bokher," from whose parent stem the Rosicrucian Fraternities also may have arisen. These Rituals contain a more complete scheme of the mediaeval occult symbolism than exists in any other form known to me, and I believe that it would not be possible for anyone to reconstitute so complete a system out of all extant literature.

There are 10 Grades in the Rosicrucian Society; they are Zelator, Theoricus, Practicus, Philosophus; Minor, Major and Exempt Adept; Master, Magus and King: some Magi are known, but only Magi know of a Rex.

Rosicrucian private rituals give the correct names and Kabalistic spelling of the Ten heavens of the World of Assiah, which is the material universe.

H. P. Blavatsky declared that a scheme of the Zodiac of 10 Signs preceded that of 12 Signs, but I have been unable to verify the statement, by any ancient work.

Hebrew and Talmudic references are as follows:--10 men were necessary to form a legally-convened meeting at the Synagogue: in London as much as L1000 a year has been spent in providing spare men for this duty. Ten curses were pronounced against Eve; see Talmud, Eiruvin, 100. 2.

Ten things were created during the twilight of the first Sabbath eve. Consult Pesachim, 54. 1.

Ten facts proved the presence of a Supernatural Power in the Temple. Yoma, 21. 1.

[p. 98]

The Rabbis taught that a man should divorce his wife, if for 10 years she had no offspring.

At funerals, condolences were recited by to men, and at weddings by ten men including the bridegroom. Ten cups were drunk at a funeral party--three before supper, three at supper, and four after the meal at the recitation of the four blessings.

Abraham was tested to times; to Miracles were performed in Egypt to help the Children of Israel, and to at the Red Sea. Ten plagues were made to afflict the Egyptians. Ten times the Jews offended God in the Wilderness.

Ten times did the Shekinah come down into the world; at the Garden of Eden; at the Tower of Babel; at Sodom; in Egypt, see Exodus iii. 8; at the Red Sea, Psalm cviii. 9; on Mount Sinai; at the Temple; in the Pillar of Cloud; on the Mount of Olives, see Zechariah xiv. 4; the 10th is omitted in the original reference, Avoth d' Rabbi Nathan, chap. 34.

There are to Hebrew words to designate Idols, and to for Joy. Sodom was to be spared for to righteous men; Gideon took to servants to destroy the Altar of Baal; Boaz chose to witnesses for his marriage with Ruth; Joab's armour was borne by to young men. Jesus speaks of 10 talents, 10 cities, 10 pieces of silver, and gave a parable of to Virgins. The Tabernacle has many to dimensions. There are to Bible names of God, to Canticles, and to necessaries for man's life. Ecclus. 39. 26.

There were to Pythagorean Virtues of Initiation, and the Buddhists teach to Paramitas of Perfection.

In the Alchymico-Kabalistic tract called "Aesch Metzareph" referred to by Eliphaz Levi, and collected from the Zohar of Knorr von Rosenroth and translated into English, and forming Volume IV. of my "Collectanea Hermetica," will be found 10 names for Gold all extracted from the Old Testament; they are there related to the Sephira Geburah.

The Hindoo Puranas tell us of the 10 Avatars of the God Vishnu, the Preserver of the Brahmanic Religion; they are periodical incarnations of the God. First as the

[p. 99]

[paragraph continues] Fish, Matsya; 2. Kurma, the Tortoise; 3. Varaha, the Boar; 4. Narasingha, the Man-Lion; 5. Vamana, the Dwarf; 6. Parasu-Rama; 7. Rama Chandra; 8. Krishna; 9. Buddha; and the 10th, Kalki, the Horse, is yet to come. These Avatars are susceptible of a mystical explanation on the plane of cosmogony; it has been given in the Garuda 'Temple of the "Oriental Order of Light" by Frater T. H. Pattinson of Bradford, a very notable mystic and occult student.

In the Yoga Vasishtha Maha Ramayana of Valmiki, edited by Vihari Lala Mitra, will be found an essay on Om-Tat-Sat, on-id-est, and this contains some very curious information on the to numerals as related to the mystical syllable Om or AUM.

"Aum mani padme hum" means literally, "Oh, the jewel in the lotus," and is taken mystically to mean "the spark of the Divine within me," as was fully explained by Blavatsky to her Esoteric section of Theosophists.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

ELEVEN. 11.

THIS seems to have been the type of a number with an evil reputation among all peoples. The Kabalists contrasted it with the perfection of the Decad, and just as the Sephirotic number is the form of all good things, so eleven is the essence of all that is sinful, harmful and imperfect; with the Ten Sephiroth they contrasted the Eleven Averse Sephiroth, symbols of destruction, violence, defeat and death. On the oldest Tarot cards, the trump called the Tower struck by Lightning, number XVI, shows the Ten Divine Sephiroth on one side and the Eleven Averse Sephiroth on the other side; modern Tarot designs are very much debased.

John Heydon says that by it we know the bodies of Devils and their nature; the Jews understand by it Lilith, Adam's first wife, a she-devil, dangerous to women in confinements; hence they wrote on the walls:--ADM ChVH ChVO LILIT, that is, Adam, Eve, out of doors Lilith."

Jesus, in Matt. xii. 43, plainly allows the doctrine that evil spirits may haunt fields, which Grotius says the Jews think; and their word Demon and Field are similar, being ShDIM (fields), and ShDIM (evil deities); the Siddim are mentioned in Psalm cvi. 37.

It is called the "Number of Sins" and the "Penitent," because it exceeds the number of the Commandments, and is less than twelve, which is the number of Grace and Perfection. But sometimes even eleven receives a favour from God, as in the case of the man who was called in the

[p. 101]

eleventh hour to the vineyard, who yet received the same pay as the others.

Rabbi Jochanan says that eleven sorts of spices were mentioned by God to Moses on Mount Sinai as suitable for holy incense.

Eleven was the number of the Disciples of Jesus, after the fall of Judas Iscariot.

In the Hebrew Language the word eleven was expressed as Achad Osher, AI, or One and Ten.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

  

TWELVE. 12.

THIS number has a perfect and notable character, and was highly esteemed by most nations of antiquity. Almost all the twelves will be found to be allied, either obviously or in a concealed manner, with the Signs of the Zodiac, twelve signs or partitions of the great circle of the heavens--twelve times thirty degrees forming the perfect cycle of 360 arithmetical degrees of the circle: each sign was further sub-divided into three decans. There are many of the learned who believe the twelve sons of Jacob, and twelve founders of tribes, are allegorical only. We may mention the "Twelve Grand Points of Masonry," which used to form a part of the lectures in the Craft degrees. Twelve events in the ceremony of initiation, referred to the sons of Jacob, are given by Mackey:

I. To Reuben was referred the opening of the Lodge--he was the first-born son.

2. To Simeon, the preparation of the land--he prepared the destruction of the Shechemites.

3. To Levi, the report or signal--he gave the signal in the attack on the men of Shechem.

4. To Judah, the entrance of the land--that tribe first entered the promised land.

5. To Zebulun, the prayer--the prayer and blessing of his father fell on him in preference to Issachar.

6. To Issachar, the circumambulation--an indolent tribe, who required a leader.

7. To Dan, the advance to the Altar--for a contrast to their rapid advance to idolatry.

[p. 103]

8. To Gad, the obligation--on account of Jephthah's vow.

9. To Asher, the entrusting; with rich Masonic blessings--resembled the Fathers of their land.

10. To Naphtali, the investment and declared "Free"--the tribe of Naphtali had a peculiar freedom given by Moses.

11. To Joseph, the N.E. corner--because Ephraim and Manasseh (grandsons) represented him, newest corners.

12. To Benjamin, the closing of the Lodge--as being the last son of the Patriarch.

The following associations of Birds, Animals, and Flowers with heavenly bodies has the authority of the Greco-Roman mythology:--

          Greek.

       Latin.

       Bird.

       Animal.

       Vegetable.

     
      Pallas

       Minerva

       Owl

       She-goat

       Olive

     
      Aphrodite

       Venus

       Dove

       He-goat

       Myrtle

     
      Helios

       Sol

       Cock

       Bull

       Laurel

     
      Hermes

       Mercury

       Ibis

       Dog

       Hazel

     
      Zeus

       Jupiter

       Eagle

       Hart

       Horse-chestnut.

     
      Demeter

       Ceres

       Sparrow

       Sow

       Apple

     
      Hephaistos

       Vulcan

       Goose

       Ass

       Box

     
      Ares

       Mars

       Magpie

       Wolf

       Dog-wood

     
      Artemis

       Diana

       Daw

       Hind

       Palm

     
      Hestia

       Vesta

       Heron

       Lion

       Pine

     
      Hera

       Juno

       Peacock

       Sheep

       Thorn

     
      Poseidon

       Neptune

       Swan

       Horse

       Elm

     
   The astrologers associated colours with the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, thus:--

With Pisces, white

" Aquarius, blue

" Capricorn, black or brown

" Sagittarius, yellow or green

" Scorpio, brown

" Libra, black or crimson

" Virgo, black and blue

[p. 104]

With Leo, red and green

" Cancer, green and brown

" Gemini, red

" Aries, white

" Taurus, white and yellow

The Zodiacal Signs are also associated with Sex, and the contrast of Day and Night.

          Pisces

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Aquarius

       Male

       Diurnal

     
      Capricorn

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Sagittarius

       Male

       Diurnal

     
      Scorpio

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Libra

       Male

       Diurnal

     
      Virgo

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Leo

       Male

       Diurnal

     
      Cancer

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Gemini

       Male

       Diurnal

     
      Taurus

       Female

       Nocturnal

     
      Aries

       Male

       Diurnal

     
   And, again, there are other characters which astrologers deem of importance, thus:--

          Pisces

       Water

       Northern

       Common

       Fruitful

     
      Aquarius

       Air

       Western

       Fixed

        

     
      Capricorn

       Earth

       Southern

       Cardinal

        

     
      Sagittarius

       Fire

       Eastern

       Common

        

     
      Scorpio

       Water

       Northern

       Fixed

       Fruitful

     
      Libra

       Air

       Western

       Cardinal

        

     
      Virgo

       Earth

       Southern

       Common

       Barren

     
      Leo

       Fire

       Eastern

       Fixed

       Barren

     
      Cancer

       Water

       Northern

       Cardinal

       Fruitful

     
      Gemini

       Air

       Western

       Common

       Barren

     
      'Taurus

       Earth

       Southern

       Fixed

        

     
      Aries

       Fire

       Eastern

       Cardinal

        

     
   Lastly, the twelve signs are allotted to the planets as their houses:--

[p. 105]

Pisces--the night house of Jupiter

Aquarius--the day house of Saturn (Uranus)

Capricorn--the night house of Saturn

Sagittarius--the night house of Mars

Libra--the day house of Venus

Virgo--the night house of Mercury

Leo--the sole house of Sol

Cancer--the sole house of Luna

Gemini--the day house of Mercury

Taurus--the night house of Venus

Aries--the day house of Mars.

This is very fully explained by Coley in his "Astrology," and also by John Middleton in his "Astrology," 1679.

Herodotus tells us that the Egyptians founded the system of a Twelve-God theology: Euterpe iv. The Hebrews certainly at times worshipped the Sun, Moon, seven planets, and the Star Rulers of the Twelve Zodiacal Signs: see 2 Kings xxiii. 5, and Job xxxviii. 32. Dunlop, in his "Vestiges," remarks that of the names of the twelve months in use among the Jews, several are identical with names of Deities, as Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Bul. Groups of twelve Gods are to be noticed in the religions of many of the ancient nations, as the Chaldeans, Etruscans, Mamertines, Romans, etc.

In Scandinavia the Great Odin had 12 names--personified attributes.

The Kabalists esteem the 12 permutations of the Tetragrammaton, IHVH, VHIH, HIHV, HVHI, IHHV, IVHH, HVIH, VIHH, HHVI, HHIV, HIVH, VHHI.

The Talmuds say:--

No deceased person is at heart lost to his relatives until after 12 months; see the Treatise Berachoth.

How was the Witch of Endor able to bring up Samuel by necromancy? To this question Rabbi Abhu answered, because he had not been dead 12 months: after that time it would not have been possible, for then the body is destroyed and the Soul has gone up into the next world.

[p. 106]

The Rabbis said that at the first revelation the True Name of God was a word of 12 letters. Kiddushin, 71. 1.

The Mishna narrates the events of the first 12 hours; Adam fell into sin in the tenth Hour, was judged in the eleventh, and was cast out of the Garden in the twelfth; so he abode not even one day in his dignity. Sanhedrin, 38. 2. Compare the "Nuctemeron" of Apollonius of Tyana, given by Eliphaz Levi in his "Rituel de la Magie," Paris, 1861.

The 12 Stones of the High Priest's Breast-plate were named;--Sardius, Topaz, Carbuncle, Emerald, Sapphire, Diamond, Ligure or Jacinth, Agate, Amethyst, Beryl, Onyx, and Jasper. See Hebrew Ancient Version, Exodus xxviii.

The 12 Foundations of the Heavenly City, given in Revelations xxi., are,--Jasper, Sapphire, Chalcedony, Sardius, Sardonyx, Emerald, Topaz, Beryl, Chrysolite, Amethyst, Jacinth and Chrysophrasus.

The 12 Hebrew Months were Abib or Nizan (March-April), Iyar or Zif, Sivan, Thammuz, Ab, Elul, Tisri, Bul, Chisleu, Tebeth, Shebat, Adar; and the inter-calary month Ve-Adar.

The 12 Egyptian Months were Pachon, Paoni, Epiphi, Mesori, Thoth, Phaophi, Athyr, Choiak, Tobi, Mechir, Phamenoth and Pharmuthi; the last beginning on March 27th.

The 12 Sons of Jacob were related to the 12 Signs of the Zodiac by the Rosicrucians in a correct order; other schemes of attribution are given by Athanasius Kircher and others.

That by Sir William Drummond is:--Aries to Gad, Taurus to Ephraim, Gemini to Benjamin, Cancer to Issachar, Leo to Judah, Virgo to Naphtali, Libra to Asher, Scorpio to Dan, Sagittary to Manasseh, Capricorn to Zebulun, Aquarius to Reuben, and Pisces to Simeon and Levi.

The 12 Apostles of Jesus were;--Simon Peter, Andrew, James and John the sons of Zebedee, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew also called Levi, James son of Alphaeus,

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] Judas called Lebbaeus and Thaddeus, Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot. The Venerable Bede proposed to rename the Signs with the names of the apostles, and a scheme of allotment is to be found in "The Sphere of Marcus Manilius," by Edward Sherburne, London, 1675. See "Notes and Queries," Vol. xiv., Manchester, U.S.A., p. 211. Westcott on the Zodiac in Soc. Ros. Reports gives the Christian allusions to the Zodiac.

In an ordinary pack of Playing Cards there are 12 Court Cards, but in the Tarot Pack there are also 4 Cavaliers.

The Kabalists greatly esteemed the 12-lettered Name of God, HIH-HVVH-VIHIH, meaning "fuit, est, erit,"--or,--He was, is, will be.

Less esoteric was the Triple Tetragrammaton, IHVH thrice written.

All Fratres of the Rosicrucian Society of England will also be familiar with AB BEN V Ruch H QDSh, Ab-Ben-ve-Ruach-ha-Kodesh; meaning Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

The Rosicrucian Society had a scheme of distributing 12 shades of Colour among the Zodiacal Signs, but this is a secret matter; many erroneous schemes have been published.

The 12 Signs of the Zodiac are named in Hebrew, beginning with Aries; Taleh, Shur, Thaumim, Sartan, Ariah, Bethuleh, Mazanaim, Akrab, Kesith, Gedi, Deli, and Dagim. In Arabic; Al Hamal, Al Thaur, Al Tauman, Al Sartan, Al Asad, Sunbul, Al Zubena, Al Akrab, Al Kaus, Al Gedi, Debi and Al Haut. In Chinese, Pe yaugh, the sheep; Kin nieu, golden bull; Shang huing, two brothers; Kin hiai, crab; Sin, lion; Sha niu, the house girl; Tien tchingh, the claws of a scorpion; Tien Kie, the scorpion; Gun Ma, the man horse; Mu Thien, the hill sheep; Pao pingh, precious vase; and Shang Yu, two fishes.

The old Sanskrit Hindoo names used by astrologers at the present time are; Mesha, Rishaba, Mithuna, Katakam, Simha, Kanya, Tulam, Vrishchika, Dhanus, Makaram, Kumbha and Minam.

The 12 simple letters of the Hebrew Alphabet have

[p. 108]

affinities with the Zodiacal Signs, but the order of relation is a Rosicrucian private doctrine.

There were 12 recorded Appearances of Jesus after his death; to Mary Magdalene, to the Galician women, to two disciples, to Peter, to ten apostles, to eleven apostles, to seven apostles and others when fishing, to 500 brethren at once, to James the Less, to eleven apostles, to Stephen at his martyrdom, to Paul at his Conversion, and to the apostle John.

The 12 hours marked in a watch face can be used to find the cardinal points, if the time is correct, and the sun is visible. Lay the watch flat and point the hour hand to the sun, and then the south will be half way between that hour and the figure XII.

The author of the Hymns of Orpheus, the Scholiast on Hesiod, and Porphyry state that the 12 Labours of Hercules are said to be emblems of the sun in its passage through the 12 signs, and this is repeated by the "Mystagogus Poeticus," 1653, and they have been allotted as follows:--to Aries, the quest of the Golden Apples of the Hesperides; to Taurus, the slaying of the Cretan Bull; Gemini, Hercules and his twin brother strangle the serpents; Cancer, the taking of the Herds of Geryon; Leo, the slaying of the Nemaean Lion; Virgo, the victory over the Amazon Queen; Libra, the death of the Erymanthean boar; Scorpio, the death of the Lernaean Hydra; Sagittarius, the shooting of the Stymphalian Birds; Capricornus, taking of the hind alive to Mycenae; Aquarius, cleaning the stables of Augeas; Pisces, the capture of the horses of Diomedes.

Janus of the Romans is the God of the 12 months, and is drawn with 12 altars beneath his feet. He is the same as Assyrian Ain, Ion, Jan; ON of Eastern nations (Dunlop's "Vestiges," 31).

John Heydon gives the following statements:--

Prosperous numbers are 1 2 3 4 7 9 11 13 14

Very good " 16 17 19 20 22 23 10 26 27

Indifferent " 5 6 8 12 15 18 21

Very bad " 24 25 28 29 30

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

THIRTEEN. 13.

THIRTEEN was the sacred number of the Mexicans and people of Yucatan: twelve of many tribes of North American Indians, as of so many nations of antiquity: this had an astronomical connection, because the Stars and Sun were Gods to them. The method of computation among the Mexican Priests was by weeks of 13 days; consult Dunlop's "Vestiges." Their year contained 28 weeks of 13 days and 1 day over, just as ours contains 52 of 7 days and one day over. Thirteen years formed an Indiction, a week of years, the 13 days over forming another week. Four times 13, or 52, years was their cycle. In Yucatan there were 13 "Snake Gods" (see Steven's "Yucatan," and Gama's "Ancient Mexicans ").

13 is the number of the Hebrew word AHBH, Ahebah, love, and of Achad, AChD, unity. Old authors state that 13 is a number used to procure agreement among married people. Hebrew ancient lore did not reckon the number 13 as unlucky; this idea arose from the fate of Judas after the Last Supper of Jesus, yet not for some centuries, but since the notion was started it has been prevalent among all Christians.

The 13 cards of each suit of a pack of Cards are sometimes applied to the 13 lunar months for purposes of divination.

The Gnostic gems are often inscribed with a 13-lettered Name for God, ABLANA Th ANALBA.

Rabbi Eliezer on account of a serious drought proclaimed 13 fasts, at the end of which rain fell at once.

The Temple used 13 collecting horns; and in it were 13 tables, and 13 devotional reverential bows were used in the full service.

When a Hebrew boy reached the age of 13 years he began to fast for the full time: a girl began at twelve years.

The word Covenant is written 13 times in the chapter on Circumcision.

The Bava Metzia gives 13 reasons for a good breakfast. In the Hebrew Liturgy are found the 13 logical rules for interpreting the law. Hershon, "Talmud Miscellany," p. 167.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

SOME HINDOO USES OF NUMBERS.

IN ancient India, in the Sanscrit language, certain words were used as equivalent to the low numbers: for One they said Moon or Earth: for Two they used many words of things in pairs such as eye, wing, arm: for Three they used Rama, fire or guna, for they knew of 3 Ramas, 3 kinds of fire and 3 gunas or qualities: for 4 they used Veda, age or ocean: for 6 they used Seasons: for 7 they used Sage or vowel: for 12 they said Sun or Zodiac; and for 20 they used nails, meaning those of hands and feet. Edward B. Tylor.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

  

OTHER HIGHER NUMBERS.

THE 14 days of Burial, in the Master's degree: 14 parts into which the body of Osiris was divided: a type of Christ, sacrificed on the 14th day of the month: an amulet of 14 points has been used to cure the sick.

There are 14 Books of the Apocrypha; they were written originally in , never in Hebrew. An Israelite had to partake of 14 meals in the Booth during the Feast of Tabernacles.

The Israelites killed the Paschal Lamb on the 14th day of the Month Nisan.

In Matthew, chap. i., we find the genealogy of Jesus recited in three series of 14 names, the first under Patriarchs and judges, the second under kings, and the third under priests and governors.

The ancient physicians considered that the 14th day was the crisis of fevers.

The Moon waxes and wanes, each for 14 days.

15 was the number of Pairs of The Aeons, or Holy Principles in the Gnostic scheme of Valentinus.

15 is the number by Gematria of the 8th Sephira Hod, HUD.

There were 15 steps in the Temple between the ante-court of Israel and the Women's Court, and in these were sung the 15 Psalms of Degrees; Psalms cxx.-cxxxiv. 15 is the number of Jah, a name of God; so the Jews who wrote letters for numbers, never wrote JH, 10, 5, for 15, but TV, 9, 6 15.

The great day of joyful recreation for Jewish Maidens

[p. 112]

was the 15th day of the month Ab. The Deluge covered the hills to the depth of 15 cubits.

A Jewish boy in the olden time was ordered to begin the study of the Gemara when 15 years of age.

16 means Felicity; a square number. There are 16 Court Cards in a Tarot pack.

17. In the treatise "De Iside et Osiride," Plutarch says Osiris was killed on the 17th day of the moon, and hence when the moon was at the full--and from that reason the Egyptians abominate the number 17, and so did the Pythagoreans--they called in Antiphraxis (obstruction), because it falls between the square number 16 and the oblong number 18.

18 was deemed a protection against thieves.

18. Isaiah made 18 denunciations against Israel. At 18 years of age a girl should go to the Nuptial Canopy. The Golden Candlestick of the Temple was 18 hands-breadths tall. There are 18 Blessings in the Hebrew Liturgy. There were only 18 High Priests during the existence of the First or Solomonic Temple at Jerusalem.

19. The number 19 is famous as being the number of years in the Metonic Cycle; the cycle of the revolutions of the moon, after which she returns to have her changes on the same day of the solar year. Meto lived 433 B.C.; he was an Athenian; he published his discovery at the Olympic Games in the above year. The exact period is, however, 18 years and to days. The Calippic period of four cycles, or seventy-six years, was invented by Calippus, B.C. 330, to correct Meto. John Heydon says that the number 19 facilitates births and menses.

20. The Kiddushin, 29. 2, says God may curse a man who does not marry at least when 20 years old, for his life is a constant transgression. A woman marrying before 20 may bear children up to sixty; at 20 until forty, and after forty will have none. Bava Bathra, 119. 2. To die after 20 days' diarrhoea is to die pure.

21. A hen sits 21 days, and the Almond is ripe 21 days after the flower falls.

[p. 113]

22 Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, used also as numerals. The realization of a good Dream may be deferred 22 years. Berachoth, 55. 2.

From the Works of Hermes Trismegistus are abstracted 22 axioms on the Human Will; they can be found in Tukaram Tatya's "Guide to Theosophy," Bombay, 1887.

There are 22 Trumps in a pack of ancient Tarot Cards, used for Divination; Eliphaz Levi, in his "Clef des Mysteres," says that the numbers 1 to 19 refer to the Keys of Occult Science, and that numbers 19 to 22 are the Keys of Nature: the relation of letters to these are nowhere correctly printed in books.

23. In the Sanhedrin 23 judges were required to try cases punishable by death.

23. This day of September is notable because the moon which comes to the full within a fortnight of it is called the harvest moon, which rises three days in succession at the same time, instead of getting daily later.

24 is an evil number, referring to Cain, QIN, but not of his numeration, which is 100 + 10 + 50 =160, or else 100 + 10 + 700 = 810.

24. There are 24 birds unclean as food; 24 ribs both in man and woman.

26. The number of Jehovah, IHVH, 10 + 5 + 6 + 5.

26. In the English language, which uses 26 letters, it is found that the letters occur in very different proportions. In a fair example of modern English it has been calculated that the proportion between the frequency of the use of the letters was, of a, 85; b, 16; c, 30; d, 44; e, 120; f, 25; g, 17; h, 64; i, 80; j, 4; k, 8; 1, 40; m, 30; n, 80; o, 80; p, 17; q, 5; r, 62; s, 80; t, 90; u, 34; v, 12; w, 20; x, 4; y, 20; and z, 2.

27. The number of the Izeds or Angels who ruled under the supervision of the Seven Amshaspands of the Zoroastrian theology.

28. A division of the Zodiac into 28 mansions of the moon, was probably earlier than the solar division into 12

[p. 114]

parts. The names and symbols can be obtained in Sanskrit and in Arabic. Proctor believes that Solar Astronomy of the 12 signs arose about 2170 B.C., in a country of about 36 degrees of north latitude, and at a period when Taurus was the first constellation of the Zodiac.

29. The Rosh Hashanha says the period of the Moon's Revolution is 29 days and six hours and forty minutes.

30. A meal of Lentils once in 30 days keeps off the Quinsy. At 30 years of age Jesus began his ministry; Joseph was 30 years old when he stood before Pharaoh; David was 30 years old when he began to reign; 30 pieces of silver was the price Judas received, and Jair had 30 sons.

31. The number of El, God = AL. 1 + 30.

31. Joshua did not complete the conquest of Canaan until he had slain 31 kings.

32. The number of the Paths of Wisdom, of the Sepher Yetzirah, being Io Sephiroth and 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet.

33. The years of the life of Jesus: King David reigned in Jerusalem 33 years: the number of vertebrae in the human spinal column.

35. The number of Agla, AGLA, a composite Kabalistic wonder-working name. See page <page 27>.

36. Abaji said there are never less than 36 holy men of any generation upon whom the Shekinah does not rest.

36. Plutarch, "De Iside et Osiride," calls the Tetractys the power of the number 36, and on this was the greatest oath of the Pythagoreans sworn; and it was denominated the World, in consequence of its being composed of the first four even and the first four odd numbers; for 1 and 3 and 5 and 7 are 16; add 2 and 4 and 6 and 8, and obtain 36.

39. The number of Articles of the Protestant Christian Church belief.

40. Up to 40 years of age eating is best for a man, after 40 drinking suits best. He who has passed 40 days without an affliction has had his reward in this life.

[p. 115]

For 40 days the Flood lasted, for 40 days the spies searched the promised land, for 40 days Goliath challenged Israel, 40 days of Ezekiel's penitence, the Jews were 40 years in the Wilderness, 40 days of waiting before embalming the dead, Genesis 1. 3; for 40 days the woman's purification lasted after childbirth; for 40 days Moses fasted twice; for 40 days Elijah fasted, and for 40 days Jesus fasted in the Wilderness, and 40 days elapsed between the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus. Moses was 40 years in Egypt, 40 in Midian, and 40 in the Wilderness. The Israelites were 40 years among the Philistines.

42 is notable because of the 42-lettered name of God, taught by the Kabalists: there were 42 Judges in the Judgment Hall of Osiris. See Bettany, "The World's Religions," p. 166, on the events of the 42nd day after death.

42. The Talmud of Babylon in Kiddushin 71, mentions the 42-lettered Name, and it is given by Ignatz Stern as composed of the Divine Names of the Bible; thus Eheieh asher eheieh, Al, Jah, Jehovah, Elohim, Jehovah Sabaoth, El Chai and Adonai. AHIH AShR AHIH; IH; IHVIH; AL; ALHIM; IHVH TzBAVT; AL ChI; ADNI, Or 4, 3, 4, 2, 5, 2, 5, 4, 5, 2, 2, 4 = 42.

It is very curious that the Ten Sephiroth which denote the attributes of God will show, when these letters are added together, and a V added for and before the last one, this same number 42; if Chesed be called Gedulah, as was common among Kabalists.

45. The number of Adam, ADM.

45. The world is preserved for the sake of 45 righteous persons. Chullin, 92.

48. There have been 48 prophets in Israel: 48 cities were assigned to the Levites.

49. Moses received 49 reasons for the cleanness and uncleanness of each thing: so says The Talmud.

50. The number of the Gates of Binah (BINH) the Understanding. The Kabalah states that even Moses only reached the 49th. See my "Sepher Yetzirah," Third Edition, 1911.

[p. 116]

58. Noah, Nch.

60. Aristotle stated that the Crocodile lives naturally 60 years, and sits 60 days on 60 eggs.

The Chinese have a time cycle of 60 years, and call it Kya-tse. The people of Malabar call this period Chi-tam.

60. The Talmud refers to 60 deadly drugs, and 60 sorts of wines; the sow bears her litter in 60 days.

6i. The number AIN, Negative existence of the Deity.

64. Aletheia, truth.

65. The number of Adonai, translated "Lord" (ADNI) and of Hs, Hes, keep silence.

67. The number of Binah, Supernal Mother, the 3rd Sephira.

70. The number of SUD, Sod, a secret doctrine and private assembly: the earliest name for the Kabalah: also IIN, Yayin, wine, also meant a secret.

70. The Rabbis considered that there were 70 nations, and Mordecai is said to have known 70 languages. The Jewish 70 years of the captivity are reckoned from their conquest by Nebuchadnezzar to the accession of Cyrus.

71. The number of the Members of the Sanhedrin.

72 has a large number of mystic references--to the 72 angels bearing the names of God--derived from Exodus xiv. 19, 20, 21, by the Kabalists; there is an important set of 72 pentacles which, placed in pairs, forms a series of 36 talismans (see Dr. Rudd, the Lemegeton, Harleian MSS.); it is also the number of Chesed (ChSD) the Sephira, Mercy.

72. It is said that Ptolemy, King of Egypt, collected 72 Hebrew Rabbis and confined each in a separate room, and ordered each to write out the Mosaic Law, and that by the help of God each wrote out the same words. Megillah of the Talmud, 9. 1.

This account is similar to that of Josephus and Aristaeus, but different to that of Philo: hence the name Septuagint.

73. The number of Chokmah (ChKMH), Wisdom, the 2nd Sephira.

78. The number of cards in a Tarot pack: 40 numerals, r6 court cards and 22 Trumps.

[p. 117]

79. Boz, Boaz, the left-hand brazen Pillar at the entrance to Solomon's Temple.

80. The number of Yesod, foundation, 9th Sephira. 80. The venerable Rabbi Hillel had 80 pupils.

81. According to the Book of Rites of Chao Kung, B.C. 1112, an Emperor of China should have 3 concubines of the First rank, 9 of the Second, 27 of the Third and 81 of the Fourth Rank.

90. IKIN, Jachin, the right-hand Pillar of Solomon's Temple.

91 is the number of AMN and of Tetragrammaton Adonai (IHVH, ADNI).

96. According to Vitruvius the natural height of a typical adult man is 96 digits, which equalled 24 palms, or six feet.

99. The Mahometans have 99 names attributed to God.

100. This is the number of MDVN, which means strife, and it is the beginning of 100 lawsuits.

The Jerusalem Talmud, Bava Metzia, 85. 1, says that Rabbi Zira fasted 100 times to enable him to forget the Talmud of Babylon, in favour of the Talmud of Jerusalem.

Obadiah was considered worthy to be called prophet, because he concealed 100 prophets in a cave.

103. The family of Herod Asmonaeus ruled Jewry 103 years.

120. For 120 years the secret vault of Christian Rosenkreutz remained unopened, as he had ordered, 1484 to 1604.

The Shemaneh Esreh, the 18 Blessings, were composed by 120 Elders.

130. The Rabbis said that after the curse Adam fasted 130 years as a penance. This number is referred to Elijah, ALIHV, and to the word prophet, HNBIA; these names number 120, add 10 to this, the number of letters. The Kabalists make a Mystical Square (rectangle) or Kamea of ALIHV of 130 permutations; ten by thirteen.

152. The number of Maria, the Greek name for Mary the Virgin, being 40, 1, 100, 10, 1 =152.

153. The number of the great fishes caught in an unbroken net by the Apostles after the Resurrection.

[p. 118]

200. The number of the bones in the human body.

207. This is the number of Ain Suph, AIN SVP, the Boundless, and Aur, AVR, Light, and of Adonai Olam, ADNI OVLAM, Lord of the Universe.

216. The cube of 6; 216 years, the period of the Pythagorean Metempsychosis.

221. The Cup of David in heaven contains 221 logs of wine: (about 20 gallons) says the Talmud.

231. The sum of the numbers 1 to 21, the Gates of the Sepher Yetzirah.

243. Circles of Zoir Anpin; the number of the permutations, without reversal of the Hebrew Letters. Kalisch.

248. There are 248 members of the body, says Talmud Eiruvin, 53. 2, and an anathema enters into all of them. The word ChRM, accursed, is 248, but so is RChM, Mercy.

252. It is said that the disciples of Rabbi Ishmael once dissected a low woman, and found she had 252 members; but it does not say what the extra ones were.

270. Worlds of the Idra Rabba, or Greater Holy Assembly.

271. The Talmud, in Niddah, says that the Hebrew woman's pregnancy lasted 271, 272 or 273 days.

280 days the term of natural pregnancy, human;-ten times the Lunar 28 day period.

284. The number of Theos, God, in Greek letters.

294. Ekklesia, The Church and RODON, the Rose, and also Melchisedek, King of Salem.

300. Mithras.

300. The riches of Korah were so vast that it took 300 mules to carry them.

There were 300 sorts of devils in Sichin.

The Veil of the Temple required 300 priests to draw it aside, and 300 to cleanse it.

314. The number of Shaddai, ShDI and of Metatron, MTTRUN.

318. Helios, the Sun.

345. This is the number of El Shaddai, AL ShDI, God Almighty; and of ShMH (Shemah), the Name of the Absolute God: also of MShH, Moses, and ShILH, Shiloh.

[p. 119]

358. The number of Messiah, Mshich and Nchsh nachash, the Serpent symbol of life.

364. The name Satan, the Shathan, H,shThN, contains 364, and all these days of each year he can tempt man, but not on the 365th, the Day of Atonement.

365. The Greek numeration of Abraxas, a Gnostic talismanic word.

365. Days of the year, Negative Jewish precepts, Dukes of Babylon, and Streets in the City of Rome.

370. Directions of the thought of Microprosopus. See Idra Rabba, 5. 537.

373. Logos.

375. ShLMH, Solomon.

394. There were this number of law-courts in the Jerusalem of the kingdom period.

400. The body of Joseph was carried 400 miles to burial. David is said to have had a guard of 400 young men who rode in golden chariots at the head of his army.

410. The First Temple stood CIo years, and the Second Temple 420.

474. The number of Daath, DOT, Secret Wisdom, the union of Chokmah and Binah.

496. The number of Malkuth (MLKT), the Kingdom, the 10th Sephira.

500. Kosmos.

543. The number of the mystic name Aheie asher Aheie, "I am that I am" (AHIH AShR AHIH).

550. ShMIR, the Shamir, the magical insect which cut the stones for Solomon's Temple.

608 is a very notable number, representing the Sun. Martianus Capella, of the 5th century, says: "The Sun is called in Italy the 'God Sol'; at the Nile, Serapis; at Memphis, Osiris; he is also Attis; Adonis at Byblos; and Ammon in Libya; also Typhon, Mithras, and Pluto; his holy name is of 3 letters, which number 608." In Chaldee and Hebrew 608 is Cham, or Ham (ChM), which also means, "heat." In Greek Y.H.S. from U.H.S. = 400 + 8 + 200 = 608. Tyre, TRCh, is also an example of 608.

[p. 120]

612. Zeus.

613. The words Moses our Rabbi, MShH RBINU; and Lord God of Israel, IHVH ALHI IshRL both number by Gematria 613. The 613 Precepts of the Jewish law were delivered to Moses. David, it is said, reduced them to eleven, and Isaiah to six, and later to two. Habakkuk to One, viz., The just shall live by Faith. 613 also refers to the holy garment which had 600 fringes, eight threads and five knots.

620. The number of Kether, KTR, the Crown, or 1st Sephira.

622 years from the Christian era is the date of the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet from Mecca, from which year the Mahometans reckon their calendar.

632 years A.D. is the foundation of the Persian mode of reckoning years, from their king Yezdegird.

640 is Shemesh, the Sun, ShMSh; Mem is water; place the three letters one above the other, and we get Sh, fire, sun, rising above and sinking below the waters.

646. The total numeration of Elohim, or Aleim ALHIM, being 1 + 30 + 5 + 10 + 600; or avoiding the use of final Mem, we get 1 + 30 + 5 + 10 + 40; neglecting the tens 1 + 3 + 5 + 1 + 4, and placing these figures in a circle, we get the sequence 3.1415, notable as the value of p, or the relation of a diameter to circumference of every circle. Elohim is both a singular and a plural word.

650 has been referred by Godfrey Higgins to Noah, Menes, and Bacchus. Noah, in Hebrew, is NVCh or 64.

651 Teletai, the Greek Ancient Mysteries and Episteme--Science.

666 is the pet number of Godfrey Higgins, as referred to Rasit (RSVT), 200 + 60 + 6 + 400, which he insists means Wisdom--or as most believe--Beginning or Principle: The first words of Genesis are be-rasit, In the beginning.

666. The number of the Beast, the number of a Man, has been associated with Satan, Mahomet, the Pope and a hundred others. It is also the number of SVRT, the Hebrew word for the Sun. It occurs in Revelations xiii. 18.

[p. 121]

666 is also the diameter of a circle whose circumference is 2093, which is the diagonal of a square whose sides are 1480, the number of Christos. It is also the sum of the numbers 1 to 36. It is also the number of Syene in Greek, a place in Egypt at which, if a pit be dug, said Eratosthenes, the rays of the Sun at the Summer Solstice shine perpendicularly into it.

700. The Talmud says there are 700 species of fishes, and in Eiruvin, 18. 1, it says that God plaited Eve's hair into 700 braids.

753 B.C. The founding of the City of Rome.

753. The number alike of Abram with Sarai 243 and 510, and of Abraham with Sarah 248 and 505, the change which led to parenthood.

780. Ophis--serpent, and Sophia--wisdom.

Sol is the number of alpha and omega, 1 + 800, the Peristera or Dove, vehicle of the Holy Ghost; being 80 + 5 + 100 + 10 + 200 + 300 + 5 + 100 + 1 =801.

813 is the numeration of ARARITA, a very important Kabalistic word, its letters being collected from the initials of the sentence, "One principle of his unity, one beginning of his individuality, his vicissitude is one," or so it is rendered by S. L. Mathers.

831. Puramis, a pyramid and Phallos.

888. The number of Iesous, Jesus, the great contrast with 666, the number of the Beast.

891. Uranus, oyranos--Heaven.

903. The Talmud in Berachoth, 8. 1, says that there are 903 kinds of Death, for by Gematria of the word TUTZAUT, which means "outlets" see Psalm lxviii. 20; this number is obtained, thus T, 400: V, 6: Tz, 90: A, 1: V, 6: T, 400 = 903. Death by the Divine kiss is the Euthanasia; death from quinsy is said to be the worst form, a sort of suffocation long drawn out.

950. According to Genesis ix. v. 29 Noah lived 950 years. The great ages given in the book of Genesis to the patriarchs have long been a cause of doubt: recent researches by a Hebrew scholar have led to the opinion that these high

[p. 122]

numbers did not mean our solar years, but years of five months of thirty days, and perhaps the earliest year was only one month. David spoke of 70 years as the length of human life; there was no such long period between Noah and David as could reduce human life by eleven-twelfths.

974. There were this number of generations from the writing of the Law by the Holy One before he created Man in the World.

999. At the Judgment, although there be 999 who condemn a man, he shall be saved if One plead for him.

1000. The 1000-headed serpent is Sesha or Ananta, the Hindoo emblem of eternity.

1000. The daughter of Pharaoh, whom Solomon married, told him of 1000 forms of musical instruments and taught him the chants for all the idols. 1000 is the cube of Ten, a symbol of perfection.

Potiphar's wife tempted Joseph with 1000 talents of silver, when her personal charms failed to move him.

The thickness of the earth's crust is 1000 ells: below this is an abyss of 15,000 ells. Succah, 53. 2.

If you have a secret, tell it only to One in 1000.

1004. B.C. The Consecration of Solomon's Temple.

1081. The number of Tiphereth, the central Sephira, the Sun, Beauty, Microprosopus, Sun-God.

1263. The number of the word Gnosis.

1271. HE GNOSIS, The Gnosis, and Stauros, the cross of Jesus.

1322. First year of Egyptian cycle of Sothis, B.C.; Rameses II. came to the throne in this year, B.C.

1378. The reputed year of the birth of Christian Rosenkreutz, founder of the Rosicrucian philosophy.

1408. Christian Rosenkreutz founded his arcane society in Germania.

1459. The date of the writing of the Hermetic Romance of the Chemical Wedding, by C. R.

1461. The Egyptian Sothic Period, calculated by the heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star, at the solstice.

1480. Christos, in Greek numeration: meaning Anointed:

[p. 123]

according to "The Canon" this number exhibits an important measure of the Cosmos, and was the foundation of the scientific pantheism upon which Christian theology was built, it was a part of The Gnosis and was derived from the priestly astronomers of Egypt.

1484. Christian Rosenkreutz died: the Vault closed over his body and the secrets of the Order he had founded.

1604. The Vault of C. R. opened by his successors after 120 years of secret study and benevolence.

1614. The Fama Fraternitatis Rosae Crucis was printed.

1717. Grand Lodge of Freemasons was founded.

1752. New Year's Day changed from March 25 to January 1.

1865. Frater Robert Wentworth Little founded the Rosicrucian Society of Freemasons of England, in its present form.

1885. Dr. Wm. Robert Woodman became Supreme Magus.

1892. Dr. Wm. Wynn Westcott became Supreme Magus.

1911. This year A.D. is the 5013th year of the Kali-Yuga of the Hindoo sages; this Yuga is to continue 432,000 years.

2000. A Sabbath day's journey was 2000 paces. Rabbi Gamaliel had a tube made which, when he looked through, he could see objects at 2000 cubits distance; this is the earliest suggestion of the telescope. Eiruvin, 43. 2.

2368. The  number of Iesous Christos.

3000. Rav Hammunah says that Solomon spoke 3000 proverbs. At the mourning for Moses 3000 precepts were forgotten.

3102. In B.C. 3102, in February the Kali Yuga, the Black Age of humanity began, according to the Brahmins.

3761. The Jewish Era was calculated to commence 3761 years before the Christian Era.

4231 Years after the dispersion, said Rashi, the Jews will be restored to their own land.

4291. After these years the wars of Gog and Magog will cease, says the Talmud.

5888. The number of verses in the Pentateuch, says the Kiddushin: but they are usually counted as 5845.

[p. 124]

6000. The world was intended to last 6000 years: woo years of Disorder; 2000 of the Law: and woo more before Messiah should come; but his Coming has been delayed by our iniquities; so says the Talmudic treatise. Sanhedrin, 97. 1.

25,000. According to Ezekiel the mystical city of Jerusalem was surrounded by a square space measuring 25,000 roods in length, and this he called The Holy Oblation, and it was for the use of the priests, the sons of Zadok.

3.14159, the value of ir, the ratio of diameter to circumference of a circle.

Bode's Law is a curious arithmetical and astronomical problem:--

        Take the series of numbers

       0

       3

       6

       12

       24

       48

       96

       192

     
      Add 4 to each of them

       4

       4

       4

       4

       4

       4

       4

       4

     
      And we obtain the numbers

       4

       7

       10

       16

       28

       52

       100

       196

     
 These show the relation of the ancient planets to the Sun, as to distance, in the order Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus. The planet corresponding to 28 is missing, and seems to be replaced by the asteroids. Uranus was discovered in 1781.

The Platonic Year, or great Period, according to Tycho Brahe, is 25,816 years; Ricciolus, 25,920 years; Cassini, 24,800 years; Norman Lockyer now gives 24,450 years.

It is the period of time determined by the revolution of the equinoxes, or the space of time wherein the stars and constellations return to their former places in respect to the equinoxes by means of a constant precession. The equinoxes moving backwards or westwards, meet the Sun constantly earlier. In the time of the oldest Greek observations, the equinoxial points were in the first stars of Aries and Libra respectively; they are now in Pisces and Virgo. When these names were given the sun entered

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Aries at the Vernal equinox, and Sign and constellation coincided; now they do not, so do not be confused by our still calling the first Sign of spring Aries, although the Sun is now really at such time in Pisces: every 2160 years the Sign is changed. Precedent to Aries the Sun at the Vernal equinox entered Taurus.

Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues, by W. Wynn Westcott, [1911], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

THE APOCALYPTIC NUMBERS.

1st Resurrection, Revelation xx. 5.

2nd Death, xx. 14. 2 Witnesses, xi. 3.

2 Olive Trees, 2 Candlesticks before throne of God of the Earth, xi. 4.

2-Horned Beast who spoke like a Dragon, xiii. 11; his number is 666.

3 Woes, ix. 12.

1/3 part of Vegetation killed, viii. 7-do. of Sea became Blood, and do. of Fish died, viii. 8-do. of Waters became bitter, viii. 11-do. of Sun, Moon, Stars, viii. 12.

3 1/2 days, Bodies lay unburied, xxi. 9.

4 quarters of the Earth, xx. 8.

4 Beasts, full of eyes and have 6 wings, iv. 6-9 ("Beasts" should be living beings.--W.).

4 Horses, White, Red, Pale, Black.

4 Horns of the golden altar before God, ix. 13.

4 Angels of the Euphrates, ix. 14.

4 Angels of the Winds of the 4 corners of the Earth, vii. 1.

5 Months the Locusts had power to hurt Men, ix. 5-10.

6 Wings of the Beasts (living beings), full of eyes, iv. 8.

7 Churches, i. 20.

7 Candlesticks, i. 20. Represent the 7 Churches.

7 Stars, i. 20; ii. 1. Represent 7 angels of the Churches.

7 Angels of the Churches, i. 20.

7 Lamps stand near the Throne, iv. 5.

7 Seals, v. 5, opened by the Lamb, produce 4 horses, etc.

7 Trumpets, viii. 2. Given to 7 Angels.

7 Thunders utter their voices, x. 3.

7 Plagues held by 7 Angels, xv. 1.

7 Vials of Wrath, xv. 7.

7 Spirits of God, v. 6.

[p. 127]

7-horned and 7-eyed Lamb, v. 6; near the Throne are the 7 Spirits of God.

7-headed and 10-horned Scarlet Beast, on which is a Woman, xvii. 3.

7-headed and 10-horned Dragon with 7 Crowns, xii. 3.

7-headed and 10-horned Beast rose out of Sea, xiii. 1.

10 Crowns on Ten horns of beast which had 7 heads, xiii. 1.

10-horned Dragon with 7 heads, xii. 3.

10-horned Beast with 7 heads rose out of sea, xiii. 1.

10-horned Scarlet Beast with 7 heads, on which was a woman, xvii. 3.

12 Tribes of Israel.

12 Apostles of the Lamb, xxi. 14.

12 Gates of the New Jerusalem, 12 Angels guarding them xxi. 12.

12 Foundations of the Walls of the New Jerusalem.

12 Stars on the head of the Woman, xii. 1.

12 sorts of Fruit on the Tree of Life, xxii. 2.

24 Elders around the Throne, on 24 seats, iv. 4-10.

42 months the Gentiles tread over the outer court of Temple, xi. 2.

42 months the 7-headed Beast to have power to blaspheme, xiii. 5.

144 cubits, the height of the Walls of the New Jerusalem, xxi. 17.

666, the number of "The Beast."

1000 years, the Dragon bound for, xx. 2-3.

1000 years, Souls of the Faithful to live and reign, xx. 4.

1260 days, the two Witnesses prophesy, xi. 3.

1260 days, the Woman to be in the wilderness, xii. 6. 12,000 of each Tribe chosen.

12,000 furlongs, length of the sides of the New Jerusalem, xxi. 16.

144,000 chosen from the whole of the Tribes.

100,000,000, or ten thousand times ten thousand Angels, round the Throne, v. 11.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ody.txt =====



The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey of Homer

  

Translated by Samuel Butler

  

[1900]

Formatted at sacred-texts.com, April 2002, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK I.

TELL ME, O MUSE, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide after he had sacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit, and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he could not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented them from ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things, O daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them. 

So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely home except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his wife and country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got him into a large cave and wanted to marry him. But as years went by, there came a time when the gods settled that he should go back to Ithaca; even then, however, when he was among his own people, his troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not let him get home. 

Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world's end, and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East. He had gone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house of Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first. At that moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon's son Orestes; so he said to the other gods: 

"See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing but their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love to Agamemnon's wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew it would be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do either of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure to take his revenge when he grew up and wanted to return home. Mercury told him this in all good will but he would not listen, and now he has paid for everything in full." 

Then Minerva said, "Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it served Aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; but Aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heart bleeds, when I think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island, far away, poor man, from all his friends. It is an island covered with forest, in the very middle of the sea, and a goddess lives there, daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the bottom of the ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth asunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses, and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his home, so that he is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he may once more see the smoke of his own chimneys. You, sir, take no heed of this, and yet when Ulysses was before Troy did he not propitiate you with many a burnt sacrifice? Why then should you keep on being so angry with him?" 

And Jove said, "My child, what are you talking about? How can I forget Ulysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? Bear in mind, however, that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for having blinded an eye of Polyphemus king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus is son to Neptune by the nymph Thoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys; therefore though he will not kill Ulysses outright, he torments him by preventing him from getting home. Still, let us lay our heads together and see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then be pacified, for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us." 

And Minerva said, "Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, the gods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send Mercury to the Ogygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up our minds and that he is to return. In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, to put heart into Ulysses' son Telemachus; I will embolden him to call the Achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his mother Penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; I will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if he can hear anything about the return of his dear father--for this will make people speak well of him." 

So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable, with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, whereon forthwith she was in Ithaca, at the gateway of Ulysses' house, disguised as a visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she held a bronze spear in her hand. There she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of the oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front of the house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some cutting up great quantities of meat. 

Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodily among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would send them flying out of the house, if he were to come to his own again and be honoured as in days gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among them, he caught sight of Minerva and went straight to the gate, for he was vexed that a stranger should be kept waiting for admittance. He took her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear. "Welcome," said he, "to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shall tell us what you have come for." 

He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they were within he took her spear and set it in the spear--stand against a strong bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father, and he conducted her to a richly decorated seat under which he threw a cloth of damask. There was a footstool also for her feet, and he set another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that she might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, and that he might ask her more freely about his father. 

A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side, and a man-servant brought them wine and poured it out for them. 

Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and seats. Forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink they wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of a banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they compelled perforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began to sing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers that no man might hear. 

"I hope, sir," said he, "that you will not be offended with what I am going to say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf. If these men were to see my father come back to Ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather than a longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, has fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that he is coming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see him again. And now, sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declared themselves to be--for you cannot have come by land. Tell me also truly, for I want to know, are you a stranger to this house, or have you been here in my father's time? In the old days we had many visitors for my father went about much himself." 

And Minerva answered, "I will tell you truly and particularly all about it. I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians. I have come here with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign tongue being bound for Temesa with a cargo of iron, and I shall bring back copper. As for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron under the wooded mountain Neritum. Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell you, if you will go and ask him. They say, however, that he never comes to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, with an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when he comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard. They told me your father was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems the gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on the mainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean, or a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will I am no prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it is borne in upon me from heaven, and assure you that he will not be away much longer; for he is a man of such resource that even though he were in chains of iron he would find some means of getting home again. But tell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses really have such a fine looking fellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfully like him about the head and eyes, for we were close friends before he set sail for Troy where the flower of all the Argives went also. Since that time we have never either of us seen the other." 

"My mother," answered Telemachus, tells me I am son to Ulysses, but it is a wise child that knows his own father. Would that I were son to one who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is no more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is my father." 

And Minerva said, "There is no fear of your race dying out yet, while Penelope has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me true, what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people? What is it all about? Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding in the family--for no one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own? And the guests--how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they make over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable person who comes near them." 

"Sir," said Telemachus, "as regards your question, so long as my father was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. I could have borne it better even though he were dead, if he had fallen with his men before Troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the storm-winds have spirited him away we know not wither; he is gone without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothing but dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for the chiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland island of Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to my mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so also with myself." 

"Is that so?" exclaimed Minerva, "then you do indeed want Ulysses home again. Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple lances, and if he is the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking and making merry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors, were he to stand once more upon his own threshold. He was then coming from Ephyra, where he had been to beg poison for his arrows from Ilus, son of Mermerus. Ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not give him any, but my father let him have some, for he was very fond of him. If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors will have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. 

"But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return, and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge you to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take my advice, call the Achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow -lay your case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness. Bid the suitors take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother's mind is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so dear a daughter may expect. As for yourself, let me prevail upon you to take the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men, and go in quest of your father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell you something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct you. First go to Pylos and ask Nestor; thence go on to Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of all the Achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his way home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand you hear of his death, come home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again. Then, having done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means or foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. You are too old to plead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing Orestes' praises for having killed his father's murderer Aegisthus? You are a fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make yourself a name in story. Now, however, I must go back to my ship and to my crew, who will be impatient if I keep them waiting longer; think the matter over for yourself, and remember what I have said to you." 

"Sir," answered Telemachus, "it has been very kind of you to talk to me in this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all you tell me; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a little longer till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself. I will then give you a present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; I will give you one of great beauty and value--a keepsake such as only dear friends give to one another." 

Minerva answered, "Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way at once. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till I come again, and I will take it home with me. You shall give me a very good one, and I will give you one of no less value in return." 

With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had given Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about his father. He felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the stranger had been a god, so he went straight to where the suitors were sitting. 

Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he told the sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva had laid upon the Achaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his song from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, not alone, but attended by two of her handmaids. When she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roof of the cloisters with a staid maiden on either side of her. She held a veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly. 

"Phemius," she cried, "you know many another feat of gods and heroes, such as poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these, and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom I mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos." 

"Mother," answered Telemachus, "let the bard sing what he has a mind to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, who makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own good pleasure. This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated return of the Danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most warmly. Make up your mind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the only man who never came back from Troy, but many another went down as well as he. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for speech is man's matter, and mine above all others--for it is I who am master here." 

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying in her heart. Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes. But the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters, and prayed each one that he might be her bed fellow. 

Then Telemachus spoke, "Shameless," he cried, "and insolent suitors, let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for it is a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has; but in the morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you formal notice to depart, and feast at one another's houses, turn and turn about, at your own cost. If on the other hand you choose to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father's house there shall be no man to avenge you." 

The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, "The gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may Jove never grant you to be chief in Ithaca as your father was before you." 

Telemachus answered, "Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing, I will be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think of for me? It is no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches and honour. Still, now that Ulysses is dead there are many great men in Ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them; nevertheless I will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whom Ulysses has won for me." 

Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, "It rests with heaven to decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own house and over your own possessions; no one while there is a man in Ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow, I want to know about this stranger. What country does he come from? Of what family is he, and where is his estate? Has he brought you news about the return of your father, or was he on business of his own? He seemed a well-to-do man, but he hurried off so suddenly that he was gone in a moment before we could get to know him." 

"My father is dead and gone," answered Telemachus, "and even if some rumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeed sometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his prophecyings no heed. As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son of Anchialus, chief of the Taphians, an old friend of my father's." But in his heart he knew that it had been the goddess. 

The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the evening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to bed each in his own abode. Telemachus's room was high up in a tower that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, he hied, brooding and full of thought. A good old woman, Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son of Pisenor, went before him with a couple of blazing torches. Laertes had bought her with his own money when she was quite young; he gave the worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his household as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her to his bed for he feared his wife's resentment. She it was who now lighted Telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any of the other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when he was a baby. He opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as he took off his shirt he gave it to the good old woman, who folded it tidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after which she went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolt home by means of the strap. But Telemachus as he lay covered with a woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage of the counsel that Minerva had given him. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK II.

NOW when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an immortal god. He at once sent the criers round to call the people in assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then, when they were got together, he went to the place of assembly spear in hand--not alone, for his two hounds went with him. Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, and when he took his place' in his father's seat even the oldest councillors made way for him. 

Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, the first to speak His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius, land of noble steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him, He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father's land, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless their father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and was still weeping for him when he began his speech. 

"Men of Ithaca," he said, "hear my words. From the day Ulysses left us there has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us? Has he got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or would he speak upon some other matter of public moment? I am sure he is an excellent person, and I hope Jove will grant him his heart's desire." 

Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he was bursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of the assembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then, turning to Aegyptius, "Sir," said he, "it is I, as you will shortly learn, who have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I have not got wind of any host approaching about which I would warn you, nor is there any matter of public moment on which I would speak. My grieveance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes which have fallen upon my house. The first of these is the loss of my excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was like a father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all the chief men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will. They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him to choose the one he likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but day by day they keep hanging about my father's house, sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward off harm from our doors, and I cannot hold my own against them. I shall never all my days be as good a man as he was, still I would indeed defend myself if I had power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house is being disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, to your own consciences and to public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest the gods should be displeased and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove and Themis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold back, my friends, and leave me singlehanded--unless it be that my brave father Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would now avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am to be eaten out of house and home at all, I had rather you did the eating yourselves, for I could then take action against you to some purpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till I got paid in full, whereas now I have no remedy." 

With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into tears. Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spoke thus: 

"Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw the blame upon us suitors? It is your mother's fault not ours, for she is a very artful woman. This three years past, and close on four, she has been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us, and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says. And then there was that other trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweet hearts,' said she, 'Ulysses is indeed dead, still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait--for I would not have skill in needlework perish unrecorded--till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' 

"This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no. The suitors, therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand-'Send your mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father's choice'; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever. We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena, Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your mother, any one of them. It was not fair of her to treat us in that way, and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and I do not see why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, and it is you who pay for it, not she. Understand, then, that we will not go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her choice and married some one or other of us." 

Telemachus answered, "Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore me from my father's house? My father is abroad and we do not know whether he is alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius the large sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughter back to him. Not only will he deal rigorously with me, but heaven will also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will calf on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be a creditable thing to do, and I will have nothing to say to it. If you choose to take offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another's houses at your own cost turn and turn about. If, on the other hand, you elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father's house there shall be no man to avenge you." 

As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly flight. When they were right over the middle of the assembly they wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the town. The people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what an this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best prophet and reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying: 

"Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors, for I see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be away much longer; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in Ithaca. Let us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickedness before he comes. Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be better for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge; everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when the Argives set out for Troy, and he with them. I said that after going through much hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in the twentieth year and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming true." 

Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, "Go home, old man, and prophesy to your own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these omens myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in the sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. Ulysses has died in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead along with him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger of Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is. I suppose you think he will give you something for your family, but I tell you--and it shall surely be--when an old man like you, who should know better, talks a young one over till he becomes troublesome, in the first place his young friend will only fare so much the worse--he will take nothing by it, for the suitors will prevent this--and in the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for it will bear hardly upon you. As for Telemachus, I warn him in the presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear a daughter may expect. Till we shall go on harassing him with our suit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with all his fine speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as much as you please, but we shall only hate you the more. We shall go back and continue to eat up Telemachus's estate without paying him, till such time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other in his suit for a prize of such rare perfection. Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for the way in which she treats us." 

Then Telemachus said, "Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall say no more, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people of Ithaca now know my story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty men to take me hither and thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylos in quest of my father who has so long been missing. Some one may tell me something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear of him as alive and on his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, I will return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again." 

With these words he sat down, and Mentor who had been a friend of Ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority over the servants, rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus: 

"Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind and well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for there is not one of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you as though he were your father. I am not half so angry with the suitors, for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts, and wager their heads that Ulysses will not return, they can take the high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others I am shocked at the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop such scandalous goings on-which you could do if you chose, for you are many and they are few." 

Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, "Mentor, what folly is all this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard thing for one man to fight with many about his victuals. Even though Ulysses himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own head if he fought against such great odds. There is no sense in what you have been saying. Now, therefore, do you people go about your business, and let his father's old friends, Mentor and Halitherses, speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all--which I do not think he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comes and tells him something." 

On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own abode, while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses. 

Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in the grey waves, and prayed to Minerva. 

"Hear me," he cried, "you god who visited me yesterday, and bade me sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. I would obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked suitors, are hindering me that I cannot do so." 

As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and with the voice of Mentor. "Telemachus," said she, "if you are made of the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward henceforward, for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half done. If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless, but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veins I see no likelihood of your succeeding. Sons are seldom as good men as their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you are not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not entirely without some share of your father's wise discernment, I look with hope upon your undertaking. But mind you never make common cause with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor virtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that will shortly fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day. As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such an old friend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come with you myself. Now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors; begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round the town and beat up volunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca both old and new; I will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get her ready and will put out to sea without delay." 

Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in doing as the goddess told him. He went moodily and found the suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinous came up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own, saying, "Telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do. The Achaeans will find you in everything--a ship and a picked crew to boot--so that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news of your noble father." 

"Antinous," answered Telemachus, "I cannot eat in peace, nor take pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough that you should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy? Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, and whether here among this people, or by going to Pylos, I will do you all the harm I can. I shall go, and my going will not be in vain though, thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must be passenger not captain." 

As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile the others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings, jeering at him tauntingly as they did so. 

"Telemachus," said one youngster, "means to be the death of us; I suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or again from Sparta, where he seems bent on going. Or will he go to Ephyra as well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?" 

Another said, "Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be like his father and perish far from his friends. In this case we should have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us: as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her have that." 

This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty and spacious store-room where his father's treasure of gold and bronze lay heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were kept in open chests. Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god to drink, were ranged against the wall in case Ulysses should come home again after all. The room was closed with well-made doors opening in the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper Euryclea, daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of everything both night and day. Telemachus called her to the store-room and said: 

"Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you are keeping for my father's own drinking, in case, poor man, he should escape death, and find his way home again after all. Let me have twelve jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn leathern bags with barley meal--about twenty measures in all. Get these things put together at once, and say nothing about it. I will take everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for the night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can hear anything about the return of my dear father. 

When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him, saying, "My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into your head? Where in the world do you want to go to--you, who are the one hope of the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned these wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, and will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you are among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life out on the barren ocean." 

"Fear not, nurse," answered Telemachus, "my scheme is not without heaven's sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she hears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to spoil her beauty by crying." 

The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and getting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back to the suitors. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape, and went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at the ship by sundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and asked him to let her have a ship--which he was very ready to do. When the sun had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and stationed her at the end of the harbour. Presently the crew came up, and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them. 

Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors into a deep slumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting over their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes heavy and full of drowsiness. Then she took the form and voice of Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside. 

"Telemachus," said she, "the men are on board and at their oars, waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off." 

On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. When they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and Telemachus said, "Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; they are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not know anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one." 

With these words he led the way and the others followed after. When they had brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board, Minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the vessel, while Telemachus sat beside her. Then the men loosed the hawsers and took their places on the benches. Minerva sent them a fair wind from the West, that whistled over the deep blue waves whereon Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did as he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. As the sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Then they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing-bowls to the brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove. 

Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night from dark till dawn. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK III.

BUT as the sun was rising from the fair sea into the firmament of heaven to shed Blight on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the city of Neleus. Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake. There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were nine bulls to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats and burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune, Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship to anchor, and went ashore. 

Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said, "Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and how he came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see what he has got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell no lies, for he is an excellent person." 

"But how, Mentor," replied Telemachus, "dare I go up to Nestor, and how am I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding long conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who is so much older than myself." 

"Some things, Telemachus," answered Minerva, "will be suggested to you by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I am assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth until now." 

She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till they reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were assembled. There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of meat on to the spits while other pieces were cooking. When they saw the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade them take their places. Nestor's son Pisistratus at once offered his hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were lying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then he gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them into a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at the same time. 

"Offer a prayer, sir," said he, "to King Neptune, for it is his feast that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink-offering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt not that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without God in the world. Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an age with myself, so I he handed I will give you the precedence." 

As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and proper of him to have given it to herself first; she accordingly began praying heartily to Neptune. "O thou," she cried, "that encirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants that call upon thee. More especially we pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering you. Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect of the matter that has brought us in our to Pylos." 

When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to Telemachus and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his portion and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak. 

"Now," said he, "that our guests have done their dinner, it will be best to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, and from what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail the seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man's hand against you?" 

Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask about his father and get himself a good name. 

"Nestor," said he, "son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you ask whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca under Neritum, and the matter about which I would speak is of private not public import. I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to have sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself. We know what fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy, but as regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he is dead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished, nor say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid the waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if haply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for me, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all." 

"My friend," answered Nestor, "you recall a time of much sorrow to my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while privateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of king Priam. Our best men all of them fell there--Ajax, Achilles, Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a man singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. But we suffered much more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story? Though you were to stay here and question me for five years, or even six, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you would turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us; during all this time there was no one who could compare with your father in subtlety--if indeed you are his son--I can hardly believe my eyes--and you talk just like him too--no one would say that people of such different ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had any kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all might be ordered for the best. 

"When however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the Argives on their homeward voyage; for they had Not all been either wise or understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through the displeasure of Jove's daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel between the two sons of Atreus. 

"The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, for it was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they explained why they had called--the people together, it seemed that Menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offered hecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva. Fool that he was, he might have known that he would not prevail with her, for when the gods have made up their minds they do not change them lightly. So the two stood bandying hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do. 

"That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching mischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships into the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest, about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We--the other half--embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had smoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to the gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however, did not yet mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the course of which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all the ships that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief was brewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with him. Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up our minds about our course--for we did not know whether to go outside Chios by the island of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, over against the stormy headland of Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign, and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of danger if we headed our ships across the open sea to Euboea. This we therefore did, and a fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passage during the night to Geraestus, where we offered many sacrifices to Neptune for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomed and his men stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made it fair for me. 

"Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything about the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that have reached me since I have been here in my own house. They say the Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles' son Neoptolemus; so also did the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got safe home with him to Crete. No matter how far out of the world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to at the hands of Aegisthus--and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus presently pay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him to do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noble father. You too, then--for you are a tall, smart-looking fellow--show your mettle and make yourself a name in story." 

"Nestor son of Neleus," answered Telemachus, "honour to the Achaean name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through all time for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant me to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are ill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no such happiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as best we may." 

"My friend," said Nestor, "now that you remind me, I remember to have heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards you and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely, or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows but what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in full, either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him? If Minerva were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysses when we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods so openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if she would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would soon some of them him, forget their wooing." 

Telemachus answered, "I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far too much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even though the gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me." 

On this Minerva said, "Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided I could be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get home quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by the treachery of Aegisthus and his wife. Still, death is certain, and when a man's hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how fond they are of him." 

"Mentor," answered Telemachus, "do not let us talk about it any more. There is no chance of my father's ever coming back; the gods have long since counselled his destruction. There is something else, however, about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than any one else does. They say he has reigned for three generations so that it is like talking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor, and tell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What was Menelaus doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better a man than himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed Agamemnon?" 

"I will tell you truly," answered Nestor, "and indeed you have yourself divined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy had found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no barrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would have been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a woman would have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; but we were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus who was taking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon's wife Clytemnestra with incessant flattery. 

"At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she was of a good natural disposition; moreover there was a bard with her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy, that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled her destruction, Aegisthus thus this bard off to a desert island and left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon--after which she went willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus. Then he offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his expectations. 

"Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good terms with one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens, Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of Menelaus' ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in rough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in his hand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites. Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as far as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it it blow hard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet and took the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about the waters of the river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereabouts stretching out into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all along this part of the coast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing, but arter Phaestus the coast is more protected, for a small headland can make a great shelter. Here this part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews just managed to save themselves. As for the other five ships, they were taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold and substance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here at home plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he ruled in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth year Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer of his father. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and of false Aegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very day Menelaus came home, with as much treasure as his ships could carry. 

"Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool's errand. Still, I should advise you by all means to go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such distant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds cannot fly the distance in a twelvemonth, so vast and terrible are the seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you to Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person." 

As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said, "Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings to Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed time. People should go away early and not keep late hours at a religious festival." 

Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering; then they threw the tongues of the victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink-offerings. When they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Minerva and Telemachus were forgoing on board their ship, but Nestor caught them up at once and stayed them. 

"Heaven and the immortal gods," he exclaimed, "forbid that you should leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor and short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tell you I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son of my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship--not while I live--nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as have done." 

Then Minerva answered, "Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much better that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only older person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus' own age, who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to the ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconians where I have a large sum of money long owing to me. As for Telemachus, now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and let one of your sons go with him. Be pleased also to provide him with your best and fleetest horses." 

When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and all marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus by the hand. "My friend," said he, "I see that you are going to be a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you are still so young. This can have been none other of those who dwell in heaven than Jove's redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who showed such favour towards your brave father among the Argives." "Holy queen," he continued, "vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my good wife, and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you in sacrifice." 

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way to his own house, followed by his sons and sons-in-law. When they had got there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed them a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed the wine, he prayed much and made drink-offerings to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drink-offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home to bed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room that was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only unmarried son now left him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room of the house, with the queen his wife by his side. 

Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Nestor left his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble that stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat, sceptre in hand, as guardian of the public weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him, Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth son was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him sit with them. Nestor then addressed them. 

"My sons," said he, "make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish first and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested herself visibly to me during yesterday's festivities. Go, then, one or other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer, and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus's ship, and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel. Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the horns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also--to bring me some clear spring water." 

On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was brought in from the plain, and Telemachus's crew came from the ship; the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he worked his gold, and Minerva herself came to the sacrifice. Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratius and Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from the house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his other hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with a sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket. Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley meal, and he offered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from the heifer's head upon the fire. 

When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal Thrasymedes dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke that cut through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters and daughters-in-law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight. Then they lifted the heifer's head from off the ground, and Pisistratus cut her throat. When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up. They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands. When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits and toasted them over the fire. 

Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor's youngest daughter, washed Telemachus. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she brought him a fair mantle and shirt, and he looked like a god as he came from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When the outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had had had enough to eat and drink Nestor said, "Sons, put Telemachus's horses to the chariot that he may start at once." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fleet horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision of bread, wine, and sweetmeats fit for the sons of princes. Then Telemachus got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up the reins and took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high citadel of Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying the yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochus and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diocles entertained them hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn; appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse. Pisistratus lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they came to the corn lands Of the open country, and in the course of time completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them. 

Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land, 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK IV.

THEY reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon them where they drove straight to the of abode Menelaus [and found him in his own house, feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and also of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that valiant warrior Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her to him while he was still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles' son was reigning. For his only son he had found a bride from Sparta, daughter of Alector. This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who was fair as golden Venus herself. 

So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making merry in his house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up with his tune.] 

Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate, whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went close up to him and said, "Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two men, who look like sons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take their horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?" 

Menelaus was very angry and said, "Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you never used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horses out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper; you and I have stayed often enough at other people's houses before we got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace henceforward." 

So Eteoneus bustled back and bade other servants come with him. They took their sweating hands from under the yoke, made them fast to the mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into the house. Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished when they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then, when they had admired everything to their heart's content, they went into the bath room and washed themselves. 

When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by the side of Menelaus. A maidservant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side. 

Menelaus then greeted them saying, "Fall to, and welcome; when you have done supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you cannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line of sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you are." 

On this he handed them a piece of fat roast loin, which had been set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close that no one might hear, "Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, see the gleam of bronze and gold--of amber, ivory, and silver. Everything is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Jove. I am lost in admiration." 

Menelaus overheard him and said, "No one, my sons, can hold his own with Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but among mortal men--well, there may be another who has as much wealth as I have, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much and have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before I could get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the Erembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are born, and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one in that country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk, for the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was travelling and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure in being lord of all this wealth. Whoever your parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin of a stately mansion fully and magnificently furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have so that I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain of Troy, far from Argos. I of grieve, as I sit here in my house, for one and all of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it. Yet grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for them all. I cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he make me, for no one of all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he did. He took nothing by it, and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a long time, and we know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, his long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he left behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account." 

Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with both hands. When Menelaus saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his own time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all about. 

While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted and perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought her a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the silver work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus lived in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world; he gave Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work-box that ran on wheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed this by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violet coloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat, put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband. 

"Do we know, Menelaus," said she, "the names of these strangers who have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?-but I cannot help saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so like somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think) as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby behind him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts, on account of my most shameless self." 

"My dear wife," replied Menelaus, "I see the likeness just as you do. His hands and feet are just like Ulysses'; so is his hair, with the shape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I was talking about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on my account, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle." 

Then Pisistratus said, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in thinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father, Nestor, sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you could give him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble at home when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is no one among his own people to stand by him." 

"Bless my heart," replied Menelaus, "then I am receiving a visit from the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake. I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when heaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should have founded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should have made him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that are subject to me. We should thus have seen one another continually, and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at all." 

Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept, Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom the son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus, 

"Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me you were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it be possible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I am getting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone. This is all we can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads for them and wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who died at Troy; he was by no means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him--his name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself, but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant." 

"Your discretion, my friend," answered Menelaus, "is beyond your years. It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man is son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and offspring--and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days, giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who are both we disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to all this weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured over our hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in the morning." 

On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them. 

Then Jove's daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She drugged the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour. Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop down dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before his very eyes. This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing-bowl and others poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole country is a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had put this drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, she said: 

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable men (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil, and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I tell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single one of the exploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he was before Troy, and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. He covered himself with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the enemy's city looking like a menial or a beggar. and quite different from what he did when he was among his own people. In this disguise he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him. I alone recognized him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for me. When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes, and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans till he had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships, he told me all that the Achaeans meant to do. He killed many Trojans and got much information before he reached the Argive camp, for all which things the Trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning to oam after my home, and I was unhappy about wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there, away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is indeed by no means deficient either in person or understanding." 

Then Menelaus said, "All that you have been saying, my dear wife, is true. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but I have never seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too, and what courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the bravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans. At that moment you came up to us; some god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and you had Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hiding place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and mimicked all our wives -Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside heard what a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our minds whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but Ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except Anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his two brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this that saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away again." 

"How sad," exclaimed Telemachus, "that all this was of no avail to save him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to send us all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep." 

On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to wear. So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which a man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then, did Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Menelaus rose and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an immortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said: 

"And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to Lacedaemon? Are you on public or private business? Tell me all about it." 

"I have come, sir replied Telemachus, "to see if you can tell me anything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; my fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying their addresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if haply you may tell me about my father's melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller; for he was a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all." 

Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. "So," he exclaimed, "these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well lay her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair will make short work with the pair of them--and so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered him--if he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without concealment all that the old man of the sea told me. 

"I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very strict about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as a ship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an island called Pharos--it has a good harbour from which vessels can get out into open sea when they have taken in water--and the gods becalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind to help me forward. We should have run clean out of provisions and my men would have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and saved me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me. 

"She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger. 'Stranger,' said she, 'it seems to me that you like starving in this way--at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by inches.' 

"'Let me tell you,' said I, 'whichever of the goddesses you may happen to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the gods know everything. which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home.' 

"'Stranger,' replied she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you. There is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name is Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he is Neptune's head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom of the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home. He will also tell you, if you so will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.' 

"'Can you show me,' said I, 'some stratagem by means of which I may catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For a god is not easily caught--not by a mortal man.' 

"'Stranger,' said she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you. About the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that furs the water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and goes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals--Halosydne's chickens as they call them--come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in shoals all round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they bring with them. Early to-morrow morning I will take you to this place and will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore, the three best men you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the old man will play you. 

"'First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleep among them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that he is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for he will do his very utmost to get away from you. He will turn himself into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the seas.' 

"Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was clouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach. 

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I took the three men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the goddess fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them just skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father. Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we should come up. When we were close to her, she made us lie down in the pits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Our ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy seals was most distressing--who would go to bed with a sea monster if he could help it?-but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under each man's nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of the seals. 

"We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the old man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he went over them and counted them. We were among the first he counted, and he never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had done counting. Then we rushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on which he began at once with his old tricks, and changed himself first into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was running water, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him and never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became distressed, and said, Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that hatched this plot with you for snaring me and seizing me against my will? What do you want?' 

"'You know that yourself, old man,' I answered, 'you will gain nothing by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in this island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing all heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home?' 

"Then,' he said, 'if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly, you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven fed stream of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign in heaven. When you have done this they will let you finish your voyage.' 

"I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long and terrible voyage to Egypt; nevertheless, I answered, 'I will do all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me true, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we set sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them came to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends when the days of his fighting were done.' 

"'Son of Atreus,' he answered, 'why ask me? You had better not know what I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard my story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans perished during their return home. As for what happened on the field of battle--you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea, alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drove him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safe out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva's hatred he would have escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting. He said the gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when Neptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawny hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remained where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and was drowned. 

"'Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but when he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against his will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but where Aegisthus was then living. By and by, however, it seemed as though he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own country. 

"'Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, and to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been looking out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he went and told Aegisthus who at once began to lay a plot for him. He picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on one side the cloister, while on the opposite side he prepared a banquet. Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, and invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him there, all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles; not one of Agamemnon's followers was left alive, nor yet one of Aegisthus', but they were all killed there in the cloisters.' 

"Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat down upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear to live nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had had my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea said, 'Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you can, for Aegisthus be still alive, and even though Orestes has beforehand with you in kilting him, you may yet come in for his funeral.' 

"On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, 'I know, then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is he dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.' 

"'The third man,' he answered, 'is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I can see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for he has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your own end, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take you to the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. There fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings softly from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men. This will happen to you because you have married Helen, and are Jove's son-in-law.' 

"As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went along. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars. I again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased heaven's anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that his name might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for the gods sent me a fair wind. 

"And now for yourself--stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and I will then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of a chariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice that so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a drink-offering to the immortal gods." 

"Son of Atreus," replied Telemachus, "do not press me to stay longer; I should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; I find your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos are already impatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should he a piece of plate. I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca, but will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadowsweet and wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas in Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that. None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and Ithaca least of all." 

Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus's hand within his own. "What you say," said he, "shows that you come of good family. I both can, and will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing-bowl by Vulcan's own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold. Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey. I will make you a present of it." 

Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king's house. They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the courts]. 

Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses' house, and were behaving with all their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were sitting together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said to Antinous, 

"Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos? He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet broken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break him." 

They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was only away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the swineherd; so Antinous said, "When did he go? Tell me truly, and what young men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his own bondsmen--for he might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let him have the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did he take it without yourleave?" 

"I lent it him," answered Noemon, "what else could I do when a man of his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him? I could not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they were the best young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain--or some god who was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor here myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out for Pylos." 

Noemon then went back to his father's house, but Antinous and Eurymachus were very angry. They told the others to leave off playing, and to come and sit down along with themselves. When they came, Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke in anger. His heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said: 

"Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has got away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be giving us trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown. Find me a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait for him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue the day that he set out to try and get news of his father." 

Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all of them went inside the buildings. 

It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were plotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell his mistress. As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said: "Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell the maids to leave their master's business and cook dinner for them? I wish they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of my son's estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were children how good Ulysses had been to them--never doing anything high-handed, nor speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and they may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never did an unjust thing by anybody--which shows what bad hearts you have, and that there is no such thing as gratitude left in this world." 

Then Medon said, "I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are plotting something much more dreadful now--may heaven frustrate their design. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his father." 

Then Penelope's heart sank within her, and for a long time she was speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance. At last, however, she said, "Why did my son leave me? What business had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the ocean like sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one behind him to keep up his name?" 

"I do not know," answered Medon, "whether some god set him on to it, or whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if his father was dead, or alive and on his way home." 

Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief. There were plenty of seats in the house, but she. had no heart for sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed, 

"My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction than any other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now my darling son is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having heard one word about his leaving home. You hussies, there was not one of you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If I had known he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matter how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him--one or other. Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at once and tell everything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who are trying to exterminate his own race and that of Ulysses." 

Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, "You may kill me, Madam, or let me live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the real truth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want you to spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam, wash your face, change your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him even though he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he has trouble enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate die race of the race of the son of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to come up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that lie far all round it." 

With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the tears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and went upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised barley into a basket and began praying to Minerva. 

"Hear me," she cried, "Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable. If ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son from the villainy of the suitors." 

She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer; meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister, and one of them said: 

"The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us. Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die." 

This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen. Then Antinous said, "Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest some of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that in silence, about which we are all of a mind." 

He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their. ship and to the sea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft, while their fine servants brought them their armour. Then they made the ship fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and waited till night should fall. 

But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the wicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in the likeness of Penelope's sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had married Eumelus and lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to the house of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so it came into her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the door to, and hovered over her head, saying, 

"You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer you to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he will yet come back to you." 

Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered, "Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but I suppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, to leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me? I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship--a foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going about among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious about him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him, lest something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he has gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against him, and are bent on killing him before he can return home." 

Then the vision said, "Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There is one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand by his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who has sent me to bear you this message." 

"Then," said Penelope, "if you are a god or have been sent here by divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one--is he still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?" 

And the vision said, "I shall not tell you for certain whether he is alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation." 

Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted, so vivid had been her dream. 

Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea, intent on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and there is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie. Here then the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK V.

AND NOW, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus--harbinger of light alike to mortals and immortals--the gods met in council and with them, Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began to tell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away there in the house of the nymph Calypso. 

"Father Jove," said she, "and all you other gods that live in everlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of his subjects but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were their father. There he is, lying in great pain in an island where dwells the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot get back to his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying to murder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of his father." 

"What, my dear, are you talking about?" replied her father, "did you not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses to get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able to protect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him." 

When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, "Mercury, you are our messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor Ulysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor men, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to reach fertile Scheria, the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of ourselves. They will send him in a ship to his own country, and will give him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back from Troy, if he had had had all his prize money and had got home without disaster. This is how we have settled that he shall return to his country and his friends." 

Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to the island which was his journey's end, he left the sea and went on by land till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived. 

He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal wood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her cave there was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees, wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests--owls, hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. Even a god could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when he had admired it sufficiently he went inside the cave. 

Calypso knew him at once--for the gods all know each other, no matter how far they live from one another--but Ulysses was not within; he was on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso gave Mercury a seat and said: "Why have you come to see me, Mercury--honoured, and ever welcome--for you do not visit me often? Say what you want; I will do it for be you at once if I can, and if it can be done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before you. 

As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough, and then said: 

"We are speaking god and goddess to one another, one another, and you ask me why I have come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jove sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all this way over the sea where there are no cities full of people to offer me sacrifices or choice hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods can cross Jove, nor transgress his orders. He says that you have here the most ill-starred of alf those who fought nine years before the city of King Priam and sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it. On their way home they sinned against Minerva, who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone was carried hither by wind and tide. Jove says that you are to let this by man go at once, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people, but shall return to his house and country and see his friends again." 

Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, "You gods," she exclaimed, to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous and hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in open matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia. So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to him in a thrice ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so long and killed Iasion with his thunder-bolts. And now you are angry with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor creature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island. I got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal, so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him. Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as will be likely to bring him safely to his own country." 

"Then send him away," said Mercury, "or Jove will be angry with you and punish you"' 

On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses, for she had heard Jove's message. She found him sitting upon the beach with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home-sickness; for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. As for the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea-shore, weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the sea. Calypso then went close up to him said: 

"My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your life out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will; so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread, wine, and water on board to save you from starving. I will also give you clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home, if the gods in heaven so will it--for they know more about these things, and can settle them better than I can." 

Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. "Now goddess," he answered, "there is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft. Not even a well-found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall mage me go on board a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean me no mischief." 

Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: "You know a great deal," said she, "but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx--and this is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take--that I mean you no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what I should do myself in your place. I am dealing with you quite straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry for you." 

When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on till they came to Calypso's cave, where Ulysses took the seat that Mercury had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him of the food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar for herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them. When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink, Calypso spoke, saying: 

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own land at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and let me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see this wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet I flatter myself that at am no whit less tall or well-looking than she is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should compare in beauty with an immortal." 

"Goddess," replied Ulysses, "do not be angry with me about this. I am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so beautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal. Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the best of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea already, so let this go with the rest." 

Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into the inner part of the cave and went to bed. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Ulysses put on his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about her waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself to think how she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a great bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island where the largest trees grew--alder, poplar and pine, that reached the sky--very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the water. Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew, Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished doing. He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring them by rule in good workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he filed a deck on top of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mast with a yard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all round with wicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then he threw on a quantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some linen to make the sails, and he made these too, excellently, making them fast with braces and sheets. Last of all, with the help of levers, he drew the raft down into the water. 

In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean clothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another larger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions, and found him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm for him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it, while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting Bootes, and on the Bear--which men also call the wain, and which turns round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into the stream of Oceanus--for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left. Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian coast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon. 

But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight of Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged his head and muttered to himself, saying, heavens, so the gods have been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia, and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen him. Still, he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done with it." 

Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon him all at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses' heart began to fail him. "Alas," he said to himself in his dismay, "what ever will become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I should have trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all coming true. How black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and what a sea the winds are raising from every quarter at once. I am now safe to perish. Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in the cause of the sons of Atreus. Would that had been killed on the day when the Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, for then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honoured my name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end." 

As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let go the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. For a long time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above water and spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams. In spite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to escape drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn winds whirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as though the South, North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with it at once. 

When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea, saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great distress Ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft. 

"My poor good man," said she, "why is Neptune so furiously angry with you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as I bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to the Phaecian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take my veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to no harm so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land take it off, throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again." With these words she took off her veil and gave it him. Then she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters. 

But Ulysses did not know what to think. "Alas," he said to himself in his dismay, "this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring me to ruin by advising me to will quit my raft. At any rate I will not do so at present, for the land where she said I should be quit of all troubles seemed to be still a good way off. I know what I will do--I am sure it will be best--no matter what happens I will stick to the raft as long as her timbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up I will swim for it; I do not see how I can do any better than this." 

While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft, which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed about by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it as if he were on horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso had given him, bound Ino's veil under his arms, and plunged into the sea--meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched him as he did so, and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, "'There now, swim up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people. I do not think you will be able to say that I have let you off too lightly." On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where his palace is. 

But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe. 

Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when the third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so much as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell he looked eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children rejoice when their dear father begins to get better after having for a long time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might once more set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, he began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell still broke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was enveloped in spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops. 

Ulysses' heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to himself, "Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the sea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb out for want of foothold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me off my legs and dash me against the rocks as I leave the water--which would give me a sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know that Neptune is very angry with me." 

While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold of the rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave came on again and carried him back with it far into the sea-tearing his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its bed, and the stones come up along with it even so did the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down under the water. 

Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his own destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him. He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating against the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the shore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of a river, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said: 

"Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of the sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has lost his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself your suppliant." 

Then the god stayed his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here at last Ulysses' knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had completely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently, when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off the scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt stream of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave that bore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down among the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth. 

"Alas," he cried to himself in his dismay, "what ever will become of me, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed through the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter cold and damp may make an end of me--for towards sunrise there will be a keen wind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand, I climb the hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I may escape the cold and have a good night's rest, but some savage beast may take advantage of me and devour me." 

In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one upon some high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath two shoots of olive that grew from a single stock--the one an ungrafted sucker, while the other had been grafted. No wind, however squally, could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun's rays pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow into one another. Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself a bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lying about--enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard winter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself down and heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone in the country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the ashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so did Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleep upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of his sorrows. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK VI.

SO HERE Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off to the country and city of the Phaecians--a people who used to live in the fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous moved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far from all other people. He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses and temples, and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead and gone to the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were inspired of heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hie in furtherance of the return of Ulysses. 

She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there slept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King Alcinous. Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty, one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well-made folding doors. Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas's daughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age; then, coming up to the girl's bedside like a breath of wind, she hovered over her head and said: 

"Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy daughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend you. This is the way to get yourself a good name, and to make your father and mother proud of you. Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a washing day, and start at daybreak. I will come and help you so that you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going to remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have a waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and girdles; and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town." 

When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say is the everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine and in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are illumined for ever and ever. This was the place to which the goddess went when she had given instructions to the girl. 

By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about her dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. Her mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as he was going out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the Phaeacian aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said: 

"Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are the chief man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt when you attend meetings of the council. Moreover, you have five sons at home, two of them married, while the other three are good-looking bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go to a dance, and I have been thinking about all this." 

She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to, but her father knew and said, "You shall have the mules, my love, and whatever else you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shall get you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold all your clothes." 

On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out, harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. Her mother prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of good things, and a goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon, and her mother gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and her women might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip and reins and lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on the road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her. 

When they reached the water side they went to the washing-cisterns, through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any quantity of linen, no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mules and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the water side. They took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get the dirt out. After they had washed them and got them quite clean, they laid them out by the sea side, where the waves had raised a high beach of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves with olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of the stream, and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had done dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to play at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goes forth upon the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer, and the wood-nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their sport along with her (then is Leto proud at seeing her daughter stand a full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her handmaids. 

When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the clothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how Ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him to the city of the Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. On this they all shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat up in his bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be. 

"Alas," said he to himself, "what kind of people have I come amongst? Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilized, or hospitable and humane? I seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass. At any rate I am among a race of men and women. Let me try if I cannot manage to get a look at them." 

As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even into a well-fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep--even such did Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked as he was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt and so begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, for Minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. She stood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or stay where he was and entreat her to give him some clothes and show him the way to the town. In the end he deemed it best to entreat her from a distance in case the girl should take offence at his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her in honeyed and persuasive language. 

"O queen," he said, "I implore your aid--but tell me, are you a goddess or are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, I can only conjecture that you are Jove's daughter Diana, for your face and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and mother--thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourself going out to a dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whose wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home. I never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am lost in admiration as I behold you. I can only compare you to a young palm tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar of Apollo--for I was there, too, with much people after me, when I was on that journey which has been the source of all my troubles. Never yet did such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and I admired and wondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder at yourself. I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress; yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon the sea. The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygian island, and now fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endure still further suffering; for I do not think that I have yet come to the end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me. 

"And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I have met, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way to your town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither to wrap your clothes in. May heaven grant you in all things your heart's desire--husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a house. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one." 

To this Nausicaa answered, "Stranger, you appear to be a sensible, well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives prosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. Now, however, that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes nor for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably look for. I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to Alcinous, in whom the whole power of the state is vested." 

Then she called her maids and said, "Stay where you are, you girls. Can you not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for a robber or a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to do us Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on a land's end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do with any other people. This is only some poor man who has lost his way, and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress are under Jove's protection, and will take what they can get and be thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink, and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the wind." 

On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another back. They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told them, and brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go wash in the stream. But Ulysses said, "Young women, please to stand a little on one side that I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil, for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon it. I cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. I am ashamed to strip before a number of good-looking young women." 

Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and from his broad shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, and had got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil, and put on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then made him look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it--and his work is full of beauty. Then he went and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite young and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said to her maids: 

"Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who live in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first saw him I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the gods who dwell in heaven. I should like my future husband to be just such another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want to go away. However, give him something to eat and drink." 

They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and drank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind. Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she took her seat, she called Ulysses: 

"Stranger," said she, "rise and let us be going back to the town; I will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I can tell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaecians. But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person. As long as we are going past the fields--and farm lands, follow briskly behind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself. Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side with a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the road side, for every one has a place where his own ship can lie. You will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it, and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people deal in ship's gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are the places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel far over the sea. 

"I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low fellow, if he met us, might say, 'Who is this fine-looking stranger that is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she End him? I suppose she is going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she has taken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or some god has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is going to live with him all the rest of her life. It would be a good thing if she would take herself of I for sh and find a husband somewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians who are in with her.' This is the kind of disparaging remark that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for I should myself be scandalized at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with men in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still alive, and without having been married in the face of all the world. 

"If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help you home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by the road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow all round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about as far from the town as a man' voice will carry. Sit down there and wait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my father's house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come into the town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous. You will have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything like such a fine house as he has. When you have got past the gates and through the outer court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. You will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by firelight. It is a fine sight to see her as she leans back against one of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her. Close to her seat stands that of my father, on which he sits and topes like an immortal god. Never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly. If you can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again, no matter how distant it may be." 

So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river. The mules drew well and their hoofs went up and down upon the road. She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with judgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter of Jove. 

"Hear me," he cried, "daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hear me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking me. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends and be hospitably received by the Phaecians." 

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK VII.

THUS, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at the gateway, and her brothers--comely as the gods--gathered round her, took the mules out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira, and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king over the Phaecians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god. She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and brought her supper for her into her own room. 

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaecians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him, and Ulysses said: 

"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous? I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your town and country." 

Then Minerva said, "Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air." 

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one of the Phaecians could see him as he passed through the city in the midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired their harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when they reached the king's house Minerva said: 

"This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you. You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen. Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous. They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous by Periboea, a woman of great beauty. Periboea was the youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life to boot. 

"Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaecians. Nausithous had two sons Rhexenor and Alcinous; Apollo killed the first of them while he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured of all those that keep house along with their husbands. 

"Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle their disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have every hope of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and country." 

Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to Marathon and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered the abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous, and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver and the hook of the door was of gold. 

On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old. Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the house had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaecians used to sit and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table. There are fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles go, backwards and forwards like the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it will turn oil. As the Phaecians are the best sailors in the world, so their women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent. 

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful trees--pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so soft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this, the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again are just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout the whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the outer court to the house itself, and the town's people draw water from it. Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the house of king Alcinous. 

So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among the Phaecians making their drink-offerings to Mercury, which they always did the last thing before going away for the night. He went straight through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there, but Ulysses began at once with his petition. 

"Queen Arete," he exclaimed, "daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave their possessions to their children, and all the honours conferred upon them by the state) to help me home to my own country as soon as possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from my friends." 

Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus: 

"Alcinous," said he, "it is not creditable to you that a stranger should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine and water that we may make a drink-offering to Jove the lord of thunder, who takes all well-disposed suppliants under his protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever there may be in the house." 

When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many good things of what there was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous said to one of the servants, "Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants." 

Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said: 

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You have had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter how distant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like other people. It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs. They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves, and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other of them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are." 

Then Ulysses said: "Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted. Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me, you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless, let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man's notice no matter how dire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I shall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose, and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shall be content to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house." 

Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when they had made their drink-offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants were taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak, for she recognized the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said, "Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should like to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes? Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?" 

And Ulysses answered, "It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island far away in the sea which is called 'the Ogygian.' Here dwells the cunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself far from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however, me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave comrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in and treated me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal that I might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let her do so. 

"I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the good clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will, either because Jove had told her she must, or because she had changed her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which she provisioned with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair. Days seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast--and glad indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still much trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to your shores. 

"There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then, I got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night was coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off into a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept among the leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter's maid servants playing upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. I besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition, much more so than could be expected from so young a person--for young people are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine, and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in which you see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told you the whole truth." 

Then Alcinous said, "Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she was the first person whose aid you asked." 

"Pray do not scold her," replied Ulysses; "she is not to blame. She did tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid, for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Every human being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable." 

"Stranger," replied Alcinous, "I am not the kind of man to get angry about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter, and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a house and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend to-morrow to the matter of your escort. You can sleep during the whole voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a long way further off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is the furthest of any place--and yet they did the whole voyage in a single day without distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards. You will thus see how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are." 

Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, "Father Jove, grant that Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country." 

Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, "Rise, sir stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready," and glad indeed was he to go to his rest. 

So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; but Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by his side. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK VIII.

NOW when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous and Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaecian place of assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there they sat down side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took the form of one of Alcinous' servants, and went round the town in order to help Ulysses to get home. She went up to the citizens, man by man, and said, "Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, come to the assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks like an immortal god." 

With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every one was struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he really was, that he might impress the Phaecians favourably as being a very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials of skill to which they would challenge him. Then, when they were got together, Alcinous spoke: 

"Hear me," said he, "aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may be, has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East or West. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. Let us then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him; indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain of me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw a ship into the sea--one that has never yet made a voyage--and man her with two and fifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you have made fast your oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to prepare a feast. I will find you in everything. I am giving will these instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards you aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining our guest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and we will have Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he may choose to sing about." 

Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a servant went to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to the sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft. They moored the vessel a little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house of King Alcinous. The outhouses, yards, and all the precincts were filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and Alcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen. These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet. 

A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of his eyesight. Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests, leaning it up against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on a peg over his head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands. He also set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cup of wine from which he might drink whenever he was so disposed. 

The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse inspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel between Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on one another as they gat together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was glad when he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for Apollo had foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor to consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the evil that by the will of Jove fell both Danaans and Trojans. 

Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head and covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that he was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly. No one noticed his distress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy sighs that he was heaving. So he at once said, "Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us proceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners." 

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A servant hung Demodocus's lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief men of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of several thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus, and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also Euryalus son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking man among the Phaecians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas, Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also. 

The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew forward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a couple of mules can plough in a fallow field. They then turned to the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best man. Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous's son Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, when they had all been diverted with the games, "Let us ask the stranger whether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfully built; his thighs, claves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength, nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong he is." 

"You are quite right, Laodamas," replied Euryalus, "go up to your guest and speak to him about it yourself." 

When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd and said to Ulysses, "I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of them--and you must have gone in for many a one before now. There is nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the showing himself a proper man with his hands and feet. Have a try therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind. Your return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn into the water, and the crew is found." 

Ulysses answered, "Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind is set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite trouble, and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and people to further me on my return home." 

Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, "I gather, then, that you are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in. I suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward freights and homeward cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the athlete about you." 

"For shame, Sir," answered Ulysses, fiercely, "you are an insolent fellow--so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in speech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence, but heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever he goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome as a god, but his good looks are not crowned with discretion. This is your case. No god could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but you are a fool. Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you are quite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed, so long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of the age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I have gone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for your taunts have stung me to the quick." 

So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc, larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians when disc-throwing among themselves. Then, swinging it back, he threw it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he did so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been made yet. Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked the place where it had fallen. "A blind man, Sir," said she, "could easily tell your mark by groping for it--it is so far ahead of any other. You may make your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can come near to such a throw as yours." 

Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, so he began to speak more pleasantly. "Young men," said he, "come up to that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or even heavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him because I am his guest, and one cannot compete with one's own personal friend. At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible thing for a guest to challenge his host's family at any game, especially when he is in a foreign country. He will cut the ground from under his own feet if he does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I want to have the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good hand at every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. I am an excellent archer. In battle I am always the first to bring a man down with my arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me. Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could when we Achaeans were before Troy and in practice. I far excel every one else in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of the earth, but I should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such as Hercules, or Eurytus the Cechalian-men who could shoot against the gods themselves. This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his end, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged him as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an arrow. Running is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of the Phaecians might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am still weak." 

They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, "Sir, we have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which I understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who knows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend my meaning, and will explain to any be one of your chief men who may be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not particularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of good dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen, warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him." 

On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king's house, and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers. Presently the servant came back with Demodocus's lyre, and he took his place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the merry twinkling of their feet. 

Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus many presents, and defiled King Vulcan's marriage bed, so the sun, who saw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief, got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place. When he had finished his snare he went into his bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs; he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not even a god could see them, so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting out for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was the one he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love for Venus. 

Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, an said as he took her hand in his own, "Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is barbarous." 

She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest, whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too late that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him what was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods. 

"Father Jove," he cried, "and all you other blessed gods who live for ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I will show you. Jove's daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because I am lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built, whereas I am a cripple--but my parents are to blame for that, not I; they ought never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together asleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are very fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer than they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there, however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest." 

On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the goddesses stayed at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been, whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying: 

"Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages." 

Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, "Messenger Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?" 

"King Apollo," answered Mercury, "I only wish I might get the chance, though there were three times as many chains--and you might look on, all of you, gods and goddesses, but would sleep with her if I could." 

The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free again. "Let him go," he cried, "and I will undertake, as you require, that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among the immortal gods." 

"Do not," replied Vulcan, "ask me to do this; a bad man's bond is bad security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?" 

"Vulcan," said Neptune, "if Mars goes away without paying his damages, I will pay you myself." So Vulcan answered, "In this case I cannot and must not refuse you." 

Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with burnt offerings. Here the Graces hathed her, and anointed her with oil of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her in raiment of the most enchanting beauty. 

Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were charmed as they heard him. 

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and caught it with ease before it came down again. When they had done throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a great stamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said: 

"King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was astonished as I saw them." 

The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaecians "Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he may reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with a light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology and a present too, for he has been rude." 

Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, "King Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He shall have sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him." 

As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, "Good luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return, for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone through much hardship." 

To which Ulysses answered, "Good luck to you too my friend, and may the gods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you have given me along with your apology." 

With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his sons received them, and placed them under their mother's charge. Then Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats. 

"Wife," said he, turning to Queen Arete, "Go, fetch the best chest we have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on the fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that will follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet--which is of exquisite workmanship--that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his life whenever he makes a drink-offering to Jove, or to any of the gods." 

Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. Meanwhile Arete brought a magnificent chest her own room, and inside it she packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the Phaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from Alcinous, and said to Ulysses: 

"See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your ship." 

When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had taken as good care of him as though he had been a god. When the servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guests who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof if the cloister, and admired him as she saw him pass. "Farewell stranger," said she, "do not forget me when you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom for having saved your life." 

And Ulysses said, "Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved me." 

When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean against it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant, "Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less; bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse teaches them their songs and loves them." 

The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took it and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, "Demodocus, there is no one in the world whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied under the Muse, Jove's daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing the return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If you were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who was. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses got by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you." 

The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some of the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others, hidden within the horse, were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it, and were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering and propitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their ambuscade. He sang how they over ran the city hither and thither and ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelaus to the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged most furiously, nevertheless by Minerva's help he was victorious. 

All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. She screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks--even so piteously did Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said: 

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently in great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it should be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we are making with so much good will, are wholly in his honour, and any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother. 

"Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is no one, neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for people's fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born. Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians have no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the whole world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is covered with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing my father say that Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the matter of giving people escorts. He said that one of these days he should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted some one, and bury our city under a high mountain. This is what my used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no is a matter which he will decide for himself. 

"And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and in what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples themselves, and of their cities--who were hostile, savage and uncivilized, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us also why you are made unhappy on hearing about the return of the Argive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged all this, and sent them their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something to sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife's when you were before Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law--which are the nearest relations a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some brave and kindly-natured comrade--for a good friend is as dear to a man as his own brother?" 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK IX.

AND ULYSSES answered, "King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however, since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. 

"Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my there guests though I live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes, reknowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain called Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a group of islands very near to one another--Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it towards dawn. It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know none that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of them persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own country and his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreign country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it. Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove's will I met with on my return from Troy. 

"When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is the city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly would not obey me, so they stayed there drinking much wine and killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the Cicons cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These were more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another. So long as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against them, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; so we got away with those that were left. 

"Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the hands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land. There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and steersmen direct our ship. I should have got home at that time unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against me as I was doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of Cythera. 

"I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eater, who live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had a third man under them. They started at once, and went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to them, but were for staying and munching lotus with the Lotus-eater without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast under the benches. Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. 

"We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have no laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no account of their neighbours. 

"Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is overrun with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen--who as a rule will suffer so much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices--do not go there, nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city, or sail over the sea to one another's country as people who have ships can do; if they had had these they would have colonized the island, for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season. There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea shore, well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There is a good harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship be moored, but all one has to do is to beach one's vessel and stay there till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and there are poplars growing all round it. 

"Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist hung all round our ships; the moon was hidden behind a mass of clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach till daybreak. 

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we admired the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove's daughters roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill,--and we had plenty of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While we were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires. We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council. 

"'Stay here, my brave fellows,' said I, 'all the rest of you, while I go with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they are uncivilized savages, or a hospitable and humane race.' 

"I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large yard, with a high wall round it made of stones built into the ground and of trees both pine and oak. This was the abode of a huge monster who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He would have nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was a horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain. 

"I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I also took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron, Apollo son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. When we were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also his wife and child; so he made me some presents of great value--seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maid in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one housekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was impossible to refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect neither right nor law. 

"We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went inside and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold. They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey. When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return, drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with them. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might give me a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal with. 

"We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to the mouth of the cave--so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the doorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said: 

"'Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do you sail the as rovers, with your hands against every man, and every man's hand against you?' 

"We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous form, but I managed to say, 'We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy, but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors may reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven, for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers under his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and foreigners in distress.' 

"To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, 'Stranger,' said he, 'you are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me, indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do not care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much stronger than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for doing so. And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you came on shore. Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the land?' 

"He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in that way, so I answered with a lie; 'Neptune,' said I, 'sent my ship on to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me escaped the jaws of death.' 

"The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals, but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came. 

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, he again lit his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his morning's meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back again--as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried 'Shoo, shoo,' after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself with glory. 

"In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows. The Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do, and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the monster's eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom I should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave--this time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my hands: 

"'Look here, Cyclops,' said I, you have been eating a great deal of man's flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed yourself; how can you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this way?' 

"He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. 'Be so kind,' he said, 'as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want to make you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this drinks like nectar and ambrosia all in one.' 

"I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as I could: 'Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me, therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what my father and mother and my friends have always called me.' 

"But the cruel wretch said, 'Then I will eat all Noman's comrades before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the present that I will make him.' 

As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground. His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk. Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam into the monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship's plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the fire. As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper it--for it is this that gives strength to the iron--and it makes a great hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops' eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We ran away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him. 

"'What ails you, Polyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a noise, breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is trying to kill you either by fraud or by force? 

"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, 'Noman is killing me by fraud! Noman is killing me by force!' 

"'Then,' said they, 'if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray to your father Neptune.' 

"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish enough to attempt this. 

"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In the end I deemed that this plan would be the best. The male sheep were well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in the thick wool under his belly, and flung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time. 

"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self; Polyphemus laid hold of it and said: 

"'My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because that wicked Noman and his horrid crew have got him down in his drink and blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm a this no-good Noman has done me.' 

"As spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's belly, and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed. However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops. 

"'Cyclops,' said I, 'you should have taken better measure of your man before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin would find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.' 

"He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore. But I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of me to hold my tongue. 

"'Do not,' they exclaimed, 'be mad enough to provoke this savage creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have pounded our heads and our ship's timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.' 

"But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage, 'Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.' 

"On this he groaned, and cried out, 'Alas, alas, then the old prophecy about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and said I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been all along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength, whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey--for Neptune and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no one else neither god nor man can do.' 

"Then I said, 'I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.' 

"On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed, saying, 'Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true-begotten son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man's ship and find trouble in his house.'] 

"Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on our way towards the shore of the island. 

"When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops' sheep, and divided them equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As for the ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only thought how he might destroy my ships and my comrades. 

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK X.

THENCE we went on to the Aeoli island where lives Aeolus son of Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it were) upon the sea, iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus has six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry the daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother, feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well-made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These were the people among whom we had now come. 

"Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must go, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of difficulty, but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut up in the hide as in a sack--for Jove had made him captain over the winds, and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly with a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from any quarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly. 

"Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among themselves, and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack that Aeolus had given me. 'Bless my heart,' would one turn to his neighbour, saying, 'how this man gets honoured and makes friends to whatever city or country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking home from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has, come back with hands as empty as we set out with--and now Aeolus has given him ever so much more. Quick--let us see what it all is, and how much gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.' 

"Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack, whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried us weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make the best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the Aeolian island. 

"When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the threshold. They were astounded when they saw us and said, 'Ulysses, what brings you here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took great pains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it was that you wanted to go to.' 

"Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, 'My men have undone me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this mischief, for you can if you will.' 

"I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their father answered, 'Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you come here as one abhorred of heaven. "And with these words he sent me sorrowing from his door. 

"Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the rocky stronghold of Lamus--Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians, where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked] salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleep might earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day. 

"When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for there was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always dead calm. I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the very end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising from the ground. So I sent two of my company with an attendant to find out what sort of people the inhabitants were. 

"The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water, and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of that country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she directed them to her father's house, but when they got there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they were horrified at the sight of her. 

"She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly, and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them, and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates raised a hue and cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians sprang up from every quarter--ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard the horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishes and took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing my men within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and told my men to row with alf their might if they too would not fare like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us. As for the others there was not one of them left. 

"Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives a great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes--for they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus. We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god guided us thither, and having landed we there for two days and two nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third day came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork, or hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out I espied the smoke of Circe's house rising upwards amid a dense forest of trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some of them instead of going myself. 

"When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four feet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag was much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder, steadying him with one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship, I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. 'Look here my friends,' said I, 'we are not going to die so much before our time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have got something to eat and drink on board.' On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed a splendid fellow. Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner. 

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning, fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, 'My friends, we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no idea where the sun either sets or rises, so that we do not even know East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thick forest of trees.' 

"Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a captain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I took command of the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they wept, as also did we who were left behind. 

"When they reached Circe's house they found it built of cut stones, on a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. There were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it--poor bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against them. As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming from dinner--for they know he will bring them something--even so did these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures. Presently they reached the gates of the goddess's house, and as they stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as she worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling colours as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, 'There is some one inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is woman or goddess.' 

"They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who suspected mischief and stayed outside. When she had got them into her house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian but she drugged it with wicked poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her pigsties. They were like pigs-head, hair, and all, and they grunted just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they remembered everything. 

"Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to tell me about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so; his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the others. 

"'We went,' said he, as you told us, through the forest, and in the middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was a goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed her into the house, but I stayed where I was, for I thought there might be some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.' 

"Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and show me the way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously, saying, 'Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.' 

"'Stay where you are, then, 'answered I, 'eating and drinking at the ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.' 

"With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through the charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his face. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, 'My poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone and without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe's pigsties, like so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not fancy that you can set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back and will have to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I will protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, which is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe's house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief. 

"'And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try to practise upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will prevent her spells from working. I will tell you all about it. When Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as though you were goings to kill her. She will then be frightened and will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take good care also of yourself, but you make her swear solemnly by all the blessed that she will plot no further mischief against you, or else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for nothing.' 

"As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground an showed me what it was like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk; the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods can do whatever they like. 

"Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island; but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with care as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and called the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her--much troubled in my mind. She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without its charming me, she struck she, struck me with her wand. 'There now,' she cried, 'be off to the pigsty, and make your lair with the rest of them.' 

"But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her, whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke piteously, saying, 'Who and whence are you? from what place and people have you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you? Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than the bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day with his ship while on his way home form Troy; so be it then; sheathe your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to trust each other.' 

"And I answered, 'Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.' 

"So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her oath then I went to bed with her. 

"Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their work. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Another brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of gold. A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth she brought in water and set it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted. When the water in the cauldron was boiling, she poured cold into it till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing me and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant brought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious. 

"When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief, she came to me and said, 'Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink? Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I have already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.' 

"And I said, 'Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his friends free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my own eyes.' 

"When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand in her hand and opened the pigsty doors. My men came out like so many prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than they were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me at once, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the whole house was filled with the sound of their hullabalooing, and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all your ship's gear and property in some cave, and come back here with your men.' 

"I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the silly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds with their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got back to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred. 'Sir,' said the affectionate creatures, 'we are as glad to see you back as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about the fate of our comrades.' 

"I spoke comfortingly to them and said, 'We must draw our ship on to the land, and hide the ship's gear with all our property in some cave; then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe's house, where you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great abundance.' 

"On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried to hold them back and said, 'Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to keep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them. It was all through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.' 

"When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and said, 'Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe's house.' 

"On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand that I had given him. 

"Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably at dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud till the whole palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and hearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the hardships--you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness left in you.' 

"Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had come round, my men called me apart and said, 'Sir, it is time you began to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your house and native country at all.' 

"Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down to sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what I had got to say. 'Circe,' said I, 'please to keep the promise you made me about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon as ever your back is turned.' 

"And the goddess answered, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is another journey which you have got to take before you can sail homewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias whose reason is still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.' 

"I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, 'And who shall guide me upon this voyage--for the house of Hades is a port that no ship can reach.' 

"'You will want no guide,' she answered; 'raise you mast, set your white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there of itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will reach the fertile shore of Proserpine's country with its groves of tall poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of Hades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron, and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run into one another. 

"'When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench a cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then wine, and in the third place water-sprinkling white barley meal over the whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the pyre with good things. More particularly you must promise that Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all your flocks. 

"'When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the river. On this, many dead men's ghosts will come to you, and you must tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to Proserpine. Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any other poor ghost from coming near the split blood before Teiresias shall have answered your questions. The seer will presently come to you, and will tell you about your voyage--what stages you are to make, and how you are to sail the see so as to reach your home.' 

"It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to each of them man by man: 'You must not lie sleeping here any longer,' said I to them, 'we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.' And this they did as I bade them. 

"Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We had with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of Hades. 

"When I had got the men together I said to them, 'You think you are about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.' 

"The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it, for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not wish to be seen? 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XI.

THEN, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind. Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft and stayed steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear and let her go as the wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails were full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us. 

"Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had, and would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly promised that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best in all my flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon the ghosts came trooping up from Erebus--brides, young bachelors, old men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale with fear. When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered my questions. 

"The first ghost 'that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and unburied in Circe's house, for we had had too much else to do. I was very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: 'Elpenor,' said I, 'how did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have here on foot quicker than I have with my ship.' 

"'Sir,' he answered with a groan, 'it was all bad luck, and my own unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe's house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul down to the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or I may bring heaven's anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.' And I said, 'My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.' 

"Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood till I had asked my questions of Teiresias. 

"Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre in his hand. He knew me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why, poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.' 

"So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of the blood he began with his prophecy. 

"You want to know,' said he, 'about your return home, but heaven will make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all your men, [in another man's ship, and you will find trouble in your house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to your wife. 

"'When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you must take a well-made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune. Then go home and offer hecatombs to an the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you. All that I have said will come true].' 

"'This,' I answered, 'must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother's ghost close by us; she is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can make her know me.' 

"'That,' said he, 'I can soon do Any ghost that you let taste of the blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let them have any blood they will go away again.' 

"On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and spoke fondly to me, saying, 'My son, how did you come down to this abode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot, but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?' 

"'Mother,' said I, 'I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans. But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind me; is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she could and married again?' 

"My mother answered, 'Your wife still remains in your house, but she is in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a magistrate, and how every one invites him; your father remains at his old place in the country and never goes near the town. He has no comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown anyhow upon the ground. He grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force of my affection for you--this it was that was the death of me.' 

"Then I tried to find some way of embracing my mother's ghost. Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and being touched to the quick I said to her, 'Mother, why do you not stay still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?' 

"'My son,' she answered, 'most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now, however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.' 

"Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally. In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned her told me her race and lineage. 

"The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of Cretheus the son of Aeolus. She fell in love with the river Enipeus who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber. When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his own and said, 'Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold your tongue and do not tell any one.' 

"Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer. 

"Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not hold Thebes till they had walled it. 

"Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon, and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon. 

"I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king OEdipodes whose awful lot it was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother--to his ruing bitterly thereafter. 

"Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only man who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer, but the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had passed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then, was the will of Jove accomplished. 

"And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons, Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a special dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods. 

"After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace of Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world, and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa, that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them, before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or chin. 

"Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her. 

"I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here. As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it." 

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them: 

"What do you think of this man, O Phaecians? Is he not tall and good looking, and is he not Clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you share in the distinction. Do not he a hurry to send him away, nor niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need, for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance." 

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among them, "My friends," said he, "what our august queen has just said to us is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it; but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King Alcinous." 

"The thing shall be done," exclaimed Alcinous, "as surely as I still live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow, by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean to give him. As regards--his escort it will be a matter for you all, and mine above all others as the chief person among you." 

And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay here for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me when I get back to Ithaca." 

"Ulysses," replied Alcinous, "not one of us who sees you has any idea that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practised bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed time--go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here listening till to-morrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell us of your adventures." 

"Alcinous," answered Ulysses, "there is a time for making speeches, and a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their return, through the treachery of a wicked woman. 

"When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up tome, surrounded by those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as he had tasted the blood he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. 'How did you come by your death,' said I, 'King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives and city?' 

"'Ulysses,' he answered, 'noble son of Laertes, was not lost at sea in any storm of Neptune's raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing-bowl and the loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our-blood. I heard Priam's daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her close beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body, and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy murdering her own husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after--even on the good ones.' 

"And I said, 'In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to last in the matter of their women's counsels. See how many of us fell for Helen's sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief against too during your absence.' 

"'Be sure, therefore,' continued Agamemnon, 'and not be too friendly even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about the rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We left her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for Troy. This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man's estate, and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I could do so. Furthermore I say--and lay my saying to your heart--do not tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women. But now tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes? Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus--for I presume that he is still living.' 

"And I said, 'Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not know.' 

"As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus. The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?' 

"And I said, 'Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you are a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so much to heart even if you are dead.' 

"'Say not a word,' he answered, 'in death's favour; I would rather be a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king of kings among the dead. But give me news about son; is he gone to the wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if you have heard anything about my father Peleus--does he still rule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy--could I but be as I then was and go even for a short time to my father's house, any one who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon me it.' 

"'I have heard nothing,' I answered, 'of Peleus, but I can tell you all about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a man did he kill in battle--I cannot name every single one of those whom he slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman's bribes. Moreover, when all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse--grasping the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.' 

"When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the prowess of his son. 

"The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof--still angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess. 

"When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, will you not forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for it was this that made him counsel your destruction--come hither, therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can tell you.' 

"He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts; nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being so angry, or I should have gone talking to him, only that there were still others among the dead whom I desired to see. 

"Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his sentences upon them. 

"After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever. 

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering some nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove's mistress Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho. 

"I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground--parched by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed their fruit over his head--pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds. 

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone with both his hands. With hands and feet he' tried to roll it up to the top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and the steam rose after him. 

"After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him like scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle, and death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be able to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, my poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of suffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me--a low fellow who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch the hell-hound--for he did not think he could find anything harder for me than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury and Minerva helped me.' 

"On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me. And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I would fain have seen--Theseus and Pirithous glorious children of the gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places, whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had to row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XII.

"AFTER we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is dawn and sunrise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and waited till day should break. 

"Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent some men to Circe's house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewood from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had been used to row with. 

"While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and wine. Then she stood in the midst of us and said, 'You have done a bold thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died twice, to other people's once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, and will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from misadventure either by land or sea.' 

"We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our adventures. 

"'So far so good,' said she, when I had ended my story, 'and now pay attention to what I am about to tell you--heaven itself, indeed, will recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens who enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too close and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to death with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead men's bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them. Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men's ears with wax that none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross-piece half way up the mast, and they must lash the rope's ends to the mast itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg and pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster. 

"'When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you coherent directions as to which of two courses you are to take; I will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them for yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove, but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove has to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The only vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against these great rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore to Jason. 

"'Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it there is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one--not even a god--could face her without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet, and six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment, and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing some men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in each mouth. 

"'You will find the other rocks lie lower, but they are so close together that there is not more than a bowshot between them. [A large fig tree in full leaf grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.' 

"'Is there no way,' said I, 'of escaping Charybdis, and at the same time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?' 

"'You dare-devil,' replied the goddess, you are always wanting to fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage, extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla's dam, bad luck to her; she will then stop her from making a second raid upon you. 

"'You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god--seven herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne them and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which was a long way off, to live there and look after their father's flocks and herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.' 

"Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven, whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars. Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair wind that blew dead aft, and stayed steadily with us, keeping our sails well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman headed her. 

"Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, 'My friends, it is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as no one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope's ends to the mast itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly still.' 

"I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached the island of the two Sirens, for the wind had been very favourable. Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam they raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it up small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright on the crosspiece; but they went on rowing themselves. When we had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing. 

"'Come here,' they sang, 'renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name, and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song--and he who listens will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.' 

"They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them further I made by frowning to my men that they should set me free; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens' voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears and unbound me. 

"Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea resounded with the rushing of the waters, but the ship stayed where it was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and exhorted them man by man not to lose heart. 

"'My friends,' said I, 'this is not the first time that we have been in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might and main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them, for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.' 

"So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster Scylla, for I knew the men would not on rowing if I did, but would huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe's strict instructions--I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears I took my stand on the ship Is bows, for it was there that I expected first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much harm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes with looking the gloomy rock all over and over 

"Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt water. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we could see the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks. We could see the bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wit's ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and were expecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and snatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and men, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my name in one last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some jutting rock throws bait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox's horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he catches them one by one--even so did Scylla land these panting creatures on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they screamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony. This was the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages. 

"When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind Theban prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being much troubled I said to the men, 'My men, I know you are hard pressed, but listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie. Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.' 

"The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an insolent answer. 'Ulysses,' said he, 'you are cruel; you are very strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron, and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this island, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on through the watches of the flying night. It is by night that the winds blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so often wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now, therefore, let us obey the of night and prepare our supper here hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put out to sea.' 

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that heaven meant us a mischief and said, 'You force me to yield, for you are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, but will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.' 

"They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep. 

"In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the men together in council. 

"'My friends,' said I, 'we have meat and drink in the ship, let us mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it; for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. And again they promised that they would obey. 

"For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was no other wind, but only South and East. As long as corn and wine held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when, however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One day, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show me some means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear of all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from the wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by and by they sent me off into a sweet sleep. 

"Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, 'Listen to me,' said he, 'my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but there is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of these cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal Rods? If we ever get back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our ship out of revenge for these homed cattle, and the other gods are of the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all and have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desert island as this is.' 

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle, so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men, therefore drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal, for there was no barley left. When they had done praying they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine with which to make drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept pouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats were being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits. 

"By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat, so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. 'Father Jove,' I exclaimed, 'and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you have done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me; see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.' 

"Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to the immortals, 'Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses' ship: they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. If they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to Hades and shine there among the dead.' 

"'Sun,' said Jove, 'go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.' 

"I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the mouth of Mercury. 

"As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do. 

"For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts, spread sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from the island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised a black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so that it fell aft, while all the ship's gear tumbled about at the bottom of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the ship's stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in him. 

"Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting home again. 

"I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel (which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together, and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to take me. 

"[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise had reacfied the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking down the salt sea water, but I was carried aloft toward the fig tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft again--and a very long while it seemed. A juryman is not more glad to get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again. At last I let go with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea, bard by my raft on to which I then got, and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father of gods and men would not let her get further sight of me--otherwise I should have certainly been lost.] 

"Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again." 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XIII.

THUS did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous began to speak. 

"Ulysses," said he, "now that you have reached my house I doubt not you will get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night after night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought gold, and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance; let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a large tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the burden of such a handsome present." 

Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them. Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the ship's benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers. Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all. They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sang to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaecians, addressing himself more particularly to King Alcinous: 

"Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart's desire by giving me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may turn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peace among friends, and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction to your wives and children; may heaven vouchsafe you every good grace, and may no evil thing come among your people." 

Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Alcinous therefore said to his servant, "Pontonous, mix some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father Jove, and speed our guest upon his way." 

Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands of queen Arete. 

"Farewell, queen," said he, "henceforward and for ever, till age and death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now take my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and with king Alcinous." 

As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some maid servants with him--one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong-box, and a third with corn and wine. When they got to the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with all the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship. Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone to which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea, Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber. 

The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies over the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curveted as it were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water seethed in her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus, then, she cut her way through the water. carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea. 

When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show. the ship drew near to land. Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line of the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour there is a large olive tree, and at no distance a fine overarching cavern sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. There are mixing-bowls within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover, there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of sea purple--very curious to see--and at all times there is water within it. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down into the cave, while the other comes from the South and is more mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken by the gods. 

Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place, She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length on to the shore; when, however, they had landed, the first thing they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear some passer by might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and then they made the best of their way home again. 

But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already threatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. "Father Jove," said he, "I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such small regard for me. I said I would Ulysses get home when he had suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get home at all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, and promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a ship fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with more magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and got home without misadventure." 

And Jove answered, "What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would be monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please." 

"I should have done so at once," replied Neptune, "if I were not anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I should like to wreck the Phaecian ship as it is returning from its escort. This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I should also like to bury their city under a huge mountain." 

"My good friend," answered Jove, "I should recommend you at the very moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way, to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This will astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the mountain." 

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the Phaecians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid way, had got close-in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground. After this he went away. 

The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, "Bless my heart, who is it that can have rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could see the whole of her only moment ago." 

This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous said, "I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was what my old father used to say, and now it is all coming true. Now therefore let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off giving people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not bury our city under the high mountain." When the people heard this they were afraid and got ready the bulls. 

Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaecians to king Neptune, standing round his altar; and at the same time Ulysses woke up once more upon his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not know it again; moreover, Jove's daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and friends recognizing him until he had taken his revenge upon the wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to him--the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his native land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried aloud despairingly. 

"Alas," he exclaimed, "among what manner of people am I fallen? Are they savage and uncivilized or hospitable and humane? Where shall I put all this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had stayed over there with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great chief who would have been good to me and given me an escort. As it is I do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for fear somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do wrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have gone off with any of them." 

He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Minerva came up to him disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her comely feet and held a javelin in her hand. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and went straight up to her. 

"My friend," said he, "you are the first person whom I have met with in this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be will disposed towards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your knees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell me truly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I on an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?" 

Minerva answered, "Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come from somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It is a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It is rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a bid island for what there is of it. It grows any quantity of corn and also wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of Ithaca is known even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off from this Achaean country." 

Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and made up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart. 

"I heard of Ithaca," said he, "when I was in Crete beyond the seas, and now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have left as much more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killed Orsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed him because he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; he said I had not served his father loyally at Troy as vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in wait for him and with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as he was coming into town from the country. my It was a very dark night and nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him, but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, who were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Elis where the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them. They meant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we sailed on till we came hither by night. It was all we could do to get inside the harbour, and none of us said a word about supper though we wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were. I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of the ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand. Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress of mind." 

Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand. Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, "He must be indeed a shifty lying fellow," said she, "who could surpass you in all manner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist. Dare-devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are in your own country again? We will say no more, however, about this, for we can both of us deceive upon occasion--you are the most accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I for diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not know Jove's daughter Minerva--me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch over you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take so great a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk things over with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians give you; I want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your own house; you have got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor woman, that you have come home again. Bear everything, and put up with every man's insolence, without a word." 

And Ulysses answered, "A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you are so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it is a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. This much, however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the day on which we went on board ship after having sacked the city of Priam, and heaven dispersed us--from that day, Minerva, I saw no more of you, and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and I reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took me into the town. And now, I beseech you in your father's name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in Ithaca. I am in some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all you have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my own country?" 

"You are always taking something of that sort into your head," replied Minerva, "and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; you are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returning from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or day for the tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming near you, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get back safely though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish to quarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded his son. I will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land, and you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven of the old merman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;] here too is the overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum." 

As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs, saying, "Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if Jove's redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to manhood." 

"Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that," rejoined Minerva, "let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all." 

Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and good clothing which the Phaecians had given him. They stowed everything carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of the cave. Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors. 

"Ulysses," said Minerva, "noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and sending your encouraging messages to every one of them, but meaning the very opposite of all she says' 

And Ulysses answered, "In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall best avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as on the day when we loosed Troy's fair diadem from her brow. Help me now as you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess, will be with me." 

"Trust me for that," said she, "I will not lose sight of you when once we set about it, and I would imagine that some of those who are devouring your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and brains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see it with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the son whom you left behind you. Then go at once to the swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his pigs near the rock that is called Raven by the fountain Arethusa, where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their manner. Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I proceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive." 

"But why," said Ulysses, "did you not tell him, for you knew all about it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship while others are eating up his estate?" 

Minerva answered, "Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be well spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but is staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are lying in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I do not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves." 

As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to sling it over his shoulder. 

When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XIV.

ULYSSES now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be seen from far. He had made them spacious and fair to see, with a free ran for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his master's absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground, without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside lie had built twelve sties near one another for the sows to lie in. There were fifty pigs wallowing in each sty, all of them breeding sows; but the boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept on eating them, and die swineherd had to send them the best he had continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the herdsman's four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of sandals from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to town with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat. 

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide, rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, "Old man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your misfortunes." 

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down. He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of this he threw the shaggy chamois skin--a great thick one--on which he used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome, and said "May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your heart's desire in return for the kind way in which you have received me." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Stranger, though a still poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good to me and given me something of my own--a house, a piece of land, a good looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen's whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of kin Agamemnon." 

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the sties where the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted on them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin. 

"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of servant's pork. The fat pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce free-booters who go raiding on other people's land, and Jove gives them their spoil--even they, when they have filled their ships and got home again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the mainland, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goatherds. Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them." 

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank, filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of yours that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled much." 

Eumaeus answered, "Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will get Ulysses' wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story. But the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and a bad business it is for all his friends--for me especially; go where I may I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother and father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own country; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond of me, and took such care of me that whereever he may be I shall always honour his memory." 

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "you are very positive, and very hard of belief about your master's coming home again, nevertheless I will not merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire, who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who are ill treating his wife and son." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Old man, you will neither get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink you wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks about my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his son Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew brought you to Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come--for you cannot have come by land." 

And Ulysses answered, "I will tell you all about it. If there were meat and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me. 

"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well-to-do man, who had many sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax (whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among the Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock. When, however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars and Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was I in battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children. My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows--things that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to. Before the Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance, and much more was allotted to me later on. 

"My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it was that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it. I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them and keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage. 

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus--and I wish I had died then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me--I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then I went straight up to the king's chariot, clasped his knees and kissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and tried to kil me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do evil. 

"I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that time when months and days had gone by till the same season had come round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but really that he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. I suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not help it. 

"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting home again. I was all dismayed; Jove, however, sent the ship's mast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast. There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without charging me anything at all for his son found me when I was nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his father's house and gave me clothes to wear. 

"There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his family for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon. But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove's mind from the god's high oak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover the king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found, that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus. 

"These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further use and went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man's door--for it seems that I am not to die yet awhile." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger, I have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this way? I know all about the return of my master. The gods one and all of them detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him die with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have spirited him away we know not whither. 

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at it because they can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I have never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the following summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you." 

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will, set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precepice, as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies." 

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, both now and hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper." 

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their sties, and a tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you have, that I may sacrifice for this stranger, and we will take toll of him ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while others reap the fruit of our labour." 

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw them into the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might return home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. He made seven portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope, Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove will be as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like myself." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that, just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses." 

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion. Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had bought this man on his own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence, and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all went to bed after having made a hearty supper. 

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me," said he, "Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so. When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brush-wood that grew about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted their their places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me his ear. 

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have no cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt, and I do not know what to do.' 

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following plan: 

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.' Then he raised his head on his elbow. 

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.' 

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby." 

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story, and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only one. When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go." 

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather. 

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready to go and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his property during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from the North wind. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XV.

BUT Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses' son that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping in the forecourt of Menelaus's house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy father, so Minerva went close up to him and said: 

"Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool's errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to find your excellent mother still there when you get back. Her father and brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given her more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his wedding presents. I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know what women are--they always want to do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never give another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their father either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, and put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Let me tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. The chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you can reach home. I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a grave themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send you a fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge your pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore, for the night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got back safe from Pylos." 

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with his heel to rouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the horses to the chariot, for we must set off home." 

But Pisistratus said, "No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good-bye to us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget a host who has shown him kindness." 

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen, leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his shoulders, and went out to meet him. "Menelaus," said he, "let me go back now to my own country, for I want to get home." 

And Menelaus answered, "Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not detain you. not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is in the house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till I can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out on such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct you myself through all our principal cities. No one will send us away empty handed; every one will give us something--a bronze tripod, a couple of mules, or a gold cup." 

"Menelaus," replied Telemachus, "I want to go home at once, for when I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that something valuable has been stolen during my absence." 

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room, not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached the place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing-bowl. Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. Then they all came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said, "Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home according to your desire. I will now present you with the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing-bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on my return home. I should like to give it to you." 

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus, while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing-bowl and set it before him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand. 

"I too, my son," said she, "have something for you as a keepsake from the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day. Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go back rejoicing to your own country and to your home." 

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as they had had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood in front of the horses and pledged them, saying, "Farewell to both of you; see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy." 

"We will be sure, sir," answered Telemachus, "to tell him everything as soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses returned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very great kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I am taking with me." 

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand--an eagle with a great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm yard--and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. It came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, "Tell me, Menelaus, has heaven sent this omen for us or for you?" 

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, "I will read this matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred and has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge--if indeed he is not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors." 

"May Jove so grant it," replied Telemachus; "if it should prove to be so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at home." 

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came to Pylos, and then Telemachus said: 

"Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you. You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely; do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go to your father's house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his good will towards me, and I must go home at once." 

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus's beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then he said, "Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before I can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, and he will not go back without you. But he will be very angry." 

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave his orders. "Now, my men," said he, "get everything in order on board the ship, and let us set out home." 

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But as Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva in the ship's stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep; he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile by the great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods and held them for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in the house of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrow that dread Erinyes had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escaped with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother. Then he left the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that he should reign over much people. There he married, established himself, and had two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not live to old age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman's gifts. His sons were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was father to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried off Cleitus for his beauty's sake, that he might dwell among the immortals, but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now that Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went to live in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men. 

His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. "Friend'" said he, "now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you also by your own head and by those of your followers, tell me the truth and nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of your town and parents." 

Telemachus said, "I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and my father is 'Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come to some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a long time." 

"I too," answered Theoclymenus, am an exile, for I have killed a man of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at their hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth. I am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that they may not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit." 

"I will not refuse you," replied Telemachus, "if you wish to join us. Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according to what we have." 

On this he received Theoclymenus' spear and laid it down on the deck of the ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of twisted ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh and strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible. Thus then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis. 

Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel made a quick pass sage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans rule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands, wondering within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken prisoner. 

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut, and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or pack him off to the city; so he said: 

"Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me and show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread. I should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of her husband to queen Penelope. I could then go about among the suitors and see if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner. I should soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. Listen and believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives grace and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would make a more handy servant than I should--to put fresh wood on the fire, chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that poor men have to do for their betters." 

The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. "Heaven help me," he exclaimed, "what ever can have put such a notion as that into your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They would never think of taking a man like you for a servant. Their servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay where you are, then; you are not in anybody's way; I do not mind your being here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you want to go." 

Ulysses answered, "I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there is nothing worse than being always ways on the tramp; still, when men have once got low down in the world they will go through a great deal on behalf of their miserable bellies. Since however you press me to stay here and await the return of Telemachus, tell about Ulysses' mother, and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when he set out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already dead and in the house of Hades?" 

"I will tell you all about them," replied Eumaeus, "Laertes is still living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully his own house, for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him more than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end through sorrow for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living, though she was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking her how she did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene, the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she made little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, they sent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me, my mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, and sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever. This is all over now. Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in the situation which I now hold. I have enough to eat and drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger who comes here; but there is no getting a kind word or deed out of my mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people. Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her; they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and something too to take back with them into the country. This is what will keep servants in a good humour." 

Ulysses answered, "Then you must have been a very little fellow, Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents. Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for whatever your master gave them?" 

"Stranger," replied Eumaeus, "as regards your question: sit still, make yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights are now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time, too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master's pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning. We two will sit here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories about our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and been buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory of sorrows that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, my tale is as follows: 

"You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above Ortygia, where the land begins to turn round and look in another direction. It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good, with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole country is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus, a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both. 

"Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted with gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in my father's house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can resist, no matter how good she may be by nature. The man who had seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on this she told him her father's name. 'I come from Sidon,' said she, 'and am daughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming into the town from the country some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the sea, where they sold me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them their price for me.' 

"The man who had seduced her then said, 'Would you like to come along with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves? They are both alive and are said to be well off.' 

"'I will do so gladly,' answered she, 'if you men will first swear me a solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.' 

"They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oath the woman said, 'Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and tell my master, in which case he would suspect something. He would put me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can, and send me word when you have done loading. I will bring as much gold as I can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that I can do towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good man of the house, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I will carry him off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if you take him and sell him in foreign parts.' 

"On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise, and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the woman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father's house bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then went back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of the house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sun was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician ship was lying. When they had got on board they sailed their ways over the sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days did we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck the woman and she fell heavily down into the ship's hold as though she were a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the seals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon this country." 

Ulysses answered, "Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city." 

Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for sleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the meantime Telemachus and his crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast, and rowed the ship into the harbour. They cast out their mooring stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore, mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said, "Take the ship on to the town, but leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my farms. In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you all a good dinner with meat and wine." 

Then Theoclymenus said, 'And what, my dear young friend, is to become of me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or shall I go straight to your own house and to your mother?" 

"At any other time," replied Telemachus, "I should have bidden you go to my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper chamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you can go to--I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highest estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and the most persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and trying to take Ulysses' place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knows whether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes place." 

As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand--a hawk, Apollo's messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore them off, fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship. On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand. "Telemachus," said he, "that bird did not fly on your right hand without having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knew it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there will be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own." 

"I wish it may prove so," answered Telemachus. "If it does, I will show you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet you will congratulate you." 

Then he said to his friend Piraeus, "Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him." 

And Piraeus answered, "Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of hospitality." 

As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head of sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city as they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as he could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so devoted a servant to his master. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XVI.

MEANWHILE Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were were getting breakfast ready at daybreak for they had sent the men out with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark, but fawned upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus: 

"Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning urn him and not barking." 

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door. Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age, after ten years' absence in a foreign country and after having gone through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying: 

"So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the suitors are doing." 

"So be it, old friend," answered Telemachus, "but I am come now because I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs." 

"She is still at the house," replied Eumaeus, "grieving and breaking her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually." 

As spoke he took Telemachus' spear, whereon he crossed the stone threshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place as he entered, but Telemachus checked him; "Sit down, stranger." said he, "I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay it for me." 

Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus to sit upon. Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as he could. He mixed wine also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses. Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus, "Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew bring him to Ithaca, and who were they?-for assuredly he did not come here by land"' 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "My son, I will tell you the real truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great traveller. At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship, and has refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands. Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your suppliant." 

"I am very much distressed," said Telemachus, "by what you have just told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yet young, and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals, and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you like you can keep him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill-treat him in a way that would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong for him." 

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, it is right that I should say something myself. I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are. Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your people against you? May you not complain of your brothers--for it is to these that a man may look for support, however great his quarrel may be? I wish I were as young as you are and in my present mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the house and be the bane of every one of these men. If they were too many for me--I being single-handed--I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end that shall never be accomplished." 

And Telemachus answered, "I will tell you truly everything. There is no emnity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove has made us a race of only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and Ulysses only son of Laertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses who left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of any use to him. Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands, Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so with myself into the bargain. The issue, however, rests with heaven. But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos. Tell it to herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one else know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me." 

"I understand and heed you," replied Eumaeus; "you need instruct me no further, only I am going that way say whether I had not better let poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend the work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me that from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten nor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones." 

"More's the pity," answered Telemachus, "I am sorry for him, but we must leave him to himself just now. If people could have everything their own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do not turn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it from her." 

Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals, bound them to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a woman--fair, stately, and wise. She stood against the side of the entry, and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, and knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards. She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the yards. Then she said to him: 

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray." 

As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour, filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again. Then she went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut. His son was astounded when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking upon a god. 

"Stranger," said he, "how suddenly you have changed from what you were a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour is not the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings of wrought gold. Have mercy upon me." 

And Ulysses said, "I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands of lawless men." 

As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the ground, for he had restrained all tears till now. but Telemachus could not yet believe that it was his father, and said: 

"You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young at a moment's notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from heaven." 

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably astonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will come hereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country. What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases. At one moment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make any man look either rich or poor." 

As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father and wept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half fledged young by peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly said, "In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca? Of what nation did they declare themselves to be--for you cannot have come by land?" 

"I will tell you the truth, my son," replied Ulysses. "It was the Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in the habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by heaven's mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing our enemies. First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their number, that I may learn who, and how many, they are. I can then turn the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us." 

To this Telemachus answered, "Father, I have always heard of your renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand against many and brave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at once. There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they have six servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born. They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some one who would be willing to come and help us." 

"Listen to me," replied Ulysses, "and think whether Minerva and her father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some one else as well." 

"Those whom you have named," answered Telemachus, "are a couple of good allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power over both gods and men." 

"These two," continued Ulysses, "will not keep long out of the fray, when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore, return home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before. Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a miserable old beggar. If you see them ill-treating me, steel your heart against my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But leave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva will then soon quiet these people. There is also another matter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let no one know that Ulysses is within the house--neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is against us." 

"Father," replied Telemachus, "you will come to know me by and by, and when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do not think, however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us. Think it over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your estate with impunity and without compunction. Prove the women by all means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not in favour of going round and trying the men. We can attend to that later on, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you." 

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought Telemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land; their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all the presents at the house of Clytius. Then they sent a servant to tell Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy. This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, the servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting women, "Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos"; but Eumaeus went close up to Penelope, and said privately that her son had given bidden him tell her. When he had given his message he left the house with its outbuildings and went back to his pigs again. 

The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a council near the main entrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak. 

"My friends," said he, "this voyage of Telemachus's is a very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now, however, let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can." 

He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, "We need not send them any message, for they are here. Some god must have told them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her. 

On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any one old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke first. 

"Good heavens," said he, "see how the gods have saved this man from destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let us consider how we can make an end of him. He must not escape us; our affair is never likely to come off while is alive, for he is very shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side. We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The people will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us no hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the road hither. Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his mother and the man who marries her have the house. If this does not please you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father's property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this way, but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, and she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it is to win her." 

They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the son of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any of the other for he was a man of good natural disposition. "My friends," said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, "I am not in favour of killing Telemachus. It is a heinous thing to kill one who is of noble blood. Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade us, I would have you hold your hands." 

Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose forthwith and went to the house of Ulysses where they took their accustomed seats. 

Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister holding a veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying: 

"Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are nothing of the kind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death of Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove himself? It is not right for you to plot thus against one another. Do you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us? They wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour his property without paying for it, and break my heart by his wooing his wife and trying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the others also." 

To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, "Take heart, Queen Penelope daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters. The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth. I say--and it shall surely be--that my spear shall be reddened with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees, held wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands. Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing to fear from the hands of us suitors. Of course, if death comes to him from the gods, he cannot escape it." He said this to quiet her, but in reality he was plotting against Telemachus. 

Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva shed sleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were ready; helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and clad him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might recognize him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope. 

Telemachus was the first to speak. "So you have got back, Eumaeus," said he. "What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or are they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?" 

"I did not think of asking about that," replied Eumaeus, "when I was in the town. I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he was the first to tell the new your mother, but I can say what I saw with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of men in her. They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the suitors, but I cannot be sure." 

On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus could not see him. 

Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XVII.

WHEN the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for he wanted to go into the city. "Old friend," said he to the swineherd, "I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will never leave off grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who will give him a drink and a piece of bread. I have trouble enough of my own, and cannot be burdened with other people. If this makes him angry so much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean." 

Then Ulysses said, "Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give him something. I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck and call of a master. Therefore let this man do as you have just told him, and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire, and the day has got a little heat in it. My clothes are wretchedly thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for you say the city is some way off." 

On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge upon the When he reached home he stood his spear against a bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister itself, and went inside. 

Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and shoulders with their kisses. Penelope came out of her room looking like Diana or Venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son. She kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, "Light of my eyes," she cried as she spoke fondly to him, "so you are come home again; I made sure I was never going to see you any more. To think of your having gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining my consent. But come, tell me what you saw." 

"Do not scold me, mother,' answered Telemachus, "nor vex me, seeing what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress, go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors. I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has come back with me from Pylos. I sent him on with my crew, and told Piraeus to take him home and look after him till I could come for him myself." 

She heeded her son's words, washed her face, changed her dress, and vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors. 

Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand--not alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths and malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of his father's house, and they made him tell them all that had happened to him. Then Piraeus came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined them. Piraeus was first to speak: "Telemachus," said he, "I wish you would send some of your women to my house to take awa the presents Menelaus gave you." 

"We do not know, Piraeus," answered Telemachus, "what may happen. If the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them, I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people should get hold of them. If on the other hand I manage to kill them, I shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents." 

With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they got there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the baths, and washed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at table. A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house. Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of the bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Penelope said: 

"Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which I have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out for Troy with the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear to me before the suitors came back to the house, whether or no you had been able to hear anything about the return of your father." 

"I will tell you then truth," replied her son. "We went to Pylos and saw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably as though I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long absence; so also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word from any human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead. He sent me, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus. There I saw Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were in heaven's wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelaus asked me what it was that had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereon he said, 'So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. The lion, when he comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, and so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Greeks cheered him--if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full. He said he could see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.' This was what Menelaus told me, and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again." 

With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said to her: 

"Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things; listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide nothing from you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come, that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when I was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it." 

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true, you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall congratulate you." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the house, and behaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the town from all the country round, with their shepherds as usual, then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them at table, said, "Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport, so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a bad thing, at dinner time." 

They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and well grown. Thus they made ready for their meal. In the meantime Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the swineherd said, "Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should have liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my master tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one's master is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is now broad day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it colder." 

"I know, and understand you," replied Ulysses; "you need say no more. Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one." 

As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders, by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his liking. The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his master followed after, looking like some broken-down old tramp as he leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags. When they had got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached the fountain from which the citizens drew their water. This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was a grove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear cold water came down to it from a rock high up, while above the fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used to sacrifice. Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors' dinner, and there were two shepherds with him. When he saw Eumaeus and Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which made Ulysses very angry. 

"There you go," cried he, "and a precious pair you are. See how heaven brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, master swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make any one sick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never won a prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders against every man's door post, and begging, not for swords and cauldrons like a man, but only for a few scraps not worth begging for. If you would give him to me for a hand on my station, he might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to the kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiable belly. I say, therefore and it shall surely be--if he goes near Ulysses' house he will get his head broken by the stools they will fling at him, till they turn him out." 

On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path. For a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the swineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his hands and praying to heaven as he did so. 

"Fountain nymphs," he cried, "children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my prayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to the swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting people-gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin through bad shepherding." 

Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, "You ill-conditioned cur, what are you talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the money you will fetch. I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike Telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as I am that Ulysses will never come home again." 

With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master. When he got there he went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite Eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others. The servants brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread before him that he might eat. Presently Ulysses and the swineherd came up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius was just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took hold of the swineherd's hand, and said: 

"Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how far you go you will find few like it. One building keeps following on after another. The outer court has a wall with battlements all round it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a hard matter to take it by force of arms. I perceive, too, that there are many people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roast meat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made to go along with feasting." 

Then Eumaeus said, "You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally do; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you wait here and let me go in first? But do not wait long, or some one may you loitering about outside, and throw something at you. Consider this matter I pray you." 

And Ulysses answered, "I understand and heed. Go in first and leave me here where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things thrown at me. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man cannot hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people." 

As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his head and pricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred before setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him. In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when they went hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone he was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas. As soon as he saw Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he could not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on the other side of the yard, dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus seeing it, and said: 

"Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap: his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he only one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept merely for show?" 

"This hound," answered Eumaeus, "belonged to him who has died in a far country. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he would soon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in the forest that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks. But now he has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and the women take no care of him. Servants never do their work when their master's hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the goodness out of a man when he makes a slave of him." 

As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the suitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognized his master. 

Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he picked it up, brought it to Telemachus's table, and sat down opposite him. Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from the bread-basket. 

Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in rags. He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors leading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post of cypress-wood which the carpenter had skillfully planed, and had made to join truly with rule and line. Telemachus took a whole loaf from the bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and said to Eumaeus, "Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not be shamefaced." 

So Eumaeus went up to him and said, "Stranger, Telemachus sends you this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for beggars must not be shamefaced." 

Ulysses answered, "May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, and fulfil the desire of his heart." 

Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it on the dirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while the bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left off. The suitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that he might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the bad; but come what might she was not going to save a single one of them. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right, and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real beggar. Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another who he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius said, "Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about him, for I have seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but I know nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from." 

On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. "You precious idiot," he cried, "what have you brought this man to town for? Have we not tramps and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do you think it a small thing that such people gather here to waste your master's property and must you needs bring this man as well?" 

And Eumaeus answered, "Antinous, your birth is good but your words evil. It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to invite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those who can do public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who can charm us with his Such men are welcome all the world over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worry him. You are always harder on Ulysses' servants than any of the other suitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as Telemachus and Penelope are alive and here." 

But Telemachus said, "Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse." 

Then turning to Antinous he said, "Antinous, you take as much care of my interests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see this stranger turned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take' something and give it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mind my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know you will not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself than of giving them to other people." 

"What do you mean, Telemachus," replied Antinous, "by this swaggering talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would not come here again for another three months." 

As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from under the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold and eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to Antinous and said: 

"Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you seem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be the better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent me with a band of roving robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it. I stationed my bade ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them and keep guard over them, while sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage. 

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children captives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met them, to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in Cyprus. Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery." 

Then Antinous said, "What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague us during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court, or I will give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free with other people's property when there is plenty of it." 

On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, "Your looks, my fine sir, are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in another man's, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you to give him even a piece of bread." 

This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, "You shall pay for this before you get clear of the court." With these words he threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder-blade near the top of his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on his revenge. Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying his well-filled wallet at his feet. 

"Listen to me," he cried, "you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if he gets hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and even so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly, which is always getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor have gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come to a bad end before his marriage." 

"Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off elsewhere," shouted Antinous. "If you say more I will have you dragged hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you alive." 

The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young men said, "Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a tramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some god--and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do amiss and who righteously." 

Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile Telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his father, and though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded on his revenge. 

Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, "Would that Apollo would so strike you, Antinous," and her waiting woman Eurynome answered, "If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see the sun rise." Then Penelope said, "Nurse, I hate every single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like the darkness of death itself. A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want. Every one else has given him something to put in his wallet, but Antinous has hit him on the right shoulder-blade with a footstool." 

Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the swineherd and said, "Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I want to see him and ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "If these Achaeans, Madam, would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his adventures. I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut, which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship, and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes. If he had been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I sat in my hut and listened to him. He says there is an old friendship between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither and thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians, and that he is bringing great wealth home with him." 

"Call him here, then," said Penelope, "that I too may hear his story. As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remain unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us. If he were to come again, he and his son would soon have their revenge." 

As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded with it. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus, "Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just as I was speaking? This can only mean that all the suitors are going to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the stranger is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak of good wear." 

When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, "Father stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you; she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very things that you are most in want of. As for bread, you can get enough of that to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give that will." 

"I will tell Penelope," answered Ulysses, "nothing but what is strictly true. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in affliction, but I am afraid of passing. through this crowd of cruel suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now, moreover, as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a man gave me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor any one else defended me. Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait till sundown. Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my clothes are worn very thin--you know they are, for you have seen them ever since I first asked you to help me--she can then ask me about the return of her husband." 

The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she saw him cross the threshold, "Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus? Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming inside the house at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced." 

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "The stranger is quite reasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one else would do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can hear him and talk to him as you will." 

"The man is no fool," answered Penelope, "it would very likely be as he says, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world as these men are." 

When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he had explained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear so that none could overhear him, "My dear sir, I will now go back to the pigs, to see after your property and my own business. You will look to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of danger, for there are many who bear you ill will. May Jove bring them to a bad end before they do us a mischief." 

"Very well," replied Telemachus, "go home when you have had your dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrifice for the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me." 

On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his dinner he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and went back to his pigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on towards evening. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XVIII.

NOW there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over the city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and drunkard. This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him, was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus, because he used to run errands for any one who would send him. As soon as he came he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him out of his own house. 

"Be off, old man," he cried, "from the doorway, or you shall be dragged out neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me the wink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do so? Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows." 

Ulysses frowned on him and said, "My friend, I do you no manner of harm; people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is room enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me things that are not yours to give. You seem to be just such another tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and by. Do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense me, and old though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest with blood. I shall have more peace to-morrow if I do, for you will not come to the house of Ulysses any more." 

Irus was very angry and answered, "You filthy glutton, you run on trippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar's tusks. Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and look on. You will never be able to fight one who is so much younger than yourself." 

Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front of the doorway, and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed heartily and said to the others, "This is the finest sport that you ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house. The stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set them on to do so at once." 

The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged tramps. "Listen to me," said Antinous, "there are some goats' paunches down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set aside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the better man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all." 

The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said, "Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his own against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though I know it can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear, however that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and secure him the victory." 

They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath Telemachus put in a word and said, "Stranger, if you have a mind to settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here. Whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one. I am host, and the other chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men of understanding, are of the same mind as I am." 

Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins, thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his mighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even stronger still. The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one would turn towards his neighbour saying, "The stranger has brought such a thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of Irus." 

Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such a fright that his limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him and said, "You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all if you are afraid of such an old broken-down creature as this tramp is. I say, therefore--and it shall surely be--if he beats you and proves himself the better man, I shall pack you off on board ship to the mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him. He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your entrails for the dogs to eat." 

This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses considered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end of him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter blow that should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best to give the lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect who he was. Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the right shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear that broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him into the outer court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him up against the wall and put his staff in his hands. "Sit here," said he, "and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still worse." 

Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn, over his shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and saluting him, "May Jove, and all the other gods," said they, 'grant you whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him." 

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat's paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did so in a golden goblet of wine. "Good luck to you," he said, "father stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have better times by and by." 

To this Ulysses answered, "Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best of it; for God Almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I know all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without vainglory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence. Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly." 

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did not escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him fall by the hand of Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he had come. 

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking laugh and said, "Eurynome, I have changed my and have a fancy to show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like also to give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do with them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief." 

"My dear child," answered Eurynome, "all that you have said is true, go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already grown up." 

"I know, Eurynome," replied Penelope, "that you mean well, but do not try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I am in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be proper for me to do so." 

On this the old woman went out of the room to bid the maids go to their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another matter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed grace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn ivory. When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids came in from the women's room and woke Penelope with the sound of their talking. 

"What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having," said she, as she passed her hands over her face, "in spite of all my misery. I wish Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man among the Achaeans." 

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might win her for his own bed fellow. 

"Telemachus," said she, addressing her son, "I fear you are no longer so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown up, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well-to-do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has been going on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated? What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury while a suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very discreditable to you." 

"I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure," replied Telemachus, "I understand all about it and know when things are not as they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot, however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind, and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it to do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See how he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for has no strength left in him." 

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, "Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of understanding." 

To this Penelope replied, "Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence to the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all, and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand--'Wife, 'he said, 'we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the Trojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also at fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner than this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do you look after things here. Take care of my father and mother as at present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present home. This is what he said and now it is all coming true. A night will come when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief, moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me after the custom of my country. When men are courting a woman who they think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people's property without paying for it." 

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words which he knew she did not mean. 

Then Antinous said, "Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among us whoever he may be." 

The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his servant to bring his present. Antinous's man returned with a large and lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads that gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas's two men returned with some earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful present of some kind. 

Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought the presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing, and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it grew dark; they then brought in three braziers to give light, and piled them up with chopped firewood very and dry, and they lit torches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses said: 

"Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool. I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay till morning, but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal." 

The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but had been brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all this she showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love. 

"Poor wretch," said she, "are you gone clean out of your mind? Go and sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters--so many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or do you always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the house." 

"Vixen," replied Ulysses, scowling at her, "I will go and tell Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb from limb." 

With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body of the house. They trembled all aver, for they thought he would do as he said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up torches and looking at the people--brooding the while on things that should surely come to pass. 

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against them; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him, which made the others laugh. "Listen to me," said he, "you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not for nothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head--for his hair is all gone, every bit of it." 

Then turning to Ulysses he said, "Stranger, will you work as a servant, if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you build a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year round, and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill your belly by going round the country begging." 

"Eurymachus," answered Ulysses, "if you and I were to work one against the other in early summer when the days are at their longest--give me a good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will fast the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take a yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance: turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my temples--you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your gibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a great man because you live in a little world, ind that a bad one. If Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but you will find them narrow when you try to fly through them." 

Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, "You wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus. With this he caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses sought protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid. The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and knocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. The suitors in the covered cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, "I wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad luck to hide, for all the trouble he gives us. We cannot permit such disturbance about a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we shall have no more pleasure at our banquet." 

On this Telemachus came forward and said, "Sirs, are you mad? Can you not carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has possessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better." 

The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, "Do not let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer. Neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses' servants. Let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we may make them and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that he has come." 

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made their drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they took their several ways each of them to his own abode. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XIX.

ULYSSES was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said to Telemachus, "Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them." 

Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse Euryclea and said, "Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store room. No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down where the smoke cannot reach it." 

"I wish, child," answered Euryclea, "that you would take the management of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the store room? The maids would have so, but you would not let them. 

"The stranger," said Telemachus, "shall show me a light; when people eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from." 

Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room. Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields, and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said, "Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters, crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a flaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down from heaven." 

"Hush," answered Ulysses, "hold your peace and ask no questions, for this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me here to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief will ask me all sorts of questions." 

On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner court, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the means whereby with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors. 

Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered with a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the women's room to join her. They set about removing the tables at which the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was left, with the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embers out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said, "Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all night and spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat your supper there, or you shall be driven out with a firebrand." 

Ulysses scowled at her and answered, "My good woman, why should you be so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner of tramps and beggars generall? I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest you get out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come home, for there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though he be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo's will he has left a son behind him, Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house, for he is now no longer in his boyhood." 

Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, "Impudent baggage, said she, "I see how abominably you are behaving, and you shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose sake I am in such continual sorrow." 

Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, "Bring a seat with a fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story, and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions." 

Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, "Stranger, I shall first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and parents." 

"Madam;" answered Ulysses, "who on the face of the whole earth can dare to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people do good deeds under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask me some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, or you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another person's house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually. I shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes swim with tears because I am heavy with wine." 

Then Penelope answered, "Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty, whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs I should be both more respected and should show a better presence to the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our islands--Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself, are wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time brokenhearted about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have to invent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven put it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them, 'Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded--till I have finished making a pall for the hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been accomplished, those good-for-nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to the suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. And now I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out of this marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my son chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for he is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an excellent disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are and where you come from--for you must have had father and mother of some sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock." 

Then Ulysses answered, "madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me: people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as I have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as regards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair and fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled and there are nine cities in it: the people speak many different languages which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a conference with Jove himself. Minos was father to Deucalion, whose son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two; hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to enter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then xaging. As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance of everything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice to their heart's content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there was a gale blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one's feet on land. I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got away." 

Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time sitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was for her, but he kept his eyes as hard as or iron without letting them so much as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she had relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: "Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me, then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so also with his companions." 

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "it is such a long time ago that I can hardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and went elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect. Ulysses wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this there was a device that showed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every one marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was struggling convulsively to escape. As for the shirt that he wore next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his voyage; or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a present of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equals among the Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet, and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had a servant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he was like; his shoulders were hunched, he was dark, and he had thick curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded with himself." 

Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief in tears she said to him, "Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my house. It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I took them out of the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never welcome him home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention." 

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can hardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even though he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god. Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell I will hide nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the sun-god's cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuck to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the Phaecians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all this, and he swore to me--making drink-offerings in his house as he did so--that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would take Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, but he showed me all treasure Ulysses had got together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove's mind from the high oak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here." 

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again, that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. It shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. For how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously, the people tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed." 

Ulysses answered, "Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor, again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not let any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them." 

To this Penelope said, "My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a most respectable old woman--the same who received my poor dear husband in her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet." "Come here," said she, "Euryclea, and wash your master's age-mate; I suppose Ulysses' hands and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us dreadfully fast." 

On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began to weep and made lamentation saying, "My dear child, I cannot think whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see your son grow up to take after you; yet see how he has prevented you alone from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the women in some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all these sluts here have been gibing you. I do not wonder at your not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope's sake and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so like Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are." 

"Those who have seen us both," answered Ulysses, "have always said we were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too. 

Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath was warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold of his leg she would recognize a certain scar which it bore, whereon the whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washing her master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by a wild boar when he was hunting on Mount Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolycus--who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world--and with the sons of Autolycus. Mercury himself had endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship. It happened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the child of his daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set the infant upon his knees and said, you must find a name for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one." 

'Son-in-law and daughter," replied Autolycus, "call the child thus: I am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place and another, both men and women; so name the child 'Ulysses,' or the child of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother's family on Mount Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and will send him on his way rejoicing." 

Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from Autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome. His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get dinner ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a five year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints; these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them; they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too. They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to a mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus, among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor could the sun's rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men's feet, and the hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the first to raise his spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for the boar, Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went right through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life went out of him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass of the boar, and bound Ulysses' wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When he got back, his father and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when he was out hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mount Parnassus. 

As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well hold of it, she recognized it and dropped the foot at once. The leg fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water was spilt on the ground; Euryclea's eyes between her joy and her grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses by the beard and said, "My dear child, I am sure you must be Ulysses himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touched and handled you." 

As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said, "Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come to my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to recognize me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it any one else in the house, for if you do I tell you--and it shall surely be--that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other women." 

"My child," answered Euryclea, "what are you talking about? You know very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into your hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless." 

And Ulysses answered, "Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your tongue and leave everything to heaven." 

As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself, and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talking to him and said: 

"Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter. It is indeed nearly bed time--for those, at least, who can sleep in spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie awake thinking, and my heart comes a prey to the most incessant and cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is not now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing me and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was still young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my husband's house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it for me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of a trough, and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all. Presently he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard; whereon I wept in my room till all my maids gathered round me, so piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and told me to leave off crying. 'Be of good courage,' he said, 'daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.' On this I woke, and when I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual." 

"This dream, Madam," replied Ulysses, "can admit but of one interpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one of them will escape." 

And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are very curious and unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come true. There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say--and lay my saying to your heart--the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the whole twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams." 

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow, handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron." 

To this Penelope said, "As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from the day Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name." 

She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyelids. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XX.

ULYSSES slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock's hide, on the top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten, and Eurynome threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself down. There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling and laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and he doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. His heart growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breast and said, "Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day when the terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in silence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made sure of being killed." 

Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors. But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of a woman, and hovered over his head saying, "My poor unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is safe inside it, and so is your son who is just such a young man as any father may be proud of." 

"Goddess," answered Ulysses, "all that you have said is true, but I am in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And there is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing that with Jove's and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it is all over." 

"For shame," replied Minerva, "why, any one else would trust a worse ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less wise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you. But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you shall be out of your troubles before long." 

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus. 

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping she prayed to Diana saying, "Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the mouths of overflowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus. The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them, and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only, and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, no matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams. This very night methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream, but the very truth itself." 

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock's hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed, saying "Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and sea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are now waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kind from outside." 

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up among the from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign. There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master. "Father Jove," said she, "you who rule over heaven and earth, you have thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the suitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with the labour of grinding meal for them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhere at all." 

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman's speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avenge himself on the suitors. 

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth; Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about his shoulder, bound his sandals on his comely feet, and took a doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, "Nurse, did you make the stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him shift for himself?--for my mother, good woman though she is, has a way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting others who are in reality much better men." 

"Do not find fault child," said Euryclea, "when there is no one to find fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one for him, but he said he was re such wretched outcast that he would not sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed bullock's hide and some sheepskins put for him in the cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself." 

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids and said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and for water from the fountain at once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, for it is a feast day." 

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors also came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three best pigs he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, "Stranger, are the suitors treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?" 

"May heaven," answered Ulysses, "requite to them the wickedness with which they deal high-handedly in another man's house without any sense of shame." 

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors' dinner; and he had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse, and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. "Are you still here, stranger," said he, "to pester people by begging about the house? Why can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans, as well as here?" 

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to the swineherd. "Who, Swineherd," said he, "is this stranger that is lately come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man, but the gods give sorrow to whom they will--even to kings if it so pleases them 

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand; "Good day to you, father stranger," said he, "you seem to be very poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father Jove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children, yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as this man's are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master, who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed of his son though he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide Ulysses' property among them because he has been away so long. I have often thought--only it would not be right while his son is living--of going off with the cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people's herds. My position is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put myself under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of the house." 

"Stockman," answered Ulysses, "you seem to be a very well-disposed person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath: by Jove, the chief of all gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here." 

"If Jove were to bring this to pass," replied the stockman, "you should see how I would do my very utmost to help him." 

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home. 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand--an eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, "My friends, this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to dinner instead." 

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round. They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the breadbaskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them. 

Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that was paved with stone; he gave him a shabby-looking seat at a little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought to him, with his wine in a gold cup. "Sit there," said he, "and drink your wine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to Ulysses, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief." 

The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; then Antinous said, "We do not like such language but we will put up with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now." 

Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo. 

Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man his portion, and feasted to their hearts' content; those who waited at table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for Telemachus had told them to do so. 

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against them. Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ctesippus, and who came from Same. This man, confident in his great wealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the suitors, "Hear what I have to say. The stranger has already had as large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I will, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses' servants." 

As he spoke he picked up a heifer's foot from the meat-basket in which it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion as he did so, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to Ctesippus, "It is a good thing for you," said he, "that the stranger turned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I should have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to see about getting you buried rather than married in this house. So let me have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on, instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have long seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have put up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day--guests insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way." 

They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, "No one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; I would say, however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may commend itself to both. 'As long,' I would say, 'as you had ground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one could complain of your waiting and suffering the suitors to be in your house. It would have been better that he should have returned, but it is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man, and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink in peace, while your mother will look after some other man's house, not yours."' 

To this Telemachus answered, "By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of my unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother's marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own wishes. Heaven forbid that I should do this." 

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter. Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this and said, "Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land." 

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus then said, "This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses. Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark here." 

But Theoclymenus said, "Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me. I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for I see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be able to escape." 

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking Telemachus fly laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to him, "Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here is another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let me persuade you, for it will be much better, to put them on board ship and send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring." 

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sat silently watching his father, expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors. 

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had had a rich seat placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man were soon to lay before them--for they had brought their doom upon themselves. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XXI.

MINERVA now put it in Penelope's mind to make the suitors try their skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves, as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and got the store room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store room at the end of the house, where her husband's treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met in Lacedaemon--Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with one another in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had sailed away with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father and the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he had lost, and the mule foals that were running with them. These mares were the death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove's son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Hercules to his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared not heaven's vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the mares himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gave him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on his death had been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in return a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fast friendship, although they never visited at one another's houses, for Jove's son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so. This bow, then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, but had left it behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend. 

Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store room; the carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the doors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the doors; these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in a meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case from the peg on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees, weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it. Along with her came her maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes. When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said: 

"Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. But even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams." 

As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had bidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master's bow, but Antinous scolded them. "You country louts," said he, "silly simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by crying in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it no light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember him, though I was then only a child." 

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses, whom he was dishonouring in his own house--egging the others on to do so also. 

Then Telemachus spoke. "Great heavens!" he exclaimed, "Jove must have robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what need have I to speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excuses for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger, not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me." 

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him, and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row, in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had Wade straight by line. Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was surprised when they saw him set up so orderly, though he had never seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying for the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said: 

"Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled." 

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow. Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said: 

"Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the place at which the. cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine." 

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of OEnops was the first to rise. He was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the mixing-bowl. He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow and arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work, they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, "My friends, I cannot string it; let another have it; this bow shall take the life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is even now hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer and whose lot it is to win her." 

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door, with the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seat again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him saying: 

"Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend it yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are others who will soon string it." 

Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, "Look sharp, light a fire in the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us warm the bow and grease it we will then make trial of it again, and bring the contest to an end." 

Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside it. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders among the suitors and much the foremost among them all. 

Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and Ulysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the outer yard, Ulysses said to them quietly: 

"Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back here all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to do--to side with the suitors, or with Ulysses?" 

"Father Jove," answered the stockman, "would indeed that you might so ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see with what might and main I would fight for him." 

In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return; when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses said, "It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at last, in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I find that you two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, for I have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you two, therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven shall deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you, will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now give you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is the scar from the boar's tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on Mount Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus." 

As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw their arms round him and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses kissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said: 

"Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and tell those who a are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; Let this moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore, Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tell the women to close the doors of their apartment. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work. And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer court, and to bind them securely at once." 

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat that he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside. 

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, "I grieve for myself and for us all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. This will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn." 

"It shall not be so, Eurymachus," said Antinous, "and you know it yourself. To-day is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side--as for the axes they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats to-morrow--the best he has; we can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end." 

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering. Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said: 

"Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow that I may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I still have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and neglect have made an end of it." 

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow; Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, "Wretched creature, you have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among ourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with all those drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae. When the wine had got into his head he went mad and did ill deeds about the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his own drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly with you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here, for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself." 

Penelope then spoke to him. "Antinous," said she, "it is not right that you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house. If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind: none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all reason." 

"Queen Penelope," answered Eurymachus, "we do not suppose that this man will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go gossiping about and say, 'These suitors are a feeble folk; they are paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.' This is what will be said, and it will be a scandal against us." 

"Eurymachus," Penelope answered, "people who persist in eating up the estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk as you think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he says moreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us see whether he can string it or no. I say--and it shall surely be--that if Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and robbers, and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will see him sent safely whereever he wants to go." 

Then Telemachus said, "Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any one have the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of the bow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants. This bow is a man's matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who am master here." 

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying in her heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids. 

The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of them said, "You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out of your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry you to death." 

Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, "Father Eumaeus, bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two. I wish I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as I am than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for they mean mischief." 

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called Euryclea apart and said to her, "Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to close the doors of the women's apartments. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out, but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work." 

Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women's apartments. 

Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the outer court. There was a ship's cable of byblus fibre lying in the gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again, resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about, and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into its two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards his neighbour saying, "This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he has got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike style does the old vagabond handle it." 

Another said, "I hope he may be no more successful in other things than he is likely to be in stringing this bow." 

But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes the twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand to prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the twittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that the son of scheming Saturn had sent him. 

He took an arrow that was lying upon the table--for those which the Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver--he laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When he had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus: 

"Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what I aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong, and not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the crowning ornaments of a banquet." 

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father's seat. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XXII.

THEN Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to the ground at his feet and said, "The mighty contest is at an end. I will now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which no man has yet hit." 

On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands. He had no thought of death--who amongst all the revellers would think that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill him? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground. The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit; they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear, and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. "Stranger," said they, "you shall pay for shooting people in this way: om yi you shall see no other contest; you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremost youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed him." 

Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of every one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said: 

"Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have wasted my substance, have forced my women servants to lie with you, and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have feared neither Cod nor man, and now you shall die." 

They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke. 

"If you are Ulysses," said he, "then what you have said is just. We have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous who was the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was all his doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, and Jove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be chief man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the death which was his due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everything good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened. Until we have done this no one can complain of your being enraged against us." 

Ulysses again glared at him and said, "Though you should give me all that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall." 

Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying: 

"My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting." 

As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides, and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table. The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness. 

Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, and immediately was at his father's side. Then he said: 

"Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed." 

"Run and fetch them," answered Ulysses, "while my arrows hold out, or when I am alone they may get me away from the door." 

Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where the armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses. Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders; on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it, and he grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears. 

Now there was a trap door on the wall, while at one end of the pavement there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this exit was closed by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time. But Agelaus shouted out, "Cannot some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what is going on? Help would come at once, and we should soon make an end of this man and his shooting." 

"This may not be, Agelaus," answered Melanthius, "the mouth of the narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. One brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I will do, I will bring you arms from the store room, for I am sure it is there that Ulysses and his son have put them." 

On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store room of Ulysses, house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to the suitors. Ulysses' heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. He saw the greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, "Some one of the women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be Melanthius." 

Telemachus answered, "The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I have. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the son of Dolius." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to Ulysses who was beside him, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store room. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall I bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many wrongs that he has done in your house?" 

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius' hands and feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door fast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up to the rafters from a high bearing-post, that he may linger on in an agony." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two took their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and by Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young, but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet well behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus, saying, "Melanthius, you will pass the night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very well when morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on." 

There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, "Mentor, lend me your help, and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has done you. Besides, you are my age-mate." 

But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to reproach her. "Mentor," he cried, "do not let Ulysses beguile you into siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. You shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with Ulysses' property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of Ithaca." 

This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very angrily. "Ulysses," said she, "your strength and prowess are no longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days, and it was through your stratagem that Priam's city was taken. How comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house? Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcinous shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him." 

But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in the form of a swallow. 

Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus, Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon the suitors' side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen under the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, "My friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after having done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doors unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the others." 

They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of no effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, "My friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by us outright." 

They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears. Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while the stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead. 

The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of the cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the top skin from off Telemachus's wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze Eumaeus's shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and taunted him saying, "Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present of this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was begging about in his own house." 

Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward full on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed. They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them, for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the sport--even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite them on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood. 

Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, "Ulysses I beseech you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women in your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no thanks for all the good that I did." 

Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, "If you were their sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be long before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have children by her. Therefore you shall die." 

With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he struck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he was yet speaking. 

The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes--he who had been forced by the suitors to sing to them--now tried to save his life. He was standing near towards the trap door, and held his lyre in his hand. He did not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar of Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and Ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go straight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed it best to embrace Ulysses' knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground the ground between the mixing-bowl and the silver-studded seat; then going up to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, "Ulysses, I beseech you have mercy on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwards if you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I make all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of inspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god, do not therefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own son Telemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made me." 

Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. "Hold!" he cried, "the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will Medon too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or Eumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you were raging about the court." 

Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly flayed heifer's hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus, and laid hold of his knees. 

"Here I am, my dear sir," said he, "stay your hand therefore, and tell your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to yourself." 

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "Fear not; Telemachus has saved your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the slaughter--you and the bard--while I finish my work here inside." 

The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down by Jove's great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting that they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living, but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood. They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of the sun makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying all huddled up one against the other. 

Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, "Call nurse Euryclea; I have something to say to her." 

Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women's room. "Make haste," said he, "you old woman who have been set over all the other women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you." 

When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women's room and came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpses bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so that he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head to foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, "Old woman," said he, "rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven's doom and their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for their wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in the house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent." 

"I will tell you the truth, my son," answered Euryclea. "There are fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool, and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all have misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope. They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep." 

"Do not wake her yet," answered Ulysses, "but tell the women who have misconducted themselves to come to me." 

Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the swineherd. "Begin," said he, "to remove the dead, and make the women help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the outer court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used to lie in secret with the suitors." 

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly. First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one another in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they had done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and water, while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out of doors. Then when they had made the whole place quite clean and orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could not get away: and Telemachus said to the other two, "I shall not let these women die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and used to sleep with the suitors." 

So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should touch the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably. Their feet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long. 

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut off his hands and his feet. 

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old nurse Euryclea, "Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also all the maid servants that are in the house." 

"All that you have said is true," answered Euryclea, "but let me bring you some clean clothes--a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags on your back any longer. It is not right." 

"First light me a fire," replied Ulysses. 

She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts. Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened; whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like to weep, for he remembered every one of them. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XXIII.

EURYCLEA now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child," she exclaimed, "and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating up his estate and ill-treating his son." 

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you; for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock me when I have trouble enough already--talking such nonsense, and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back again into the women's room; if it had been any one else, who had woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding. As it is, your age shall protect you." 

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people. 

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea, and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to me; if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always were?" 

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him, one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him." 

"'My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over all this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come home--more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity. Ulysses is dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home again." 

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this bargain with you--if I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the most cruel death you can think of." 

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has killed them." 

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right angles [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby clothes and failed to recognize him, till Telemachus began to reproach her and said: 

"Mother--but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name--why do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much; but your heart always was as hard as a stone." 

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others." 

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put me to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently. She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else, because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us, however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed another, even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take up his quarrel, the man who has killed him must still say good bye to his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you consider this matter." 

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say you are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds out." 

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land. Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall seem wisest." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married at last. She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her husband's property until he comes home." 

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva--and his work is full of beauty--enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear," said he, "heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard as iron." 

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca. Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets." 

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife, I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was a young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and then worked with carpenter's tools well and skilfully, straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop. I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So you see I know all about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its roots." 

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you, who are the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked people going about. Jove's daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now, however, that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single maid servant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrust no longer." 

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with the fury of his winds and waves--a few alone reach the land, and these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm ground and out of danger--even so was her husband welcome to her as she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear her onward to break the day upon mankind. 

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the end of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. But now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep." 

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it is better that I should be told at once." 

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you? Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave me this certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he said, should surely come to pass." 

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from misfortune." 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the bed chamber woman Eurynome to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed. Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in the cloisters. 

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine. Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had ended his whole story. 

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only. Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old, but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing about which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows. 

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope, "Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last come together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these instructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs, therefore, and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no questions." 

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also. This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they opened the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led them quickly out of the town. 

The Odyssey of Homer, by Samuel Butler, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Odyssey: BOOK XXIV.

THEN Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down into the dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the souls and shadows of them that can labour no more. 

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself. 

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of Aeisthus; and the ghost of Achilles spoke first. 

"Son of Atreus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had loved you better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it has now been your lot to come to a most miserable end." 

"Happy son of Peleus," answered the ghost of Agamemnon, "for having died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother, when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying, 'Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.' 

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet voices in lament--calling and answering one another; there was not an Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt in raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes, horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold them--gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more. 

"Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife." 

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognized Amphimedon son of Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to talk to him. 

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happened to all you fine young men--all of an age too--that you are come down here under the ground? One could pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city? Answer my question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember how I came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume our voyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us." 

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, "Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room and began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,' said she, 'Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded--till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This is what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years without our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had it washed, its splendour was as that of the sun or moon. 

"Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He came so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both being struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors behind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the bow--nor nearly do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter what he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When he had got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow through the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed Antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our blood. This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are lying still un-cared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the offices due to the departed." 

"Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes," replied the ghost of Agamemnon, "you are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones." 

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with a lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman, who looked after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there, he said to his son and to the other two: 

"Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner. Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to recognize me after so long an absence." 

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father alone, hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall pear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether he should first question him and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty with him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down and digging about a plant. 

"I see, sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent gardener--what pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth. I should have said that you were one of those who should wash well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this place that I have come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you that this man came to my house once when I was in my own country and never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked better. He said that his family came from Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts, and I let him take his choice." 

His father shed tears and answered, "Sir, you have indeed come to the country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have entertained you hospitably and would have required your presents amply when you left him--as would have been only right considering what you have already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is it since you entertained this guest--my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas! He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents, could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who and whence are you--tell me of your town and parents? Where is the ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a passenger on some other man's ship, and those who brought you here have gone on their way and left you?" 

"I will tell you everything," answered Ulysses, "quite truly. I come from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left my country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left me. The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have another friendly meeting and exchange presents." 

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched, and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, "I am he, father, about whom you are asking--I have returned after having been away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation--we have no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes." 

"If you really are my son Ulysses," replied Laertes, "and have come back again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall convince me." 

"First observe this scar," answered Ulysses, "which I got from a boar's tusk when I was hunting on Mount Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me to Autolycus, my mother's father, to receive the presents which when he was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all, and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has been laid heavy upon them." 

Laertes' strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, "O father Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the cities of the Cephallenians." 

Ulysses answered, "Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that, but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready as soon as possible." 

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him on a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing presence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came back his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said to him, "My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much taller and better-looking." 

Laertes answered, "Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors. I should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced to see it." 

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their mother, the Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing old, had been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded them good-naturedly and said, "Sit down to your dinner, old man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some time and have been waiting for you." 

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. "Sir," said he, seizing his master's hand and kissing it at the wrist, "we have long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you. But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or shall we send some one to tell her?" 

"Old man," answered Ulysses, "she knows already, so you need not trouble about that." On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other; then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father. 

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses. They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrily in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said, weeping bitterly, "My friend, this man has done the Achaeans great wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule, or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons and brothers. For my own part I should have no mote pleasure in life, but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, before they can cross over to the mainland." 

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses. Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of the assembly, and Medon said, "Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on one another." 

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor, rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying, 

"Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the wantonness of their hearts--wasting the substance and dishonouring the wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however, let it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads." 

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes; they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to perish in his attempt. 

Then Minerva said to Jove, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer me this question--What do you propose to do? Will you set them fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?" 

And Jove answered, "My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will be most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign." 

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus. 

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by saying, "Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to us." So one of Dolius's sons went as he was bid. Standing on the threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, "Here they are, let us put on our armour at once." 

They put on their armour as fast as they could--that is to say Ulysses, his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did the same--warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. 

Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to his son Telemachus, "Telemachus, now that are about to fight in an engagement, which will show every man's mettle, be sure not to disgrace your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the world over." 

"You say truly, my dear father," answered Telemachus, "and you shall see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family." 

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. "Good heavens, he exclaimed, "what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour." 

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, "Son of Arceisius--best friend I have in the world--pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove her father; then poise your spear and hurl it." 

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes' helmet, and the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Meantime Ulysses and his son fell the front line of the foe and smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again, only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. "Men of Ithaca," she cried, cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at once without further bloodshed." 

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of the goddess's voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry with you." 

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace between the two contending parties. 

                      -THE END-
 . 

    


===== BOOK: olb.txt =====


    
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

OERA LINDA BOOK

  

FROM

  

A Manuscript of the Thirteenth Century

  

WITH THE PERMISSION OF THE PROPRIETOR

  

C. OVER DE LINDEN, OF THE HELDER

  

The Original Frisian Text

  

AS VERIFIED BY DR J. O. OTTEMA

  

ACCOMPANIED BY AN

  

ENGLISH VERSION OF DR OTTEMA'S DUTCH TRANSLATION

  

BY

  

WILLIAM R. SANDBACH

  

LONDON

  

TRUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL

  

[1876]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Page 48 of the Oera Linda manuscript, showing the alphabet in use

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

THE work of which I here offer an English translation has excited, among the Dutch and German literary societies, a keen controversy in regard to its authenticity--a controversy not yet brought to a conclusion, some affirming that it contains internal evidence of truth, while others declare it to be a forgery. But even the latter do not insist on its being the work of a modern fabricator. They allow it to be one hundred, or perhaps one hundred and fifty, years old. If they admit that, I do not see why they refuse it a greater antiquity; and as to the improbability of the stories related in it, I refer the reader to the exhaustive inquiry in Dr Ottema's Preface.

Is it more difficult to believe that the early Frisians, being hardy and intrepid marine adventurers, sailed to the Mediterranean, and even proceeded farther, than that the Phoenicians sailed to England for tin, and to the Baltic for amber? or that a clever woman

[p. vi]

became a lawgiver at Athens, than that a goddess sprang, full grown and armed, from the cleft skull of Jupiter?

There is nothing in the narratives of this book inconsistent with probability, however they may vary from some of our preconceived ideas.; but whether it is really what it pretends to be--a very ancient manuscript, or a more modern fiction--it is not the less a most curious and interesting work, and as such I offer it to the British public.

In order to give an idea of the manuscript, I have procured photographs of two of its pages, which are bound with this volume.

I have also followed Dr Ottema's plan of printing the original Frisian opposite to the translation, so that any reader possessing a knowledge of the language may verify the correctness of the translation.

In addition to the Preface which I have translated, Dr Ottema has written two pamphlets on the subject of the Oera Linda Book (1. Historical Notes and Explanations; 2. The Royal Academy and Het Oera Linda Bok), both of which would be very valuable to any one who wished to study the controversy respecting the authenticity of the work, but which I have not thought it necessary to translate for the present publication.

[p. vii]

There has also appeared in the "Deventer Courant" a series of twelve letters on the same subject. Though written anonymously, I believe they are from the pen of Professor Vitringa. They have been translated into German by Mr Otto.

The writer evidently entered upon his task of criticism with a feeling of disbelief in the authenticity of the book; but in his last letter he admits that, after a minute examination, he is unable to pronounce a positive conviction either for or against it.

His concluding remarks are to the following effect

"If the book is a romance, then I must admit that it has been written with a good object, and by a clever man, because the sentiments expressed in it are of a highly moral tendency; and the facts related, so far as they can be controlled by regular history, are not untruthful; and where they deal with events of which we have no historical records, they do not offend our ideas of possibility or even probability."

WM. R. SANDBACH.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

INTRODUCTION.

C. OVER DE LINDEN, Chief Superintendent of the Royal Dockyard at the Helder, possesses a very ancient manuscript, which has been inherited and preserved in his family from time immemorial, without any one knowing whence it came or what it contained, owing to both the language and the writing being unknown.

All that was known was that a tradition contained in it had from generation to generation been recommended to careful preservation. It appeared that the tradition rests upon the contents of two letters, with which the manuscript begins, from Hiddo oera Linda, anno 1256, and from Liko oera Linda, anno 803. It came to C. over de Linden by the directions of his grandfather, Den Heer Andries over de Linden, who lived at Enkhuizen, and died there on the 15th of April 1820, aged sixty-one. As the grandson was at that time barely ten years old, the manuscript was taken care of for him by his aunt, Aafje Meylhoff, born Over de Linden, living at Enkhuizen, who in August 1848 delivered it to the present possessor.

Dr E. Verwijs having heard of this, requested permission to examine the manuscript, and immediately recognised it as very ancient Fries. He obtained at the same time permission to make a copy of it for the benefit of the Friesland Society, and was of opinion that it might be of great importance, provided it was not supposititious, and invented for some deceptive object, which he feared. The manuscript

[p. vi]

being placed in my hands, I also felt very doubtful, though I could not understand what object any one could have in inventing a false composition only to keep it a secret. This doubt remained until I had examined carefully-executed facsimiles of two fragments, and afterwards of the whole manuscript--the first sight of which convinced me of the great age of the document.

Immediately occurred to me Caesar's remark upon the writing of the Gauls and the Helvetians in his "Bello Gallico" (i. 29, and vi. 14), "Graecis utuntur literis," though it appears in v. 48 that they were not entirely Greek letters. Caesar thus points out only a resemblance--and a very true one--as the writing, which does not altogether correspond with any known form of letters, resembles the most, on a cursory view, the Greek writing, such as is found on monuments and the oldest manuscripts, and belongs to the form which is called lapidary. Besides, I formed the opinion afterwards that the writer of the latter part of the book had been a contemporary of Caesar.

The form and the origin of the writing is so minutely and fully described in the first part of the book, as it could not be in any other language. It is very complete, and consists of thirty-four letters, among which are three separate forms of a and u, and two of e, i, y, and o, besides four pairs of double consonants ng, th, hs, and gs. The ng, which as a nasal sound has no particular mark in any other Western language, is an indivisible conjunction; the th is soft, as in English, and is sometimes replaced by d; the gs is seldom met with--I believe only in the word segse, to say, in modern Fries sidse, pronounced sisze.

The paper, of large quarto size, is made of cotton, not very thick, without water-mark or maker's mark, made upon a frame or wire-web, with not very broad perpendicular lines.

An introductory letter gives the year 1256 as that

[p. vii]

in which this manuscript was written by Hiddo overa Linda on foreign paper. Consequently it must have come from Spain, where the Arabs brought into the market paper manufactured from cotton.

On this subject, W. Wattenbach writes in his "Das Schriftwesen im Mittelalter" (Leipzig, 1871), s. 93:--

"The manufacture of paper from cotton must have been in use among the Chinese from very remote times, and must have become known to the Arabs by the conquest of Samarcand about the year 704. In Damascus this manufacture was an important branch of industry, for which reason it was called Charta Damascena. By the Arabians this art was brought to the Greeks. It is asserted that Greek manuscripts of the tenth century written upon cotton paper exist, and that in the thirteenth century it was much more used than parchment. To distinguish it from Egyptian paper it was called Charta bombicina, gossypina, cuttunea, xylina. A distinction from linen paper was not yet necessary. In the manufacture of the cotton paper raw cotton was originally used. We first find paper from rags mentioned by Petrus Clusiacensis (1122-50).

"The Spaniards and the Italians learned the manufacture of this paper from the Arabians. The most celebrated factories were at Jativa, Valencia, Toledo, besides Fabriano in the March of Ancona." [**]

In Germany the use of this material did not become very extended, whether it came from Italy or Spain. Therefore the further this preparation spread from the East and the adjoining countries, the more necessity there was that linen should take the place of cotton. A document of Kaufbeuren on linen paper of the year 1318 is of very doubtful genuineness. Bodman considers the oldest pure

[p. viii]

linen paper to be of the year 1324, but up to 1350 much mixed paper was used. All carefully-written manuscripts of great antiquity show by the regularity of their lines that they must have been ruled, even though no traces of the ruled lines can be distinguished. To make the lines they used a thin piece of lead, a ruler, and a pair of compasses to mark the distances.

In old writings the ink is very black or brown; but while there has been more writing since the thirteenth century, the colour of the ink is often grey or yellowish, and sometimes quite pale, showing that it contains iron. All this affords convincing proof that the manuscript before us belongs to the middle of the thirteenth century, written with clear black letters between fine lines carefully traced with lead. The colour of the ink shows decidedly that it does not contain iron. By these evidences the date given, 1256, is satisfactorily proved, and it is impossible to assign any later date. Therefore all suspicion of modern deception vanishes.

The language is very old Fries, still older and purer than the Fries Rjuchtboek or old Fries laws, differing from that both in form and spelling, so that it appears to be an entirely distinct dialect, and shows that the locality of the language must have been (as it was spoken) between the Vlie and the Scheldt.

The style is extremely simple, concise, and unembarrassed, resembling that of ordinary conversation, and free in the choice of the words. The spelling is also simple and easy, so that the reading of it does not involve the least difficulty, and yet with all its regularity, so unrestricted, that each of the separate writers who have worked at the book has his own peculiarities, arising from the changes in pronunciation in a long course of years, which naturally must have happened, as the last part of the work is written five centuries after the first.

[p. ix]

As a specimen of antiquity in language and writing, I believe I may venture to say that this book is unique of its kind.

The writing suggests an observation which may be of great importance.

The Greeks know and acknowledge that their writing was not their own invention. They attribute the introduction of it to Kadmus, a Phenician. The names of their oldest letters, from Alpha to Tau, agree so exactly with the names of the letters in the Hebrew alphabet, with which the Phenician will have been nearly connected, that we cannot doubt that the Hebrew was the origin of the Phenician. But the form of their letters differs so entirely from that of the Phenician and Hebrew writing, that in that particular no connection can be thought of between them. Whence, then, have the Greeks derived the form of their letters?

From "thet bok thera Adele folstar" ("The Book of Adela's Followers") we learn that in the time when Kadmus is said to have lived, about sixteen centuries. before Christ, a brisk trade existed between the Frisians and the Phenicians, whom they named Kadhemar, or dwellers on the coast.

The name Kadmus comes too near the word Kadhemar for us not to believe that Kadmus simply meant a Phenician.

Further on we learn that about the same time a priestess of the castle in the island of Walcheren, Min-erva, also called Nyhellenia, had settled in Attica at the head of a Frisian colony, and had founded a castle at Athens. Also, from the accounts written on the walls of Waraburch, that the Finns likewise had a writing of their own--a very troublesome and difficult one to read--and that, therefore, the Tyrians and the Greeks had learned the writing of Frya. By this representation the whole thing explains itself, and it becomes clear whence comes the exterior

[p. x]

resemblance between the Greek and the old Fries writing, which Caesar also remarked among the Gauls; as likewise in what manner the Greeks acquired and retained the names of the Finn and the forms of the Fries writing.

Equally remarkable are the forms of their figures. We usually call our figures Arabian, although they have not the least resemblance to those used by the Arabs. The Arabians did not bring their ciphers from the East, because the Semitic nations used the whole alphabet in writing numbers. The manner of expressing all numbers by ten signs the Arabs learned in the West, though the form was in some measure corresponding with their writing, and was written from left to right, after the Western fashion. Our ciphers seem here to have sprung from the Fries ciphers (siffar), which form had the same origin as the handwriting, and is derived from the lines of the Juul?

The book as it lies before us consists of two parts, differing widely from each other, and of dates very far apart. The writer of the first part calls herself Adela, wife of Apol, chief man of the Linda country. This is continued by her son Adelbrost, and her daughter Apollonia. The first book, running from page 1 to 88, is written by Adele. The following part, from 88 to 94, is begun by Adelbrost and continued by Apollonia. The second book, running from page 94 to 114, is written by Apollonia. Much later, perhaps two hundred and fifty years, a third book is written, from page 114 to 134, by Frethorik; then follows from page 134 to 143, written by his widow, Wiljow; after that from page 144 to 169 by their son, Konereed; and then from page 169 to 192 by their grandson, Beeden. Pages 193 and 194, with which the last part must have begun, are wanting, therefore the writer is unknown. He may probably have been a son of Beeden.

On page 134, Wiljow makes mention of another writing of Adela. These she names "thet bok thera sanga (thet

[p. xi]

boek), thera tellinga," and "thet Hellenia bok;" and afterwards "tha skrifta fon Adela jeftha Hellenia."

To fix the date we must start from the year 1256 of our era, when Hiddo overa Linda made the copy, in which he says that it was 3449 years after Atland was sunk. This disappearance of the old land (aldland, atland) was known by the Greeks, for Plato mentions in his "Timaeus," 24, the disappearance of Atlantis, the position of which was only known as somewhere far beyond the Pillars of Hercules. From this writing it appears that it was land stretching far out to the west of Jutland, of which Heligoland and the islands of North Friesland are the last barren remnants. This event, which occasioned a great dispersion of the Frisian race, became the commencement of a chronological reckoning corresponding with 2193 before Christ, and is known by geologists as the Cimbrian flood.

On page 80 begins an account in the year 1602, after the disappearance of Atland, and thus in the year 591 before Christ; and on page 82 is the account of the murder of Frana, "Eeremoeder," of Teerland two years later--that is, in 589. When, therefore, Adela commences her writing with her own coming forward in an assembly of the people thirty years after the murder of the Eeremoeder, that must have been in the year 559 before Christ. In the part written by her daughter Apollonia, we find that fifteen months after the assembly Adela was killed by the Finns in an attack by surprise of Texland. This must accordingly have happened 557 years before Christ. Hence it follows that the first book, written by Adela, was of the year 558 before Christ. The second book, by Apollonia, we may assign to about the year 530 before Christ. The latter part contains the history of the known kings of Friesland, Friso, Adel (Ubbo), and Asega Askar, called Black Adel. Of the third king, Ubbo, nothing is said, or rather that part is lost, as the pages 169 to 188 are missing.

[p. xii]

[paragraph continues] Frethorik, the first writer, who appears now, was a contemporary of the occurrences which he relates, namely, the arrival of Friso. He was a friend of Liudgert den Geertman, who, as rear-admiral of the fleet of Wichhirte, the sea-king, had come with Friso in the year 303 before Christ, 1890 years after the disappearance of Atland. He has borrowed most of his information from the log-book of Liudgert.

The last writer gives himself out most clearly as a contemporary of Black Adel or Askar, about the middle of his reign, which Furmerius states to have been from 70 before Christ to 11 after the birth of Christ, the same period as Julius Caesar and Augustus. He therefore wrote in the middle of the last century before Christ, and knew of the conquest of Gaul by the Romans. It is thus evident that there elapsed fully two centuries between the two parts of the work.

Of the Gauls we read on page 84 that they were called the "Missionaries of Sydon." And on page 124 "that the Gauls are Druids." The Gauls, then, were Druids, and the name Galli, used for the whole nation, was really only the name of an order of priesthood brought from the East, just as among the Romans the Galli were priests of Cybele.

 

The whole contents of the book are in all respects new. That is to say, there is nothing in it that we were acquainted with before. What we here read of Friso, Adel, and Askar differs entirely from what is related by our own chroniclers, or rather presents it in quite another light. For instance, they all relate that Friso came from India, and that thus the Frisians were of Indian descent; and yet they add that Friso was a German, and belonged to a Persian race which Herodotus called Germans (Germanioi). According to the statement in this book, Friso did come from India, and with the fleet of Nearchus;

[p. xiii]

but he is not therefore an Indian. He is of Frisian origin, of Frya's people. He belongs, in fact, to a Frisian colony which after the death of Nijhellenia, fifteen and a half centuries before Christ, under the guidance of a priestess Geert, settled in the Panjab, and took the name of Geertmen. The Geertmen were known by only one of the Greek writers, Strabo, who mentions them as Germanes, differing totally and entirely from the Braxmanes in manners, language, and religion.

The historians of Alexander's expeditions do not speak of Frisians or Geertmen, though they mention Indoscythians, thereby describing a people who live in India, bat whose origin is in the distant, unknown North.

In the accounts of Liudgert no names are given of planes where the Frieslanders lived in India. We only know that they first established themselves to the east of the Punjab, and afterwards moved to the west of those rivers. It is mentioned, moreover, as a striking fact, that in the summer the sun at midday was straight above their heads. They therefore lived within the tropics. We find in Ptolemy (see the map of Kiepert), exactly 24 degrees N. on the west side of the Indus, the name Minnagara; and about six degrees east of that, in 22 degrees N., another Minnagara. This name is pure Fries, the same as Walhallagara, Folsgara, and comes from Minna, the name of an Eeremoeder, in whose time the voyages of Teunis and his nephew Inca took place.

The coincidence is too remarkable to be accidental, and not to prove that Minnagara was the headquarters of the Frisian colony. The establishment of the colonists in the Punjab in 1551 before Christ, and their journey thither, we find fully described in Adela's book; and with the mention of one most remarkable circumstance, namely, that the Frisian mariners sailed through the strait which in those times still ran into the Red Sea.

[p. xiv]

In Strabo, book i. pages 38 and 50, it appears that Eratosthenes was acquainted with the existence of the strait, of which the later geographers make no mention. It existed still in the time of Moses (Exodus xiv. 2), for he encamped at Pi-ha-chiroht, the "month of the strait." Moreover, Strabo mentions that Sesostris made an attempt to cut through the isthmus, but that he was not able to accomplish it. That in very remote times the sea really did flow through is proved by the result of the geological investigations on the isthmus made by the Suez Canal Commission, of which M. Renaud presented a report to the Academy of Sciences on the 19th June 1856. In that report, among other things, appears the following: "Une question fort controversee est celle de savoir, si a l'epoque ou les Hebreux fuyaient de l'Egypte sous la conduite de Moise, les lacs amers faisaient encore partie de la mer rouge. Cette derniere hypothese s'accorderait mieux que l'hypothese contraire avec le texte des livres sacres, mais alors il faudrait admettre que depuis l'epoque de Moise le seuil de Suez serait sorti des eaux."

With regard to this question, it is certainly of importance to fall in with an account in this Frisian manuscript, from which it seems that in the sixteenth century before Christ the connection between the Bitter Lakes and the Red Sea still existed, and that the strait was still navigable. The manuscript further states that soon after the passage of the Geertmen there was an earthquake; that the land rose so high that all the water ran out, and all the shallows and alluvial lands rose up like a wall. This must have happened after the time of Moses, so that at the date of the Exodus (1564 B.C.) the track between Suez and the Bitter Lakes was still navigable, but could be forded dry-foot at low water.

This point, then, is the commencement of the isthmus,

[p. xv]

after the forming of which, the northern inlet was certainly soon filled up as far as the Gulf of Pelusium.

The map by Louis Figuier, in the "Annee scientifique et industrielle" (premiere annee), Paris, Hachette, 1857, gives a distinct illustration of the formation of this land.

Another statement, which occurs only in Strabo, finds also here a confirmation. Strabo alone of all the Greek writers relates that Nearchus, after he had landed his troops in the Persian Gulf, at the mouth of the Pasitigris, sailed out of the Persian Gulf by Alexander's command, and steered round Arabia through the Arabian Gulf. As the account stands, it is not clear what Nearchus had to do there, and what the object of the farther voyage was. If, as Strabo seems to think, it was only for geographical discovery, he need not have taken the whole fleet.. One or two ships would have sufficed. We do not read that he returned. Where, then, did he remain with that fleet?

The answer to this question is to be found in the Frisian version of the story. Alexander had bought the ships on the Indus, or had had them built by the descendants of the Frisians who settled there--the Geertmen--and had taken into his service sailors from among them, and at the head of them was Friso. Alexander having accomplished his voyage and the transport of his troops, had no further use for the ships in the Persian Gulf, but wished to employ them in the Mediterranean. He had taken that idea into his head, and it must be carried into effect. He wished to do what no one had done before him. For this purpose Nearchus was to sail up the Red Sea, and on his arrival at Suez was to find 200 elephants, 1000 camels, workmen and materials, timber and ropes, &c., in order to haul the ships by land over the isthmus. This work was carried on and accomplished with so much zeal and energy that after three months' labour the fleet was launched in the Mediterranean. That the fleet really

[p. xvi]

came to the Mediterranean appears in Plutarch's "Life of Alexander;" but he makes Nearchus bring the fleet round Africa, and sail through the Pillars of Hercules.

After the defeat at Actium, Cleopatra, in imitation of this example, tried to take her fleet over the isthmus in order to escape to India, but was prevented by the inhabitants of Arabia Petraea, who burnt her ships. (See Plutarch's "Life of Antony.") When Alexander shortly afterwards died, Friso remained in the service of Antigonus and Demetrius, until, having been grievously insulted by the latter, he resolved to seek out with his sailors their fatherland, Friesland. To India he could not, indeed, return.

Thus these accounts chime in with and clear up each other, and in that way afford a mutual confirmation of the events.

Such simple narratives and surprising results led me to conclude that we had to do here with more than mere Saga and Legends.

Since the last twenty years attention has been directed to the remains of the dwellings on piles, first observed in the Swiss lakes, and afterwards in other parts of Europe. (See Dr E. Ruckert, "Die Pfahlbauten;" Wurzburg, 1869. Dr T. C. Winkler, in the "Volksalmanak," t. N. v. A. 1867.) When they were found, endeavours were made to discover, by the existing fragments of arms, tools, and household articles, by whom and when these dwellings had been inhabited. There are no accounts of them in historical writers, beyond what Herodotus writes in book v. chapter 18, of the "Paeonen." The only trace that has been found is in one of the panels of Trajan's Pillar, in which the destruction of a pile village in Dacia is represented.

Doubly important, therefore, is it to learn from the writing of Apollonia that she, as "Burgtmaagd" (chief of the virgins), about 540 years before Christ, made a journey

[p. xvii]

up the Rhine to Switzerland, and there became acquainted with the Lake Dwellers (Marsaten). She describes their dwellings built upon piles--the people themselves--their manners and customs. She relates that they lived by fishing and hunting, and that they prepared the skins of the animals with the bark of the birch-tree in order to sell the fare to the Rhine boatmen, who brought them into commerce. This account of the pile dwellings in the Swiss lakes can only have been written in the time when these dwellings still existed and were lived in. In the second part of the writing, Konered oera Linda relates that Adel, the son of Friso (+- 250 years before Christ), visited the pile dwellings in Switzerland with his wife Ifkja.

Later than this account there is no mention by any writer whatever of the pile dwellings, and the subject has remained for twenty centuries utterly unknown until 1853, when an extraordinary low state of the water led to the discovery of these dwellings. Therefore no one could have invented this account in the intervening period. Although a great portion of the first part of the work--the book of Adela--belongs to the mythological period before the Trojan war, there is a striking difference between it and the Greek myths. The Myths have no dates, much less any chronology, nor any internal coherence of successive events. The untrammelled fancy develops itself in every poem separately and independently. The mythological stories contradict each other on every point. "Les Mythes ne se tiennent pas," is the only key to the Greek Mythology.

Here, on the contrary, we meet with a regular succession of dates starting from a fixed period--the destruction of Atland, 2193 before Christ. The accounts are natural and simple, often naive, never contradict each other, and are always consistent with each other in time and place. As, for instance, the arrival and sojourn of Ulysses with the

[p. xviii]

[paragraph continues] Burgtmaagd Kalip at Walhallagara (Walcheren), which is the most mythical portion of all, is here said to be 1005 years after the disappearance of Atland, which coincides with 1188 years before Christ, and thus agrees very nearly with the time at which the Greeks say the Trojan war took place. The story of Ulysses was not brought here for the first time by the Romans. Tacitus found it already in Lower Germany (see "Germania," cap. 3), and says that at Asciburgium there was an altar on which the names of Ulysses and his father Laertes were inscribed.

Another remarkable difference consists in this, that the Myths know no origin, do not name either writers or relaters of their stories, and therefore never can bring forward any authority. Whereas in Adela's book, for every statement is given a notice where it was found or whence it was taken. For instance, "This comes from Minno's writings--this is written on the walls of Waraburch--this in the town of Frya--this at Stavia--this at Walhallagara."

There is also this further. Laws, regular legislative enactments, such as are found in great numbers in Adela's book, are utterly unknown in Mythology, and indeed are irreconcilable with its existence. Even when the Myth attributes to Minos the introduction of lawgiving in Crete, it does not give the least account of what the legislation consisted in. Also among the Gods of Mythology there existed no system of laws. The only law was  Destiny and the will of the supreme Zeus.

With regard to Mythology, this writing, which bears no mythical character, is not less remarkable than with regard to history. Notwithstanding the frequent and various relations with Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, we do not find any traces of acquaintance with the Northern or Scandinavian Mythology. Only Wodin appears in the person of Wodan, a chief of the Frisians, who became the

[p. xix]

son-in-law of one Magy, King of the Finns, and after his death was deified.

The Frisian religion is extremely simple, and pure Monotheism. Wr-alda or Wr-alda's spirit is the only eternal, unchangeable, perfect, and almighty being. Wr-alda has created everything. Out of him proceeds everything--first the beginning, then time, and afterwards Irtha, the Earth. Irtha bore three daughters--Lyda, Finda, and Frya--the mothers of the three distinct races, black, yellow, and white--Africa, Asia, and Europe. As such, Frya is the mother of Frya's people, the Frieslenders. She is the representative of Wr-alda, and is reverenced accordingly. Frya has established her "Tex," the first law, and has established the religion of the eternal light. The worship consists in the maintenance of a perpetually-burning lamp, foddik, by priestesses, virgins. At the head of the virgins in every town was a Burgtmaagd, and the chief of the Burgtmaagden was the Eeremoeder of the Fryasburgt of Texland. The Eeremoeder governs the whole country. The kings can do nothing, nor can anything happen without her advice and approval. The first Eeremoeder was appointed by Frya herself, and was called Fasta. In fact, we find here the prototype of the Roman Vestal Virgins.

We are reminded here of Velleda (Welda) and Aurinia in Tacitus ("Germania," 8. Hist., iv. 61, 65; v. 22, 24. "Annals," L 54), and of Gauna, the successor of Velleda, in Dio Cassius (Fragments, 49). Tacitus speaks of the town of Velleda as "edita turris," page 146. It was the town Mannagarda fords (Munster).

In the county of the Marsians he speaks of the temple Tanfane (Tanfanc), so called from the sign of the Juul. (See plate I.)

The last of these towns was Fastaburgt in Ameland, temple Foste, destroyed, according to Occa Scarlensis, in 806.

If we find among the Frisians a belief in a Godhead

[p. xx]

and ideas of religion entirely different from the Mythology of other nations, we are the more surprised to find in some points the closest connection with the Greek and Roman Mythology, and even with the origin of two deities of the highest rank, Min-erva and Neptune. Min-erva (Athene) was originally a Burgtmaagd, priestess of Frya, at the town Walhallagara, Middelburg, or Domburg, in Walcheren. And this Min-erva is at the same time the mysterious enigmatical goddess of whose worship scarcely any traces remain beyond the votive stones at Domburg, in Walcheren, Nehallenia, of whom no mythology knows anything more than the name, which etymology has used for all sorts of fantastical derivations. [**]

The other, Neptune, called by the Etrurians Nethunus, the God of the Mediterranean Sea, appears here to have been, when living, a Friesland Viking, or sea-king, whose home was Alderga (Ouddorp, not far from Alkmaar). His name was Teunis, called familiarly by his followers Neef Teunis, or Cousin Teunis, who had chosen the Mediterranean as the destination of his expeditions, and must have been deified by the Tyrians at the time when the Phenician navigators began to extend their voyages so remarkably, sailing to Friesland in order to obtain British tin, northern iron, and amber from the Baltic, about 2000 years before Christ.

Besides these two we meet with a third mythological person--Minos, the lawgiver of Crete, who likewise appears to have been a Friesland sea-king, Minno, born at Lindaoord, between Wieringen and Kreyl, who imparted to the Cretans an "Asagaboek." He is that Minos who, with his brother Rhadamanthus and Aeacus, presided as

[p. xxi]

judges over the fates of the ghosts in Hades, and must not be confounded with the later Minos, the contemporary of Aegeus and Theseus, who appears in the Athenian fables.

The reader may perhaps be inclined to laugh at these statements, and apply to me the words that I myself have lately used, fantastic and improbable. Indeed at first I could not believe my own eyes, and yet after further consideration I arrived at the discovery of extraordinary conformities which render the case much less improbable than the birth of Min-erva from the head of Jupiter by a blow from the axe of Hephaestus, for instance.

In the Greek Mythology all the gods and goddesses have a youthful period. Pallas alone has no youth. She is not otherwise known than adult. Min-erva appears in Attica as high priestess from a foreign country, a country unknown to the Greeks. Pallas is a virgin goddess, Min-erva is a Burgtmaagd. The fair, blue-eyed Pallas, differing thus in type from the rest of the gods and goddesses, evidently belonged to Frya's people. The character for wisdom and the emblematical attributes, especially the owl, are the same for both. Pallas gives to the new town her own name, Athenai, which has no meaning in Greek. Min-erva gives to the town built by her the name Athene, which has an important meaning in Fries, namely, that they came there as friends--"Athen."

Min-erva came to Attica about 1600 years before Christ, the period at which the Grecian Mythology was beginning to be formed. Min-erva landed with the fleet of Jon at the head of a colony in Attica. In later times we find her on the Roman votive stones in Walcheren, under the name of Nehallenia, worshipped as a goddess of navigation; and Pallas is worshipped by the Athenians as the protecting goddess of shipbuilding and navigation.

Time is the carrier who must eternally turn the "Jol" (wheel) and carry the sun along his course through the

[p. xxii]

firmament from winter to winter, thus forming the year, every turn of the wheel being a day. In midwinter the "Jolfeest" is celebrated on Frya's Day. Then cakes are baked in the form of the sun's wheel, because with the Jol Frya formed the letters when she wrote her "Tex." The Jolfeest is therefore also in honour of Frya as inventor of writing.

Just as this Jolfeest has been changed by Christianity into Christmas throughout Denmark and Germany, and into St Nicholas' Day in Holland; so, certainly, our St Nicholas' dolls--the lover and his sweetheart--are a memorial of Frya, and the St Nicholas letters a memorial of Frya's invention of letters formed from the wheel.

I cannot analyse the whole contents of this writing, and must content myself with the remarks that I have made. They will give an idea of the richness and importance of the contents. If some of it is fabulous, even as fabulous it must have an interest for us, since so little of the traditions of our forefathers remains to us.

An internal evidence of the antiquity of these writings may be found in the fact that the name Batavians had not yet been used. The inhabitants of the whole country as far as the Scheldt are Frya's people--Frieslanders. The Batavians are not a separate people. The name Batavi is of Roman origin. The Romans gave it to the inhabitants of the banks of the Waal, which river bears the name Patabus in the "Tabula Pentingeriana." The name Batavi does not appear earlier than Tacitus and Pliny, and is interpolated in Caesar's "Bello Gallico," iv. 10. (See my treatise on the course of the rivers through the countries of the Frisians and Batavians, p. 49, in "De Vrije Fries," 4th vol. 1st part, 1845.)

 

I will conclude with one more remark regarding the language. Those who have been able to take only a superficial

[p. xxiii]

view of the manuscript have been struck by the polish of the language, and its conformity with the present Friesland language and Dutch. In this they seem to find grounds for doubting the antiquity of the manuscript.

But, I ask, is, then, the language of Homer much less polished than that of Plato or Demosthenes? And does not the greatest portion of Homer's vocabulary exist in the Greek of our day?

It is true that language alters with time, and is continually subject to slight variations, owing to which language is found to be different at different epochs. This change in the language in this manuscript accordingly gives ground for important observations to philologists. It is not only that of the eight writers who have successively worked at the book, each is recognisable by slight peculiarities in style, language, and spelling; but more particularly between the two parts of the book, between which an interval of more than two centuries occurs, a striking difference of the language is visible, which shows what a slowly progressive regulation it has undergone in that period of time. As the result of these considerations, I arrive at the conclusion that I cannot find any reason to doubt the authenticity of these writings. They cannot be forgeries. In the first place, the copy of 1256 cannot be. Who could at that time have forged anything of that kind? Certainly no one. Still less any one at an earlier date. At a later date a forgery is equally impossible, for the simple reason that no one was acquainted with the language. Except Grimm, Richthofen, and Hettema, no one can be named sufficiently versed in that branch of philology, or who had studied the language so as to be able to write in it. And if any one could have done so, there would have been no more extensive vocabulary at his service than that which the East Frisian laws afford. Therefore, in the centuries lately elapsed, the preparation

[p. xxiv]

of this writing was quite impossible. Whoever doubts this let him begin by showing where, when, by whom, and with what object such a forgery could be committed, and let him show in modern times the fellow of this paper, this writing, and this language.

Moreover, that the manuscript of 1256 is not original, but is a copy, is proved by the numerous faults in the writing, as well as by some explanations of words which already in the time of the copyist had become obsolete and little known, as, for instance, in page 82 (114), "to thera flete jefta bedrum;" page 151 (204), "bargum jefta tonnum fon tha bests bjar."

A still stronger proof is that between pages 157 and 158 one or more pages are missing, which cannot have been lost out of this manuscript, because the pages 157 and 158 are on the front and the back of the same leaf.

Page 157 finishes thus: "Three months afterwards Adel sent messengers to all the friends that he had gained, and requested them to send him intelligent people in the month of May." When we turn over the leaf, the other side begins, "his wife, he said, who had been Maid of Tex-land," had got a copy of it.

There is no connection between these two. There is wanting, at least, the arrival of the invited, and an account of what passed at their meeting. It is clear, therefore, that the copyist must have turned over two pages of the original instead of one. There certainly existed then an earlier manuscript, and that was doubtless written by Liko oera Linda in the year 803.

We may thus accept that we possess in this manuscript, of which the first part was composed in the sixth century before our era, the oldest production, after Homer and Hesiod, of European literature. And here we find in our fatherland a very ancient people in possession of development, civilisation, industry, navigation, commerce, literature,

[p. xx]

and pure elevated ideas of religion, whose existence we had never even conjectured. Hitherto we have believed that the historical records of our people reach no farther back than the arrival of Friso the presumptive founder of the Frisians, whereas here we become aware that these records mount up to more than 2000 years before Christ, surpassing the antiquity of Hellas and equalling that of Israel.

This paper was read at a meeting of the Frisian Society, February 1871.

Footnotes

^vii:* Compare G. Meerman, Admonitio de Chartae nostralis origine. Vad. Letteroef. 1762. P. 630.

J. H. de Stoppelaar, Paper in the Netherlands. Middelburg, 1869. P. 4.

^xx:* Min-erva was called Nyhellenia because her counsels were ny and hel, that is, new and clear. In Paul's epitome of S. Pomponius Festus, de verborum Significatione, we find "Min-erva dicta quod bene moneat." See Preller, Roman Mythology, p. 258.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

OKKE MY SON--

You must preserve these books with body and soul. They contain the history of all our people, as well as of our forefathers. Last year I saved them in the flood, as well as you and your mother; but they got wet, and therefore began to perish. In order not to lose them, I copied them on foreign paper.

In case you inherit them, you must copy them likewise, and your children must do so too, so that they may never be lost.

Written at Liuwert, in the three thousand four hundred and forty-ninth year after Atland was submerged--that is, according to the Christian reckoning, the year 1256. Hiddo, surnamed Over de Linda.--Watch. [**]

 

Beloved successors, for the sake of our dear forefathers, and of our dear liberty, I entreat you a thousand times never let the eye of a monk look on these writings. They are very insinuating, but they destroy in an underhand manner all that relates to us Frisians. In order to gain rich benefices, they conspire with foreign kings, who know that we are their greatest enemies, because we dare to speak to their people of liberty, rights, and the duties of princes. Therefore they seek to destroy all that we derive from our forefathers, and all that is left of our old customs.

Ah, my beloved ones! I have visited their courts! If Wr-alda permits it, and we do not chew ourselves strong to resist, they will altogether exterminate us.

LIKO, surnamed OVER DE LINDA.

Written at Liudroert,
 Anno Domini 803.

Footnotes

^3:* 3449--1256 is 2193 before Christ.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4] [p. 5]

  

THE BOOK OF ADELA'S FOLLOWERS.

THIRTY years after the day on which the Volksmoeder was murdered by the commander Magy, was a time of great distress. All the states that lie on the other side of the Weser had been wrested from us, and had fallen under the power of Magy, and it looked as if his power was to become supreme over the whole land. To avert this misfortune a general assembly of the people was summoned, which was attended by all the men who stood in good repute with the Maagden (priestesses). Then at the end of three days the whole council was in confusion, and in the same position as when they came together. Thereupon Adele, demanded to be heard, and said:--

You all know that I was three years Burgtmaagd. You know also that I was chosen for Volksmoeder, and that I refused to be Volksmoeder because I wished to marry Apol; but what you do not know is, that I have watched everything that has happened, as if I had really been your Volksmoeder. I have constantly travelled about, observing what was going on. By that means I have become acquainted with many things that others do not know. You said yesterday that our relatives on the other side of the Weser were dull and cowardly; but I may tell you that the Magy [*+] has not won a single village from them by force of arms; but only by detestable deceit, and still more by the rapacity of their dukes and nobles.

Frya has said we must not admit amongst us any but free people; but what have they done? They have imitated our enemies, and instead of killing their prisoners, or letting them go free, they have despised the counsel of Frya, and have made slaves of them.

Because they have acted thus, Frya cared no longer to watch over them. They robbed others of their freedom, and therefore lost their own.

[p. 6] [p. 7]

This is well known to you, but I will tell you how they came to sink so low. The Finn women had children. These grew up with our free children. They played and gamboled together in the fields, and were also together by the hearth.

There they learned with pleasure the loose ways of the Finns, because they were bad and new; and thus they became denationalised in spite of the efforts of their parents. When the children grew up, and saw that the children of the Finns handled no weapons, and scarcely worked, they took a distaste for work, and became proud.

The principal men and their cleverest sons made up to the wanton daughters of the Finns; and their own daughters, led astray by this bad example, allowed themselves to be beguiled by the handsome young Finns in derision of their depraved fathers. When the Magy found this out, he took the handsomest of his Finns and Magyars, and promised them "red cows with golden horns" to let themselves be taken prisoners by our people in order to spread his doctrines. His people did even more. Children disappeared, were taken away to the uplands, and after they had been brought up in his pernicious doctrines, were sent back.

When these pretended prisoners had learned our language, they persuaded the dukes and nobles that they should become subject to the Magy--that then their sons would succeed to them without having to be elected. Those who by their good deeds had gained a piece of land in front of their house, they promised on their side should receive in addition a piece behind; those who had got a piece before and behind, should have a rondeel (complete circuit); and those who had a rondeel should have a whole freehold. If the seniors were true to Frya, then they changed their course, and turned to the degenerate sons. Yesterday there were among you those who would have called the whole people together,

[p. 8] [p. 9]

to compel the eastern states to return to their duty. According to my humble opinion, they would have made a great mistake. Suppose that there was a very serious epidemic among the cattle, would you run the risk of sending your own healthy cattle among the sick ones? Certainly not. Every one must see that doing that would turn out very badly for the whole of the cattle. Who, then, would be so imprudent as to send their children among a people wholly depraved? If I were to give you any advice, it would be to choose a new Volksmoeder. I know that you are in a difficulty about it, because out of the thirteen Burgtmaagden that we still have remaining, eight are candidates for the dignity; but I should pay no attention to that.

Teuntia, the Burgtmaagd of Medeasblik, who is not a candidate, is a person of knowledge and sound sense, and quite as attached to our people and our customs as all the rest together. I should farther recommend that you should visit all the citadels, and write down all the laws of Frya's Tex, as well as all the histories, and all that is written on the walls, in order that it may not be destroyed with the citadels.

It stands written that every Volksmoeder and every Burgtmaagd shall have assistants and messengers--twenty-one maidens and seven apprentices.

If I might add more, I would recommend that all the respectable girls in the towns should be taught; for I say positively, and time will show it, that if you wish to remain true children of Frya, never to be vanquished by fraud or arms, you must take care to bring up your daughters as true Frya's daughters.

You must teach the children how great our country has been, what great men our forefathers were, how great we still are, if we compare ourselves to others.

[p. 10] [p. 11]

You must tell them of the sea-heroes, of their mighty deeds and distant voyages. All these stories must be told by the fireside and in the field, wherever it may be, in times of joy or sorrow; and if you wish to impress it on the brains and the hearts of your sons, you must let it flow through the lips of your wives and your daughters.

Adela's advice was followed.

These are the Grevetmen under whose direction this book is composed:--

Apol, Adela's husband; three times a sea-king; Grevetman of Ostflyland and Lindaoorden. The towns Liudgarda, Lindahem, and Stavia are under his care.

The Saxman Storo, Sytia's husband; Grevetman over the Hoogefennen and Wouden. Nine times he was chosen as duke or heerman (commander). The towns Buda and Manna-garda-forda are under his care.

Abelo, Jaltia's husband; Grevetman over the Zuiderfly-landen. He was three times heerman. The towns Aken, Liudburg, and Katsburg are under his care.

Enoch, Dywcke's husband; Grevetman over Westflyland and Texel. He was chosen nine times for sea-king. Waraburg, Medeasblik, Forana, and Fryasburg are under his care.

Foppe, Dunroo's husband; Grevetman over the seven islands. He was five times sea-king. The town Walhallagara is under his care.

This was inscribed upon the walls of Fryasburg in Tex-land, as well as at Stavia and Medeasblik.

It was Frya's day, and seven times seven years had elapsed since Festa was appointed Volksmoeder by the desire of Frya. The citadel of Medeasblik was ready, and a Burgtmaagd was chosen. Festa was about to light her new lamp, and when she had done so in the presence

[p. 12] [p. 13]

of all the people, Frya called from her watch-star, so that every one could hear it: "Festa, take your style and write the things, that I may not speak." Festa did as she was bid, and thus we became Frya's children, and our earliest history began.

This is our earliest history.

Wr-alda [**], who alone is eternal and good, made the beginning. Then commenced time. Time wrought all things, even the earth. The earth bore grass, herbs, and trees, all useful and all noxious animals. All that is good and useful she brought forth by day, and all that is bad and injurious by night.

After the twelfth Juulfeest she brought forth three maidens:--

Lyda out of fierce heat.

Finda out of strong heat.

Frya out of moderate heat.

When the last came into existence, Wr-alda breathed his spirit upon her in order that men might be bound to him. As soon as they were full grown they took pleasure and delight in the visions of Wr-alda.

Hatred found its way among them.

They each bore twelve sons and twelve daughters--at every Juul-time a couple. Thence come all mankind.

Lyda was black, with hair curled like a lamb's; her eyes shone like stars, and shot out glances like those of a bird of prey.

Lyda was acute. She could hear a snake glide, and could smell a fish in the water.

Lyda was strong and nimble. She could bend a large tree, yet when she walked she did not bruise a flower-stalk.

Lyda was violent. Her voice was loud, and when she screamed in anger every creature quailed.

[p. 14] [p. 15]

Wonderful Lyda! She had no regard for laws; her actions were governed by her passions. To help the weak she would kill the strong, and when she had done it she would weep by their bodies.

Poor Lyda! She turned grey by her mad behaviour, and at last she died heart-broken by the wickedness of her children. Foolish children! They accused each other of their mother's death. They howled and fought like wolves, and while they did this the birds devoured the corpse. Who can refrain from tears at such a recital?

Finda was yellow, and her hair was like the mane of a horse. She could not bend a tree, but where Lyda killed one lion she killed ten.

Finda was seductive. Her voice was sweeter than any bird's. Her eyes were alluring and enticing, but whoever looked upon them became her slave.

Finda was unreasonable. She wrote thousands of laws, but she never obeyed one. She despised the frankness of the good, and gave herself up to flatterers.

That was her misfortune. Her head was too full, but her heart was too vain. She loved nobody but herself, and she wished that all should love her.

False Finda! Honey-sweet were her words, bat those who trusted them found sorrow at hand.

Selfish Finda! She wished to rule everybody, and her sons were like her. They made their sisters serve them, and they slew each other for the mastery.

Treacherous Finda! One wrong word would irritate her, and the cruellest deeds did not affect her. If she saw a lizard swallow a spider, she shuddered; but if she saw her children kill a Frisian, her bosom swelled with pleasure.

[p. 16] [p. 17]

Unfortunate Finda! She died in the bloom of her age, and the mode of her death is unknown.

Hypocritical children! Her corpse was buried under a costly stone, pompous inscriptions were written on it, and loud lamentations were heard at it, but in private not a tear was shed.

Despicable people! The laws that Finda established were written on golden tables, but the object for which they were made was never attained. The good laws were abolished, and selfishness instituted bad ones in their place. O Finda I then the earth overflowed with blood, and your children were mown down like grass. Yes, Finda! those were the fruits of your vanity. Look down from your watch-star and weep.

Frya was white like the snow at sunrise, and the blue of her eyes vied with the rainbow.

Beautiful Frya! Like the rays of the sun shone the locks of her hair, which were as fine as spiders' webs.

Clever Frya! When she opened her lips the birds ceased to sing and the leaves to quiver.

Powerful Frya! At the glance of her eye the lion lay down at her feet and the adder withheld his poison.

Pure Frya! Her food was honey, and her beverage was dew gathered from the cups of the flowers.

Sensible Frya! The first lesson that she taught her children was self-control, and the second was the love of virtue; and when they were grown she taught them the value of liberty; for she said, "Without liberty all other virtues serve to make you slaves, and to disgrace your origin."

Generous Frya! She never allowed metal to be dug from the earth for her own benefit, but when she did it it was for the general use.

[p. 18] [p. 19]

Most happy Frya! Like the starry host in the firmament, her children clustered around her.

Wise Frya! When she had seen her children reach the seventh generation, she summoned them all to Flyland, and there gave them her Tex, saying, "Let this be your guide, and it can never go ill with you."

Exalted Frya! When she had thus spoken the earth shook like the sea of Wr-alda. The ground of Flyland sank beneath her feet, the air was dimmed by tears, and when they looked for their mother she was already risen to her watching star; then at length thunder burst from the clouds, and the lightning wrote upon the firmament "Watch!"

Far-seeing Frya! The land from which she had risen was now a stream, and except her Tex all that was in it was overwhelmed.

Obedient children! When they came to themselves again, they made this high mound and built this citadel upon it, and on the walls they wrote the Tex, and that every one should be able to find it they called the land about it Texland. Therefore it shall remain as long as the earth shall be the earth.

Footnotes

^5:+ Magy, King of the Magyars or Finns.

^13:* Wr-alda, always written as a compound word, meaning the Old Ancient, or the Oldest Being.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

FRYA'S TEX.

Prosperity awaits the free. At last they shall see me again. Though him only can I recognise as free who is neither a slave to another nor to himself. This is my counsel:--

1. When in dire distress, and when mental and physical energy avail nothing, then have recourse to the spirit of Wr-alda; but do not appeal to him before you have tried all other means, for I tell you beforehand, and time will prove its truth, that those who give way to discouragement sink under their burdens.

[p. 20] [p. 21]

2. To Wr-alda's spirit only shall you bend the knee in gratitude--thricefold--for what you have received, for what you do receive, and for the hope of aid in time of need.

3. You have seen how speedily I have come to your assistance. Do likewise to your neighbour, but wait not for his entreaties. The suffering would curse you, my maidens would erase your name from the book, and I would regard you as a stranger.

4. Let not your neighbour express his thanks to you on bended knee, which is only due to Wr-alda's spirit. Envy would assail you, Wisdom would ridicule you, and my maidens would accuse you of irreverence.

5. Four things are given for your enjoyment--air, water, land, and fire--but Wr-alda is the sole possessor of them. Therefore my counsel to you is, choose upright men-who will fairly divide the labour and the fruits, so that no man shall be exempt from work or from the duty of defence.

6. If ever it should happen that one of your people should sell his freedom, he is not of you, he is a bastard. I counsel you to expel him and his mother from the land. Repeat this to your children morning, noon, and night, till they think of it in their dreams.

7. If any man shall deprive another, even his debtor, of his liberty, let him be to you as a vile slave; and I advise you to burn his body and that of his mother in an open place, and bury them fifty feet below the ground, so that no grass shall grow upon them. It would poison your cattle.

8. Meddle not with the people of Lyda, nor of Finda, because Wr-alda would help them, and any injury that you inflicted on them would recoil upon your own heads.

[p. 22] [p. 23]

9. If it should happen that they come to you for advice or assistance, then it behoves you to help them; but if they should rob you, then fall upon them with fire and sword.

10. If any of them should seek a daughter of yours to wife, and she is willing, explain to her her folly; but if she will follow her lover, let her go in peace.

11. If your son wishes for a daughter of theirs, do the same as to your daughter; but let not either one or the other ever return among you, for they would introduce foreign morals and customs, and if these were accepted by you, I could no longer watch over you.

12. Upon my servant Fasta I have placed all my hopes. Therefore you must choose her for Eeremoeder. Follow my advice, then she will hereafter remain my servant as well as all the sacred maidens who succeed her. Then shall the lamp which I have lighted for you never be extinguished. Its brightness shall always illuminate your intellect, and you shall always remain as free from foreign domination as your fresh river-water is distinct from the salt sea.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIS HAS FASTA SPOKEN.

All the regulations which have existed a century, that is, a hundred years, may by the advice of the Eeremoeder, with the consent of the community, be inscribed upon the walls of the citadel, and when inscribed on the walls they become laws, and it is our duty to respect them all. If by force or necessity any regulations should be imposed upon ne at variance with our laws and customs, we must submit; but should we be released, we must always return to our own again. That is Frya's will, and must be that of all her children.

[p. 24] [p. 25]

  

FASTA SAID--

Anything that any man commences, whatever it may be, on the day appointed for Frya's worship shall eternally fail, for time has proved that she was right; and it is become a law that no man shall, except from absolute necessity, keep that day otherwise than as a joyful feast.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THESE ARE THE LAWS ESTABLISHED FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CITADELS.

1. Whenever a citadel is built, the lamp belonging to it must be lighted at the original lamp in Texland, and that can only be done by the mother.

2. Every mother shall appoint her own maidens. She may even choose those who are mothers in other towns.

3. The mother of Texland may appoint her own successor, but should she die without having done so, the election shall take place at a general assembly of the whole nation.

4. The mother of Texland may have twenty-one maidens and seven assistants, so that there may always be seven to attend the lamp day and night. She may have the same number of maidens who are mothers in other towns.

5. If a maiden wishes to marry, she must announce it to the mother, and immediately resign her office, before her passion shall have polluted the light.

6. For the service of the mother and of each of the Burgtmaidens there shall be appointed twenty-one townsmen--seven civilians of mature years, seven warriors of mature years, and seven seamen of mature years.

[p. 26] [p. 27]

7. Out of the seven three shall retire every year, and shall not be replaced by members of their own family nearer than the fourth degree.

8. Each may have three hundred young townsmen as defenders.

9. For this service they must study Frya's Tex and the laws. From the sages they must learn wisdom, from the warriors the art of war, and from the sea-kings the skill required for distant voyages.

10. Every year one hundred of the defenders shall return to their homes, and those that may have been wounded shall remain in the citadels.

11. At the election of the defenders no burgher or Grevetman, or other person of distinction, shall vote, but only the people.

12. The mother at Texland shall have three times seven active messengers, and three times twelve speedy horses. In the other citadels each maiden shall have three messengers and seven horses.

13. Every citadel shall have fifty agriculturists chosen by the people, but only those may be chosen who are not strong enough to go to war or to go to sea.

14. Every citadel must provide for its own sustenance, and must maintain its own defences, and look after its share of the general contributions.

15. If a man is chosen to fill any office and refuses to serve, he can never become a burgher, nor have any vote. And if he is already a burgher, he shall cease to be so.

16. If any man wishes to consult the mother or a Burgtmaid, he must apply to the secretary, who will take him to the Burgtmaster. He will then be examined by a surgeon to see if he is in good health. If he is passed,

[p. 28] [p. 29]

he shall lay aside his arms, and seven warriors shall present him to the mother.

17. If the affair concerns only one district, he must bring forward not less than three witnesses; but if it affects the whole of Friesland, he must have twenty-one additional witnesses, in order to guard against any deceptions.

18. Under all circumstances the mother must take care that her children, that is, Frya's people, shall remain as temperate as possible. This is her most important duty, and it is the duty of all of us to help her in performing it.

19. If she is called upon to decide any judicial question between a Grevetman and the community, she must incline towards the side of the community in order to maintain peace, and because it is better that one man should suffer than many.

20. If any one comes to the mother for advice, and she is prepared to give it, she must do it immediately. If she does not know what to advise, he must remain waiting seven days; and if she then is unable to advise, he must go away without complaining, for it is better to have no advice at all than bad advice.

21. If a mother shall have given bad advice out of illwill, she must be killed or driven out of the land, deprived of everything.

22. If her Burgtheeren are accomplices, they are to be treated in a similar manner.

23. If her guilt is doubtful or only suspected, it must be considered and debated, if necessary, for twenty-one weeks. If half the votes are against her, she must be declared innocent. If two-thirds are against her, she must wait a whole year. If the votes are then the same, she must be considered guilty, but may not be put to death.

[p. 30] [p. 31]

24. If any of the one-third who have voted for her wish to go away with her, they may depart with all their live and dead stock, and shall not be the less considered, since the majority maybe wrong as well as the minority.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

UNIVERSAL LAW.

1. All free-born, men are equal, wherefore they must all have equal rights on sea and land, and on all that Wr-alda has given.

2. Every man may seek the wife of his choice, and every woman may bestow her hand on him whom she loves.

3. When a man takes a wife, a house and yard must be given to him, If there is none, one must be built for him.

4. If he has taken a wife in another village, and wishes to remain, they must give him a house there, and likewise the free use of the common.

5. To every man must be given a piece of land behind his house. No man shall have land in front of his house, still less an enclosure, unless he bas performed some public service. In such a case it may be given, and the youngest son may inherit it, but after him it returns to the community.

6. Every village shall possess a common for the general good, and the chief of the village shall take care that it is kept in good order, so that posterity shall find it uninjured.

7. Every village shall have a market-place. All the rest of the land shall be for tillage and forest. No one shall fell trees without the consent of the community, or without the knowledge of the forester; for the forests are general property, and no man can appropriate them.

[p. 32] [p. 33]

8. The market charges shall not exceed one-twelfth of the value of the goods either to natives or strangers. The portion taken for the charges shall not be sold before the other goods. [**]

9. All the market receipts must be divided yearly into a hundred parts three days before the Juul-day.

10. The Grevetman and his council shall take twenty parts; the keeper of the market ten, and his assistants five; the Volksmoeder one, the midwife four, the village ten, and the poor and infirm shall have fifty parts.

11. There shall be no usurers in the market.

If any should come, it will be the duty of the maidens to make it known through the whole land, in order that such people may not be chosen for any office, because they are hard-hearted.

For the sake of money they would betray everybody--the people, the mother, their nearest relations, and even their own selves.

12. If any man should attempt to sell diseased cattle or damaged goods for sound, the market-keeper shall expel him, and the maidens shall proclaim him through the country.

In early times almost all the Finns lived together in their native land, which was called Aldland, and is now submerged. They were thus far away, and we had no wars. When they were driven hitherwards, and appeared as robbers, then arose the necessity of defending ourselves, and we had armies, kings, and wars.

For all this there were established regulations, and out of the regulations came fixed laws.

Footnotes

^33:* The market dues were paid in kind.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HERE FOLLOW THE LAWS WHICH WERE THUS ESTABLISHED.

1. Every Frisian must resist the assailants with such weapons as he can procure, invent, and use.

[p. 34] [p. 35]

2. When a boy is twelve years old he must devote one day in seven to learning how to use his weapons.

3. As soon as he is perfect in the use of them they are to be given to him, and he is to be admitted as a warrior.

4. After serving as a warrior three years, he may become a citizen, and may have a vote in the election of the headman.

5. When he has been seven years a voter he then may have a vote for the chief or king, and may be himself elected.

6. Every year he must be re-elected.

7. Except the king, all other officials are re-eligible who act according to Frya's laws.

8. No king may be in office more than three years, in order that the office may not be permanent.

9. After an interval of seven years he may be elected again.

10. If the king is killed by the enemy, his nearest relative may be a candidate to succeed. him.

11. If he dies a natural death, or if his period of service has expired, he shall not be succeeded by any blood relation nearer than the fourth degree.

12. Those who fight with arms are not men of counsel, therefore no king must bear arms. His wisdom must be his weapon, and the love of his warriors his shield.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THESE ARE THE RIGHTS OF THE MOTHERS AND THE KINGS.

1. If war breaks out, the mother sends her messengers to the king, who sends messengers to the Grevetmen to call the citizens to arms.

2. The Grevetmen call all the citizens together and decide how many men shall be sent.

[p. 36] [p. 37]

3. All the resolutions must immediately be sent to the mother by messengers and witnesses.

4. The mother considers all the resolutions and decides upon them, and with this the king as well as the people must be satisfied.

5. When in the field, the king consults only his superior officers, but three citizens of the mother must be present, without any voice. These citizens must send daily reports to the mother, that they may be sure nothing is done contrary to the counsels of Frya.

6. If the king wishes to do anything which his council opposes, he may not persist in it.

7. If an enemy appears unexpectedly, then the king's orders must be obeyed.

8. If the king is not present, the next to him takes command, and so on in succession according to rank.

9. If there is no leader present, one must be chosen.

10. If there is no time to choose, any one may come forward who feels himself capable of leading.

11. If a king has conquered a dangerous enemy, his successors may take his name after their own. The king may, if be wishes, choose an open piece of ground for a house and ground; the ground shall be enclosed, and may be so large that there shall be seven hundred steps to the boundary in all directions from the house.

12. His youngest son may inherit this, and that son's youngest son after him; then it shall return to the community.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HERE ARE THE RULES ESTABLISHED FOR THE SECURITY OF ALL FRISIANS.

1. Whenever new laws are made or new regulations

[p. 38] [p. 39]

established, they must be for the common good, and not for individual advantage.

2. Whenever in time of war either ships or houses are destroyed, either by the enemy or as a matter of precaution, a general levy shall be assessed on the people to make it good again, so that no one may neglect the general welfare to preserve his own interest.

3. At the conclusion of a war, if any men are so severely wounded as to be unable to work, they shall be maintained at the public expense, and shall have the best seats at festivals, in order that the young may learn to honour them.

4. If there are widows and orphans, they shall likewise be maintained at the public expense; and the sons may inscribe the names of their fathers on their shields for the honour of their families.

5. If any who have been taken prisoners should return, they must be kept separate from the camp, because they may have obtained their liberty by making treacherous promises, and thus they may avoid keeping their promises without forfeiting their honour.

6. If any enemies be taken prisoners, they must be sent to the interior of the country, that they may learn our free customs.

7. If they are afterwards set free, it must be done with kindness by the maidens, in order that we may make them comrades and friends, instead of haters and enemies.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

FROM MINNO'S WRITINGS.

If any one should be so wicked as to commit robbery, murder, arson, rape, or any other crime, upon a neighbouring state, and our people wish to inflict punishment, the culprit shall be put to death in the presence

[p. 40] [p. 41]

of the offended, in order that no war may arise, and the innocent suffer for the guilty. If the offended will spare his life and forego their revenge, it may be permitted. If the culprit should be a king, Grevetman, or other person in authority, we must make good his fault, but he must be punished.

If he bears on his shield the honourable name of his forefathers, his kinsmen shall no longer wear it, in order that every man may look after the conduct of his relatives.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

LAWS FOR THE NAVIGATORS.

Navigator is the title of those who make foreign voyages.

1. All Frya's sons have equal rights, and every stalwart youth may offer himself as a navigator to the Olderman, who may not refuse him as long as there is any vacancy.

2. The navigators may choose their own masters.

3. The traders must be chosen and named by the community to which they belong, and the navigators have no voice in their election.

4. If during a voyage it is found that the king is bad or incompetent, another may be put in his place, and on the return home he may make his complaint to the Olderman.

5. If the fleet returns with profits, the sailors may divide one-third among themselves in the following manner: The king twelve portions, the admiral seven, the boatswains each two portions, the captains three, and the rest of the crew each one part; the youngest boys each one-third of a portion, the second boys half a portion each, and the eldest boys two-thirds of a portion each.

6. If any have been disabled, they must be maintained at the public expense, and honoured in the same way as the soldiers.

[p. 42] [p. 43]

7. If any have died on the voyage, their nearest relatives inherit their portion.

8. Their widows and orphans must be maintained at the public expense; and if they were killed in a sea-fight, their sons may bear the names of their fathers on their shields.

9. If a topsailman is lost, his heirs shall receive a whole portion.

10. If he was betrothed, his bride may claim seven portions in order to erect a monument to her bridegroom, but then she must remain a widow all her life.

11. If the community is fitting out a fleet, the purveyors must provide the best provisions for the voyage, and for the women and children.

12. If a sailor is worn out and poor, and has no house or patrimony, one must be given him. If he does not wish for a house, his friends may take him home; and the community must bear the expense, unless his friends decline to receive it.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

USEFUL EXTRACTS FROM THE WRITINGS LEFT BY MINNO.

Minno [*+] was an ancient sea-king. He was a seer and a philosopher, and he gave laws to the Cretans. He was born at Lindaoord, and after all his wanderings he had the happiness to die at Lindahem.

If our neighbours have a piece of land or water which it would be advantageous for us to possess, it is proper that we should offer to buy it. If they refuse to sell it, we must let them keep it. This is Frya's Tex, and it would be unjust to act contrary to it.

If any of our neighbours quarrel and fight about any matter except land, and they request us to arbitrate, our best course will be to decline; but if

[p. 44] [p. 45]

they insist upon it, it must be done honourably and justly.

If any one comes and says, I am at war, you must help me; or another comes and says, My son is an infant and incompetent, and I am old, so I wish you to be his guardian, and to take charge of my property until he is of age, it is proper to refuse in order that we may not come into disputes about matters foreign to our free customs.

Whenever a foreign trader comes to the open markets at Wyringen and Almanland, if he cheats, he must immediately be fined, and it must be published by the maidens throughout the whole country.

If he should come back, no one must deal with him. He must return as he came.

Whenever traders are chosen to go to trading stations, or to sail with the fleets, they must be well known and of good reputation with the maidens.

If, however, a bad man should by chance be chosen and should try to cheat, the others are bound to remove him. If he should have committed a cheat, it must be made good, and the culprit must be banished from the land in order that our name may be everywhere held in honour.

If we should be ill-treated in a foreign market, whether distant or near, we must immediately attack them; for though we desire to be at peace, we must not let our neighbours underrate us or think that we are afraid.

In my youth I often grumbled at the strictness of the laws, but afterwards I learned to thank Frya for her Tex and our forefathers for the laws which they established upon it. Wr-alda or Alvader has given me many years, and I have travelled over many lands and seas, and after all that I have seen, I am convinced that we alone

[p. 46] [p. 47]

are chosen by Alvader to have laws. Lyda's people can neither make laws nor obey them, they are too stupid and uncivilised. Many are like Finda. They are clever enough, but they are too rapacious, haughty, false, immoral, and bloodthirsty.

The toad blows himself out, but he can only crawl. The frog cries "Work, work;" but he can do nothing but hop and make himself ridiculous. The raven cries "Spare, spare;" but he steals and wastes everything that he gets into his beak.

Finder's people are just like these. They say a great deal about making good laws, and every one wishes to make regulations against misconduct, but does not wish to submit to them himself. Whoever is the most crafty crows over the others, and tries to make them submit to him, till another comes who drives him off his perch.

The word "Eva" is too sacred for common use, therefore men have learned to say "Evin."

"Eva" means that sentiment which is implanted in the breast of every man in order that he may know what is right and what is wrong, and by which he is able to judge his own deeds and those of others; that is, if he has been well and properly brought up. "Eva" has also another meaning; that is, tranquil, smooth, like water that is not stirred by a breath of wind. If the water is disturbed it becomes troubled, uneven, but it always has a tendency to return to its tranquil condition. That is its nature, just as the inclination towards justice and freedom exists in Frya's children. We derive this disposition from the spirit of our father Wr-alda, which speaks strongly in Frya's children, and will eternally remain so. Eternity is another symbol of Wr-alda, who remains always just and unchangeable.

Eternal and unalterable are the signs wisdom and rectitude,

[p. 48] [p. 49]

which must be sought after by all pious people, and must be possessed by all judges. If, therefore, it is desired to make laws and regulations which shall be permanent, they must be equal for all men. The judges must pronounce their decisions according to these laws. If any crime is committed respecting which no law has been made, a general assembly of the people shall be called, where judgment shall be pronounced in accordance with the inspiration of Wr-alda's spirit. If we act thus, our judgment will never fail to be right.

If instead of doing right, men will commit wrong, there will arise quarrels and differences among people and states. Thence arise civil wars, and everything is thrown into confusion and destroyed; and, O foolish people! while you are injuring each other the spiteful Finda's people with their false priests come and attack your ports, ravish your daughters, corrupt your morals, and at last throw the bonds of slavery over every freeman's neck.

Footnotes

^43:+ Minno, Minos (the Ancient).

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

FROM MINNO'S WRITINGS.

When Nyhalennia [**], whose real name was Min-erva, was well established, and the Krekalanders [*+] loved her as well as our own people did, there came some princes and priests to her citadel and asked Min-erva where her possessions lay. Hellenia answered, I carry my possessions in my own bosom. What I have inherited is the love of wisdom, justice, and freedom. If I lose these I shall become as the least of your slaves; now I give advice for nothing, but then I should sell it. The gentlemen went away laughing and saying, Your humble servants, wise Hellenia. But they missed their object, for the people took up this name as a name of honour. When they saw that

[p. 50] [p. 51]

their shot had missed they began to calumniate her, and to say that she had bewitched the people; but our people and the good Krekalanders understood at once that it was calumny. She was once asked, If you are not a witch, what is the use of the eggs that you always carry with you? Min-erva answered, These eggs are the symbols of Frya's counsels, in which our future and that of the whole human race lies concealed. Time will hatch them, and we must watch that no harm happens to them. The priests said, Well answered; but what is the use of the dog on your right hand? Hellenia replied, Does not the shepherd have a sheep-dog to keep his flock together? What the dog is to the shepherd I am in Frya's service. I must watch over Frya's flocks. We understand that very well, said the priests; but tell us what means the owl that always sits upon your head, is that light-shunning animal a sign of your clear vision? No, answered Hellenia; he reminds me that there are people on earth who, like him, have their homes in churches and holes, who go about in the twilight, not, like him, to deliver us from mice and other plagues, but to invent tricks to steal away the knowledge of other people, in order to take advantage of them, to make slaves of them, and to suck their blood like leeches. Another time they came with a whole troop of people, when the plague was in the country, and said; We are all making offerings to the gods that they may take away the plague. Will you not help to turn away their anger, or have you yourself brought the plague into the land with all your arts? No, said Min-erva; I know no gods that do evil, therefore I cannot ask them to do better. I only know one good spirit, that is Wr-alda's; and as he is good be never does evil. Where, then, does evil come from? asked

[p. 52] [p. 53]

the priests. All the evil comes from you, and from the stupidity of the people who let themselves be deceived by you. If, then, your god is so exceedingly good, why does he not turn away the bad? asked the priests. Hellenia answered: Frya has placed us here, and the carrier, that is, Time, must do the rest. For all calamities there is counsel and remedy to be found, but Wr-alda wills that we should search it out ourselves, in order that we may become strong and wise. If we will not do that, he leaves us to our own devices, in order that we may experience the results of wise or foolish conduct. Then a prince said, I should think it best to submit. Very possibly, answered Hellenia; for then men would be like sheep, and you and the priests would take care of them, shearing them and leading them to the shambles. This is what our god does not desire, he desires that we should help one another, but that all should be free and wise. That is also our desire, and therefore our people choose their princes, counts, councillors, chiefs, and masters among the wisest of the good men, in order that every man shall do his best to be wise and good. Thus doing, we learn ourselves and teach the people that being wise and acting wisely can alone lead to holiness. That seems very good judgment, said the priests; but if you mean that the plague is caused by our stupidity, then Nyhellenia will perhaps be so good as to bestow upon us a little of that new light of which she is so proud. Yes, said Hellenia, but ravens and other birds of prey feed only on dead carrion, whereas the plague feeds not only on carrion but on bad laws and customs and wicked passions. If yon wish the plague to depart from you and not return, you must put away your bad passions and become pure within and without. We admit that the advice is good, said the priests, but how shall we induce all the people under our rule

[p. 54] [p. 55]

to agree to it? Then Hellenia stood up and said: The sparrows follow the sower, and the people their good princes, therefore it becomes you to begin by rendering yourselves pure, so that you may look within and without, and not be ashamed of your own conduct. Now, instead of purifying the people, you have invented foul festivals, in which they have so long revelled that they wallow like swine in the mire to atone for your evil passions. The people began to mock and to jeer, so that she did not dare to pursue the subject; and one would have thought that they would have called all the people together to drive us out of the land; but no, in place of abusing her they went all about from the heathenish Krekaland to the Alps, proclaiming that it had pleased the Almighty God to send his clever daughter Min-erva, surnamed Nyhellenia, over the sea in a cloud to give people good counsel, and that all who listened to her should become rich and happy, and in the end governors of all the kingdoms of the earth. They erected statues to her on all their altars, they announced and sold to the simple people advice that she had never given, and related miracles that she had never performed. They cunningly made themselves masters of our laws and customs, and by craft and subtlety were able to explain and spread them around. They appointed priestesses under their own care, who were apparently under the protection of Festa [**], our first Eeremoeder, to watch over the holy lamp; but that lamp they lit themselves, and instead of imbuing the priestesses with wisdom, and then sending them to watch the sick and educate the young, they made them stupid and ignorant, and never allowed them to come out. They were employed

[p. 56] [p. 57]

as advisers, but the advice which seemed to come from them was but the repetition of the behests of the priests. When Nyhellenia died, we wished to choose another mother, and some of us wished to go to Texland to look for her; but the priests, who were all-powerful among their own people, would not permit it, and accused us before the people of being unholy.

Footnotes

^49:* Nyhellenia or Nehalennia.

^49:+ Krekaland, the Krekenland means Magna Grecia as well as Greece.

^55:* Fasta is Vesta, or the Vestal Virgins.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

FROM THE WRITINGS OF MINNO.

When I came away from Athenia with my followers, we arrived at an island named by my crew Kreta, because of the cries that the inhabitants raised on our arrival. When they really saw that we did not come to make war, they were quiet, so that at last I was able to buy a harbour in exchange for a boat and some iron implements, and a piece of land. When we had been settled there a short time, and they discovered that we had no slaves, they were very much astonished; and when I explained to them that we had laws which made everybody equal, they wished to have the same; but they had hardly established them before the whole land was in confusion.

The priests and the princes declared that we had excited their subjects to rebellion, and the people appealed to us for aid and protection. When the princes saw that they were about to lose their kingdom, they gave freedom to their people, and came to me to establish a code of laws. The people, however, got no freedom, and the princes remained masters, acting according to their own pleasure. When this storm had passed, they began to sow divisions among us. They told my people that I had invoked their assistance to make myself permanent king. Once I found poison in my food. So when a ship from

[p. 58] [p. 59]

[paragraph continues] Flyland sailed past, I quietly took my departure. Leaving alone, then, my own adventures, I will conclude this history by saying that we must not have anything to do with Finda's people, wherever it may be, because they are full of false tricks, fully as much to be feared as their sweet wine with deadly poison.

Here ends Minno's writing.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THESE ARE THE THREE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH THESE LAWS ARE FOUNDED.

1. Everybody knows that he requires the necessaries of life, and if he cannot obtain them he does not know how to preserve his life.

2. All men have a natural desire to have children, and if it is not satisfied they are not aware what evil may spring from it.

3. Every man knows that he wishes to live free and undisturbed, and that others wish the same thing.

To secure this, these laws and regulations are made.

The people of Finda have also their rules and regulations, but these are not made according to what is just--only for the advantage of priests and princes--therefore their states are fall of disputes and murder.

1. If any man falls into a state of destitution, his case must be brought before the count by the maidens, because a high-minded Frisian cannot bear to do that himself.

2. If any man becomes poor because he will not work, he must be sent out of the country, because the cowardly and lazy are troublesome and ill-disposed, therefore they ought to be got rid of.

3. Every young man ought to seek a bride and to be married at five-and-twenty.

[p. 60] [p. 61]

4. If a young man is not married at five-and-twenty, he must be driven from his home, and the younger men must avoid him. If then he will not marry, he must be declared dead, and leave the country, so that he may not give offence.

5. If a man is impotent, he must openly declare that no one has anything to fear from him, then he may come or go where he likes.

6. If after that he commits any act of incontinence, then he must flee away; if he does not, he may be given over to the vengeance of those whom he has offended, and no one may aid him.

7. Any one who commits a theft shall restore it threefold. For a second offence he shall be Bent to the tin mines. The person robbed may forgive him if he pleases, but for a third offence no one shall protect him.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THESE RULES ARE MADE FOR ANGRY PEOPLE.

1. If a man in a passion or out of illwill breaks another's limb or puts out an eye or a tooth, he must pay whatever the injured man demands. If he cannot pay, he must suffer the same injury as he has done to the other. If he refuses this, he must appeal to the Burgtmaagd in order to be sent to work in the iron or tin mines until he has expiated his crime under the general law.

2. If a man is so wicked as to kill a Frisian, he must forfeit his own life; but if the Burgtmaagd can send him to the tin mines for his life before he is taken, she may do so.

3. If the prisoner can prove by proper witnesses that

[p. 62] [p. 63]

the death was accidental, he may go free; but if it happens a second time, he must go to the tin mines, in order to avoid any unseemly hatred or vengeance.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THESE ARE THE RULES CONCERNING BASTARDS.

1. If any man sets fire to another's house, he is no Frisian, he is a bastard. If he is caught in the act, he must be thrown into the fire; and wherever he may flee, he shall never be secure from the avenging justice.

2. No true Frisian shall speak ill of the faults of his neighbours. If any man injures himself, but does no harm to others, he must be his own judge; but if he becomes so bad that he is dangerous to others, they must bring it before the count. But if instead of going to the count a man accuses another behind his back, he must be put on the pillory in the market-place, and then sent out of the country, but not to the tin mines, because even there a backbiter is to be feared.

3. If any man should prove a traitor and show to our enemies the paths leading to our places of refuge, or creep into them by night, he must be the offspring of Finda; he must be burnt. The sailors must take his mother and all his relations to a desolate island, and there scatter his ashes, in order that no poisonous herbs may spring from them. The maidens must curse his name in all the states, in order that no child may be called by his name, and that his ancestors may repudiate him.

Click to enlarge
Plate 1: Page 45 of the manuscript of the book of Adela's Followers

[p. 64] [p. 65]

War had come to an end, but famine came in its place. There were three men who each stole a sack of corn from different owners, but they were all caught. The first owner brought his thief to the judge, and the maidens said everywhere that he had done right. The second owner took the corn away from his thief and let him go in peace. The maidens said he has done well. The third owner went to the thief's house, and when he saw what misery was there, he went and brought a waggon-load of necessaries to relieve their distress. Frya's maidens came around him and wrote his deed in the eternal book, and wiped out all his sins. This was reported to the Eeremoeder, and she had it made known over the whole country.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

WHAT IS WRITTEN HEREUNDER IS INSCRIBED ON THE WALLS OF WARABURGT.

(See Plate I.)

What appears at the top is the signs of the Juul--that is, the first symbol of Wr-alda, also of the origin or beginning from which Time is derived; this is the Kroder, which must always go round with the Juul. According to this model Frya formed the set hand which she used to write her Tex. When Fasts was Eeremoeder she made a running hand out of it. The Witkoning--that is, the Sea-king Godfried the Old--made separate numbers for the set hand and for the runic hand. It is therefore not too much that we celebrate it once a year. We may be eternally thankful to Wr-alda that he allowed his spirit to exercise such an influence over our forefathers.

In her time Finda also invented a mode of writing,

[p. 66] [p. 67]

Click to enlarge
Plate 2

but that was so high-flown and full of flourishes that her descendants have soon lost the meaning of it.

Afterwards they learned our writing--that is, the Finns, the Thyriers, and the Krekalanders--but they did not know that it was taken from the Juul, and must therefore always be written round like the sun. Furthermore, they wished that their writing should be illegible by other people, because they always had matters to conceal. In doing this they acted very unwisely, because their children could only with great difficulty read the writings of their predecessors, whereas our most ancient writings are as easy to read as those that were written yesterday.

Here is a specimen of the set hand and of the running hand, as well as of the figures, in both.

(See Plate II.)

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIS STANDS INSCRIBED UPON ALL CITADELS.

Before the bad time came our country was the most beautiful in the world. The sun rose higher, and there was seldom frost. The trees and shrubs produced various fruits, which are now lost. In the fields we had not only barley, oats, and rye, but wheat which shone like gold, and which could be baked in the sun's rays. The years were not counted, for one was as happy as another.

On one side we were bounded by Wr-alda's Sea, on which no one but us might or could sail; on the other side we were hedged in by the broad Twiskland (Tusschenland, Duitschland), through which the Finda people dared not come on account of the thick forests and the wild beasts.

Eastward our boundary went to the extremity of the East Sea, and westward to the Mediterranean

[p. 68] [p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Sea; so that besides the small rivers we had twelve large rivers given us by Wr-alda to keep our land moist, and to show our seafaring men the way to his sea.

The banks of these rivers were at one time entirely inhabited by our people, as well as the banks of the Rhine from one end to the other. Opposite Denmark and Jutland we had colonies and a Burgtmaagd. Thence we obtained copper and iron, as well as tar and pitch, and some other necessaries. Opposite to us we had Britain, formerly Westland, with her tin mines.

Britain was the land of the exiles, who with the help of their Burgtmaagd had gone away to save their lives; but in order that they might not come back they were tattooed with a B on the forehead, the banished with a red dye, the other criminals with blue. Moreover, our sailors and merchants had many factories among the distant Krekalanders and in Lydia. In Lydia (Lybia) the people are black. As our country was so great and extensive, we had many different names. Those who were settled to the east of Denmark were called Jutten, because often they did nothing else than look for amber (jutten) on the shore. Those who lived in the islands were called Letten, because they lived an isolated life. All those who lived between Denmark and the Sandval, now the Scheldt, were called Stuurlieden [**] (pilots), Zeekampers [*+] (naval men), and Angelaren [*++] (fishermen). The Angelaren were men who fished in the sea, and were so named because they used lines and hooks instead of nets. From there to the nearest part of Krekaland the inhabitants were called Kadhemers, because they never went to sea but remained ashore.

Those who were settled in the higher marches bounded by Twisklanden (Germany) were called Saxmannen, because they were always armed against the wild beasts and the savage Britons. Besides

[p. 70] [p. 71]

these we had the names Landzaten (natives of the land), Marzaten [**] (natives of the fens), and Woud or Hout zaten (natives of the woods).

Footnotes

^69:* Stjurar, in Latin Sturii.

^69:+ Sekampar, in Latin Sicambri.

^69:++ Angelara, in Latin Angli.

^71:* Marsata, in Latin Marsacii.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HOW THE BAD TIME CAME.

During the whole summer the sun had been hid behind the clouds, as if unwilling to look upon the earth. There was perpetual calm, and the damp mist hung like a wet sail over the houses and the marshes. The air was heavy and oppressive, and in men's hearts was neither joy nor cheerfulness. In the midst of this stillness the earth began to tremble as if she was dying. The mountains opened to vomit forth fire and flames. Some sank into the bosom of the earth, and in other places mountains rose out of the plain. Aldland [*+], called by the seafaring people, Atland, disappeared, and the wild waves rose so high over hill and dale that everything was buried in the sea. Many people were swallowed up by the earth, and others who had escaped the fire perished in the water.

It was not only in Finda's land that the earth vomited fire, but also in Twiskland (Germany). Whole forests were burned one after the other, and when the wind blew from that quarter our land was covered with ashes. Rivers changed their course, and at their mouths new islands were formed of sand and drift.

During three years this continued, but at length it ceased, and forests became visible. Many countries were submerged, and in other places land rose above the sea, and the wood was destroyed through the half of Twiskland (Germany). Troops of Finda's people came and settled in the empty places. Our dispersed people were exterminated or made slaves. Then watchfulness was doubly impressed upon us, and time taught us that union is force.

Footnotes

^71:+ Aldland, in Latin Atlantis.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIS IS INSCRIBED ON THE WARABURGT BY THE ALDEGAMUDE.

The Waraburgt is not a maiden's city, but the place where

[p. 72] [p. 73]

all the foreign articles brought by sailors were stored. It lies three hours south from Medeasblik.

Thus is the Preface.

Hills, bow your heads; weep, ye streams and clouds. Yes. Schoonland [**] (Scandinavia) blushes, an enslaved people tramples on your garment, O Frya.

This is the history.

One hundred and one years after the submersion of Aldland [*+] a people came out of the East. That people was driven by another. Behind us, in Twiskland (Germany), they fell into disputes, divided into two parties, and each went its own way. Of the one no account has come to us, but the other came in the back of our Schoonland, which was thinly inhabited, particularly the upper part. Therefore they were able to take possession of it without contest, and as they did no other harm, we would not make war about it. Now that we have learned to know them, we will describe their customs, and after that how matters went between us. They were not wild people, like most of Finda's race; but, like the Egyptians, they have priests and also statues in their churches. The priests are the only rulers; they call themselves Magyars, and their headman Magy. He is high priest and king in one. The rest of the people are of no account, and in subjection to them. This people have not even a name; but we call them Finns, because although all the festivals are melancholy and bloody, they are so formal that we are inferior to them in that respect. But still they are not to be envied, because they are slaves to their priests, and still more to their creeds. They believe that evil spirits abound everywhere, and enter into men and beasts, but of Wr-alda's spirit they know nothing. They have weapons of stone, the Magyars of copper. The Magyars affirm that they can exorcise

[p. 74] [p. 75]

and recall the evil spirits, and this frightens the people, so that you never see a cheerful face. When they were well established, the Magyars sought our friendship, they praised our language and customs, our cattle and iron weapons, which they would willingly have exchanged for their gold and silver ornaments, and they always kept their people within their own boundaries, and that outwitted our watchfulness.

Eighty years afterwards, just at the time of the Juulfeest, they overran our country like a snowstorm driven by the wind. All who could not flee away were killed. Frya was appealed to, but the Schoonlanders (Scandinavians) had neglected her advice. Then all the forces were assembled, and three hours from Godasburgt [**] they were withstood, but war continued. Kat or Katerine was the name of the priestess who was Burgtmaagd of Godasburgt. Kat was proud and haughty, and would neither seek counsel nor aid from the mother; but when the Burgtheeren (citizens) knew this, they themselves sent messengers to Texland to the Eeremoeder. Minna--this was the name of the mother--summoned all the sailors and the young men from Oostflyland and Denmark. From this expedition the history of Wodin sprang, which is inscribed on the citadels, and is here copied. At Aldergamude [*+] there lived an old sea-king whose name was Sterik, and whose deeds were famous. This old fellow had three nephews. Wodin, the eldest, lived at Lumkamakia [*++], near the Eemude, in Oostflyland, with his parents. He had once commanded troops. Teunis and Inka were naval warriors, and were just then staying with their father at Aldergamude. When the young warriors had assembled together, they chose Wodin to be their leader or king, and the naval force chose Teunis for their sea-king and Inka for their admiral. The navy then sailed to Denmark, where they took on board Wodin and his valiant host.

[p. 76] [p. 77]

The wind was fair, so they arrived immediately [**] in Schoonland. When the northern brothers met together, Wodin divided his powerful army into three bodies. Frya was their war-cry, and they drove back the Finns and Magyars like children. When the Magy heard how his forces had been utterly defeated, he sent messengers with truncheon and crown, who said to Wodin: O almighty king we are guilty, but all that we have done was done from necessity. You think that we attacked your brothers out of illwill, but we were driven out by our enemies, who are still at our heels. We have often asked your Burgtmaagd for help, but she took no notice of us. The Magy says that if we kill half our numbers in fighting with each other, then the wild shepherds will come and kill all the rest. The Magy possesses great riches, but he has seen that Frya is much more powerful than all our spirits together. He will lay down his head in her lap. You are the most warlike king on the earth, and your people are of iron. Become our king, and we will all be your slaves. What glory it would be for you if you could drive back the savages! Our trumpets would resound with your praises, and the fame of your deeds would precede you everywhere. Wodin was strong, fierce, and warlike, but he was not clear-sighted, therefore he was taken in their toils, and crowned by the Magy.

Very many of the sailors and soldiers to whom this proceeding was displeasing went away secretly, taking Kat with them. But Kat, who did not wish to appear before either the mother or the general assembly, jumped overboard. Then a storm arose and drove the ships upon the banks of Denmark, with the total destruction of their crews. This strait was afterwards called the Kattegat [*+]. When Wodin was crowned, he

[p. 78] [p. 79]

attacked the savages, who were all horsemen, and fell upon Wodin's [**] troops like a hailstorm; but like a whirlwind they were turned back, and did not dare to appear again. When Wodin returned, Magy gave him his daughter to wife. Whereupon he was incensed with herbs; but they were magic herbs, and by degrees he became so audacious that he dared to disavow and ridicule the spirits of Frya and Wr-alda, while he bent his free head before the false and deceitful images. His reign lasted seven years, and then he disappeared. The Magy said that he was taken up by their gods and still reigned over us, but our people laughed at what they said. When Wodin had disappeared some time, disputes arose. We wished to choose another king, but the Magy would not permit it. He asserted that it was his right given him by his idols. But besides this dispute there was one between the Magyars and Finns, who would honour neither Frya nor Wodin; but the Magy did just as he pleased, because his daughter had a son by Wodin, and he would have it that this son was of high descent. While all were disputing and quarrelling, he crowned the boy as king, and set up himself as guardian and counsellor. Those who cared more for themselves than for justice let him work his own way, but the good men took their departure. Many Magyars fled back with their troops, and the sea-people took ship, accompanied by a body of stalwart Finns as rowers.

Next comes upon the stage the history of Neef Teunis and Neef Inka.

Footnotes

^73:* Skenland or Scandinavia.

^73:+ 2193-101 is 2092 before Christ.

^75:* Goda-hisburch is Gothenburg.

^75:+ Alderga in Ouddorp, near Alkmaar.

^75:++ Lumkamakja bithere Emuda is Embden.

^77:* Amering, still in use in North Holland to signify a breath or a twinkling of an eye.

^77:+ Katagat is the Kattegat.

^79:* Wodin is Odin or Wodan.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

ALL THIS IS INSCRIBED NOT ONLY ON THE WARABURGT, BUT ALSO ON THE BURGT STAVIA, WHICH LIES BEHIND THE PORT OF STAVRE.

When Teunis wished to return home, he went first towards Denmark; but he might not land there, for so the

[p. 80] [p. 81]

mother had ordered, nor was he to land at Flyland nor anywhere about there. In this way he would have lost all his people by want and hardship, so he landed at night to steal and sailed on by day. Thus coasting along, he at length arrived at the colony of Kadik [**] (Cadiz), so called because it was built with a stone quay. Here they bought all kinds of stores, but Tuntia the Burgtmaagd would not allow them to settle there. When they were ready they began to disagree. Teunis wished to sail through the straits to the Mediterranean Sea, and enter the service of the rich Egyptian king, as he had done before, but Inka said he had had enough of all those Finda's people. Inka thought that perchance some high-lying part of Atland might remain as an island, where he and his people might live in peace. As the two cousins could not agree, Teunis planted a red flag on the shore, and Inka a blue flag. Every man could choose which he pleased, and to their astonishment the greater part of the Finns and Magyars followed Inka, who had objected to serve the kings of Finda's people. When they had counted the people and divided the ships accordingly, the fleet separated. We shall hear of Teunis afterwards, but nothing more of Inka.

Neef Teunis coasted through the straits to the Mediterranean Sea. When Atland was submerged there was much suffering also on the shores of the Mediterranean, on which account many of Finda's people, Krekalanders, and people from Lyda's land, came to us. On the other hand, many of our people went to Lyda's land. The result of all this was that the Krekalanders far and wide were lost to the superintendence of the mother. Teunis had reckoned on this, and had therefore wished to find there a good

[p. 82] [p. 83]

haven from which he might go and serve under the rich princes; but as his fleet and his people had such a shattered appearance, the inhabitants on the coasts thought that they were pirates, and drove them away. At last they arrived at the Phoenician coast, one hundred and ninety-three years after Atland was submerged [**]. Near the coast they found an island with two deep bays, so that there appeared to be three islands. In the middle one they established themselves, and afterwards built a city wall round the place. Then they wanted to give it a name, but disagreed about it. Some wanted to call it Fryasburgt, others Neeftunia; but the Magyars and Finns begged that it might be called Thyrhisburgt [*+].

Thyr [*++] was the name of one of their idols, and it was upon his feast-day that they had landed there; and in return they offered to recognise Teunis as their perpetual king. Teunis let himself be persuaded, and the others would not make any quarrel about it. When they were well established, they sent some old seamen and Magyars on an expedition as far as the town of Sidon; but at first the inhabitants of the coast would have nothing to do with them, saying, You are only foreign adventurers whom we do not respect. But when we sold them some of our iron weapons, everything went well. They also wished to buy our amber, and their inquiries about it were incessant. But Teunis, who was far-seeing, pretended that he had no more iron weapons or amber. Then merchants came and begged him to let them have twenty vessels, which they would freight with the finest goods, and they would provide as many people to row as he would require. Twelve ships were then laden with wine, honey, tanned leather, and saddles and bridles mounted in gold, such as had never been seen before.

Teunis sailed to the Flymeer with all this treasure, which so enchanted the Grevetman of Westflyland that he induced

[p. 84] [p. 85]

[paragraph continues] Teunis to build a warehouse at the mouth of the Flymeer. Afterwards this place was called Almanaland [**], and the market where they traded at Wyringen [*+] was called Toelaatmarkt. The mother advised that they should sell everything except iron weapons, but no attention was paid to what she said. As the Thyriers had thus free play, they came from far and near to take away our goods, to the loss of our seafaring people. Therefore it was resolved in a general assembly to allow only seven Thyrian ships and no more in a year.

Footnotes

^81:* Kadik is Cadiz.

^83:* 2193-193 is 2000 years before Christ.

^83:+ Thyrhisburch is Tyre.

^83:++ Thyr is the son of Odin.

^85:* Almanaland is Ameland.

^85:+ Wyringa is Wieringen.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

WHAT THE CONSEQUENCE OF THIS WAS.

In the northernmost part of the Mediterranean there lies an island close to the coast. They now came and asked to buy that, on which a general council was held.

The mother's advice was asked, and she wished to see them at some distance, so she saw no harm in it; but as we afterwards saw what a mistake we had made, we called the island Missellia [*++] (Marseilles). Hereafter will be seen what reason we had. The Golen [* section], as the missionary priests of Sidon were called, had observed that the land there was thinly peopled, and was far from the mother. In order to make a favourable impression, they had themselves called in our language followers of the truth; but they had better have been called abstainers from the truth, or, in short, "Triuwenden," as our seafaring people afterwards called them. When they were well established, their merchants exchanged their beautiful copper weapons and all sorts of jewels for our iron weapons and hides of wild beasts, which were abundant in our southern

[p. 86] [p. 87]

countries; but the Golen celebrated all sorts of vile and monstrous festivals, which the inhabitants of the coast promoted with their wanton women and sweet poisonous wine. If any of our people had so conducted himself that his life was in danger, the Golen afforded him a refuge, and sent him to Phonisia, that is, Palmland. When he was settled there, they made him write to his family, friends, and connections that the country was so good and the people so happy that no one could form any idea of it. In Britain there were plenty of men, but few women. When the Golen knew this, they carried off girls everywhere and gave them to the Britons for nothing. So all these girls served their purpose to steal children from Wr-alda in order to give them to false gods.

Footnotes

^85:++ Miasellja is Marseilles.

^85: section Gola are the Galli or Gauls.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOW WE WILL WRITE ABOUT THE WAR BETWEEN THE BURGTMAAGDEN KALTA AND MIN-ERVA,

And how we thereby lost all our southern lands and Britain to the Golen.

Near the southern mouth of the Rhine and the Scheldt there are seven islands, named after Frya's seven virgins of the week. In the middle of one island is the city of Walhallagara [**] (Middelburg), and on the walls of this city the following history is inscribed. Above it are the words "Read, learn, and watch."

Five hundred and sixty-three years after the submersion of Atland--that is, 1600 years before Christ [*+]--a wise town priestess presided here, whose name was Min-erva--called by the sailors Nyhellenia. This name was well chosen, for her counsels were new and clear above all others.

On the other side of the Scheldt, at Flyburgt, Sijrhed presided. This maiden was full of tricks. Her face was

[p. 88] [p. 89]

beautiful, and her tongue was nimble; but the advice that she gave was always conveyed in mysterious terms. Therefore the mariners called her Kalta, and the landsmen thought it was a title. In the last will of the dead mother, Rosamond was named first, Min-erva second, and Sijrhed third in succession. Min-erva did not mind that, but Sijrhed was very much offended. Like a foreign princess, she wished to be honoured, feared, and worshipped; but Min-erva only desired to be loved. At last all the sailors, even from Denmark and Flymeer, did homage to her. This hurt Sijrhed, because she wanted to excel Min-erva. In order to give an impression of her great watchfulness, she had a cock put on her banner. So then Min-erva went and put a sheep-dog and an owl on her banner. The dog, she said, guards his master and his flock, and the owl watches that the mice shall not devastate the fields; but the cock in his lewdness and his pride is only fit to murder his nearest relations. When Kalta found that her scheme had failed she was still more vexed, so she secretly sent for the Magyars to teach her conjuring. When she had had enough of this she threw herself into the hands of the Gauls; but all her malpractices did not improve her position. When she saw that the sailors kept more and more aloof from her, she tried to win them back by fear. At the full moon, when the sea was stormy, she ran over the wild waves, calling to the sailors that they would all be lost if they did not worship her. Then she blinded their eyes, so that they mistook land for water and water for land, and in this way many a good ship was totally lost. At the first war-feast, when all her countrymen were armed, she brought casks of beer, which she had drugged. When they were all drunk

[p. 90] [p. 91]

she mounted her war-horse, leaning her head upon her spear. Sunrise could not be more beautiful. When she saw that the eyes of all were fixed upon her, she opened her lips and said:

Sons and daughters of Frya, you know that in these last times we have suffered much loss and misery because the sailors no longer come to buy our paper, but you do not know what the reason of it is. I have long kept silence about it, but can do so no longer. Listen, then, my friends, that you may know on which side to show your teeth. On the other side of the Scheldt, where from time to time there come ships from all parts, they make now paper from pumpkin leaves, by which they save flax and outdo us. Now, as the making of paper was always our principal industry, the mother willed that people should learn it from us; but Min-erva has bewitched all the people--yes, bewitched, my friends--as well as all our cattle that died lately. I must come out with it. If I were not Burgtmaagd, I should know what to do. I should burn the witch in her nest.

As soon as she had uttered these words she sped away to her citadel; but the drunken people were so excited that they did not stop to weigh what they had heard. In mad haste they hurried over the Sandfal, and as night came on they burst into the citadel. However, Kalta again missed her aim; for Min-erva, her maidens, and her lamp were all saved by the alertness of the seamen.

Footnotes

^87:* Walhallagara is Middelburg, in Walcheren.

^87:+ 2193-583 is 1630 years before Christ.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

WE NOW COME TO THE HISTORY OF JON.

Jon, Jon, Jhon, Jan, are all the same name, though the pronunciation varies, as the seamen like to shorten everything to be able to make it easier to call. Jon--that is, "Given"--was a sea-king, born at Alberga, who sailed

[p. 92] [p. 93]

from the Flymeer with a fleet of 127 ships fitted out for a long voyage, and laden with amber, tin, copper, cloth, linen, felt, otter-skins, beaver and rabbit skins. He would also have taken paper from here, but when he saw how Kalta [**] had destroyed the citadel he became so angry that he went off with all his people to Flyburgt, and out of revenge set fire to it. His admiral and some of his people saved the lamp and the maidens, but they could not catch Sijrhed (or Kalta). She climbed up on the furthest battlement, and they thought she must be killed in the flames; but what happened? While all her people stood transfixed with horror, she appeared upon her steed more beautiful than ever, calling to them, "To Kalta!" Then the other Schelda people poured out towards her. When the seamen saw that, they shouted, "We are for Min-erva!" from which arose a war in which thousands were killed.

At this time Rosamond the mother, who had done all in her power by gentle means to preserve peace, when she saw how bad it was, made short work of it. Immediately she sent messengers throughout all the districts to call a general levy, which brought together all the defenders of the country. The landsmen who were fighting were all caught, but Jon with his seamen took refuge on board his fleet, taking with him the two lamps, as well as Minerva and the maidens of both the citadels. Helprik, the chief, summoned him to appear; but while all the soldiers were on the other side of the Scheldt, Jon sailed back to the Flymeer, and then straight to our islands. His fighting men and many of our people took women and children on board, and when Jon saw that he and his people would be punished for their misdeeds, he secretly took his departure. He did well, for all our islanders, and the other Scheldt people who had been fighting were

[p. 94] [p. 95]

transported to Britain. This step was a mistake, for now came the beginning of the end. Kalta, who, people said, could go as easily on the water as on the land, went to the mainland and on to Missellia (Marseilles). Then came the Gauls out of the Mediterranean Sea with their ships to Cadiz, and along all our coasts, and fell upon Britain; but they could not make any good footing there, because the government was powerful and the exiles were still Frisians. But now came Kalta and said: You were born free, and for small offences have been sent away, not for your own improvement, but to get tin by your labour. If you wish to be free again, and take my advice, and live under my care, come away. I will provide you with arms, and will watch over you. The news flew through the land like lightning, and before the carrier's wheel had made one revolution she was mistress of all the Thyriers in all our southern states as far as the Seine [**]. She built herself a citadel on the high land to the north, and called it Kaltasburgh. It still exists under the name of Kerenak. From this castle she ruled as a true mother, against their will, not for her followers, but over them, who were thenceforth called Kelts [*+]. The Gauls gradually obtained dominion over the whole of Britain, partly because they no longer had any citadel; secondly, because they had there no Burgtmaagden; and thirdly, because they had no real lamps. From all these causes the people could not learn anything. They were stupid and foolish, and having allowed the Gauls to rob them of their arms, they were led about like a bull with a ring in his nose.

Footnotes

^93:* Kalta Min-his, Minnesdaughter.

^95:* Sejene is the Seine.

^95:+ Kaltana are the Celts.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96] [p. 97]

  

Now we shall write how it fared with Jon.

  

IT IS INSCRIBED AT TEXLAND.

Ten years after Jon went away, there arrived three ships in the Flymeer; the people cried Huzza! (What a blessing!) and from their accounts the mother had this written.

When Jon reached the Mediterranean Sea, the reports of the Gauls had preceded him, so that on the nearest Italian coast he was nowhere safe. Therefore he went with his fleet straight over to Lybia. There the black men wanted to catch them and eat them. At last they came to Tyre, but Min-erva said, Keep clear, for here the air has been long poisoned by the priests. The king was a descendant of Teunis, as we were afterwards informed; but as the priests wished to have a king, who, according to their ideas, was of long descent, they deified Teunis, to the vexation of his followers. After they had passed Tyre, the Tyrians seized one of the rearmost ships, and as the ship was too far behind us, we could not take it back again; but Jon swore to be revenged for it. When night came, Jon bent his course towards the distant Krekalanden. At last they arrived at a country that looked very barren, but they found a harbour there. Here, said Min-erva, we need not perhaps have any fear of princes or priests, as they always look out for rich fat lands. When they entered the harbour, there was not room for all the ships, and yet most of the people were too cowardly to go any further. Then Jon, who wished to get away, went with his spear and banner, calling to the young people, to know who would volunteer to share his adventures. Min-erva did the same thing, but she wished to remain there. The greater part stopped with Min-erva, but the young sailors went with Jon.

[p. 98] [p. 99]

[paragraph continues] Jon took the lamp of Kalta and her maidens with him. Min-erva retained her lamp and her own maidens.

Between the near and the distant coasts of Italy Jon found some islands, which he thought desirable. Upon the largest he built a city in the wood between the mountains. From the smaller islands he made expeditions for vengeance on the Tyrians, and plundered their ships and their lands. Therefore these islands were called Insulae Piratarum, as well as Johannis Insulae [**].

When Min-erva had examined the country which is called by the inhabitants Attica [*+], she saw that the people were all goatherds, and that they lived on meat, wild roots, herbs, and honey. They were clothed in skins, and had their dwellings on the slopes (hellinga) of the hills, wherefore they were called Hellingers. At first they ran away, but when they found that we did not attack them, they came back and showed great friendship. Min-erva asked if we might settle there peaceably. This was agreed to on. the condition that we should help them to fight against their neighbours, who came continually to carry away their children and to rob their dwellings. Then we built a citadel at an hour's distance from the harbour. By the advice of Min-erva it was called Athens, because, she said, those who come after us ought to know that we are not here by cunning or violence, but were received as friends (atha). While we were building the citadel the principal personages came to see us, and when they saw that we had no slaves it did not please them, and they gave her to understand it, as they thought that she was a princess. But Min-erva said, How did you get your slaves? They answered, We bought some and took others in war. Min-erva replied, If nobody would buy slaves they would

[p. 100] [p. 101]

not steal your children, and you would have no wars about it. If you wish to remain our allies, you will free your slaves. The chiefs did not like this, and wanted to drive us away; but the most enlightened of the people came and helped us to build our citadel, which was built of stone.

This is the history of Jon and of Min-erva.

When they had finished their story they asked respectfully for iron weapons; for, said they, our foes are powerful, but if we have good arms we can withstand them. When this had been agreed to, the people asked if Frya's customs would flourish in Athens and in other parts of Greece (Krekalanden). The mother answered, If the distant Greeks belong to the direct descent of Frya, then they will flourish; but if they do not descend from Frya, then there will be a long contention about it, because the carrier must make five thousand revolutions of his Juul before Finda's people will be ripe for liberty.

Footnotes

^99:* Jonhis elanda--John's Islands, or the Pirated Isles.

^99:+ Athenia is Athens.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIS IS ABOUT THE GEERTMEN. [**]

When Hellenia or Min-erva died, the priests pretended to be with us, and in order to make it appear so, they deified Hellenia. They refused to have any other mother chosen, saying that they feared there was no one among her maidens whom they could trust as they had trusted Minerva, surnamed Nyhellenia.

But we would not recognise Min-erva as a goddess, because she herself had told us that no one could be perfectly good except the spirit of Wr-alda. Therefore we chose Geert Pyre's daughter for our mother. When the priests saw that they could not fry their herrings on our fire (have everything their own way), they left Athens, and said that we

[p. 102] [p. 103]

refused to acknowledge Min-erva as a goddess out of envy, because she had shown so much affection to the natives. Thereupon they gave the people statues of her, declaring that they might ask of them whatever they liked, as long as they were obedient to her. By these kinds of tales the stupid people were estranged from us, and at last they attacked us; but as we had built our stone city wall with two horns down to the sea, they could not get at us. Then, to and behold I an Egyptian high priest, bright of eye, clear of brain, and enlightened of mind, whose name was Cecrops [**], came to give them advice.

When he saw that with his people he could not storm our wall, he sent messengers to Tyre. Thereupon there arrived three hundred ships full of wild mountain soldiers, which sailed unexpectedly into our haven while we were defending the walls. When they had taken our harbour, the wild soldiers wanted to plunder the village and our ships--one had already ravished a girl--but Cecrops would not permit it; and the Tyrian sailors, who still had Frisian blood in their veins, said, If you do that we will burn our ships, and you shall never see your mountains again. Cecrops, who had no inclination towards murder or devastation, sent messengers to Geert, requiring her to give up the citadel, offering her free exit with all her live and dead property, and her followers the same. The wisest of the citizens, seeing that they could not hold the citadel, advised Geert to accept at once, before Cecrops became furious and changed his mind. Three months afterwards Geert departed with the best of Frya's sons, and seven times twelve ships. Soon after they had left the harbour they fell in with at least thirty ships coming from Tyre with women and children. They were on their way to Athens, but when they heard how things stood there they went with Geert. The sea-king of

[p. 104] [p. 105]

the Tyrians brought them altogether through the strait which at that time ran into the Red Sea (now re-established as the Suez Canal) [**]. At last they landed at the Punjab, called in our language the Five Rivers, because five rivers flow together to the sea. Here they settled, and called it Geertmania. The King of Tyre afterwards, seeing that all his best sailors were gone, sent all his ships with his wild soldiers to catch them, dead or alive. When they arrived at the strait, both the sea and the earth trembled. The land was upheaved so that all the water ran out of the strait, and the muddy shores were raised up like a rampart. This happened on account of the virtues of the Geertmen, as every one can plainly understand.

Footnotes

^101:* Here follows the narrative contained in page from 48 to 56.

^103:* Sekrops is Cecrops.

^105:* Strete, at present restored as the Suez Canal. Pangab is the Indus.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

IN THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND AND FIVE AFTER ATLAND WAS SUBMERGED, THIS WAS INSCRIBED ON THE EASTERN WALL OF FRYASBURGT. [*+]

After twelve years had elapsed without our seeing any Italians in Almanland, there came three ships, finer than any that we possessed or had ever seen.

On the largest of them was a king of the Jonischen Islands whose name was Ulysses, the fame of whose wisdom was great. To him a priestess had prophesied that he should become the king of all Italy provided he could obtain a lamp that had been lighted at the lamp in Tex-land. For this purpose he had brought great treasures with him, above all, jewels for women more beautiful than had ever been seen before. They were from Troy, a town that the Greeks had taken. All these treasures he offered to the mother, but the mother would have nothing to do with them. At last, when he found that there was nothing to be got from her, he went to Walhallagara [*++] (Walcheren). There there was established a Burgtmaagd whose name was Kaat,

[p. 106] [p. 107]

but who was commonly called Kalip [**], because her lower lip stuck out like a mast-head. Here he tarried for years, to the scandal of all that knew it. According to the report of the maidens, he obtained a lamp from her; but it did him no good, because when he got to sea his ship was lost, and he was taken up naked and destitute by another ship. There was left behind by this king a writer of pure Frya's blood, born in the new harbour of Athens, who wrote for us what follows about Athens, from which may be seen how truly the mother Hei-licht spoke when she said that the customs of Frya could never take firm hold in Athens.

From the other Greeks you will have heard a great deal of bad about Cecrops, because he was not in good repute; but I dare affirm that be was an enlightened man; very renowned both among the inhabitants and among us, for he was against oppression, unlike the other priests, and was virtuous, and knew how to value the wisdom of distant nations. Knowing that, he permitted us to live according to our own Asegaboek. There was a story current that he was favourable to us because he was the son of a Frisian girl and an Egyptian priest: the reason of this was that he had blue eyes, and that many of our girls had been stolen and sold to Egypt, but he never confirmed this. However it may have been, certain it is that he showed us more friendship than all the other priests together. When he died, his successors soon began to tear up our charters, and gradually to enact so many unsuitable statutes that at long last nothing remained of liberty but the shadow and the name. Besides, they would not allow the laws to be written, so that the knowledge of them was hidden from us. Formerly all the cases in

[p. 108] [p. 109]

[paragraph continues] Athens were pleaded in our language, but afterwards in both languages, and at last in the native language only. At first the men of Athens only married women of our own race, but the young men as they grew up with the girls of the country took them to wife. The bastard children of this connection were the handsomest and cleverest in the world; but they were likewise the wickedest, wavering between the two parties, paying no regard to laws or customs except where they suited their own interests. As long as a ray of Frya's spirit existed, all the building materials were for common use, and no one might build a house larger or better than his neighbours; but when some degenerate townspeople got rich by sea-voyages and by the silver that their slaves got in the silver countries, they went to live out on the hills or in the valleys. There, behind high enclosures of trees or walls, they built palaces with costly furniture, and in order to remain in good odour with the nasty priests, they placed there likenesses of false gods and unchaste statues. Sometimes the dirty priests and princes wished for the boys rather than the girls, and often led them astray from the paths of virtue by rich presents or by force. Because riches were more valued by this lost and degenerate race than virtue or honour, one sometimes saw boys dressed in splendid flowing robes, to the disgrace of their parents and maidens, and to the shame of their own sex. If our simple parents came to a general assembly at Athens and made complaints, a cry was raised, Hear, hear! there is a sea-monster going to speak. Such is Athens become, like a morass in a tropical country full of leeches, toads, and poisonous snakes, in which no man of decent habits can set his foot.

Footnotes

^105:+ 2193-1005 is 1188 before Christ.

^105:++ Walhallagara is Walcheren.

^107:*Kalip, called by Homer Kalipso.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110] [p. 111]

  

THIS IS INSCRIBED IN ALL OUR CITADELS.

How our Denmark [**] was lost to us 1602 years after the submersion of Atland [*+]. Through the mad wantonness of Wodin, Magy had become master of the east part of Scandinavia. They dare not come over the hills and over the sea. The mother would not prevent it. She said, I see no danger in their weapons, but much in taking the Scandinavians back again, because they are so degenerate and spoilt. The general assembly were of the same opinion. Therefore it was left to him. A good hundred years ago Denmark began to trade; they gave their iron weapons in exchange for gold ornaments, as well as for copper and iron-ore. The mother sent messengers to advise them to have nothing to do with this trade. There was danger to their morals in it, and if they lost their morals they would soon lose their liberty. But the Den-markers paid no attention to her. They did not believe that they could lose their morals, therefore they would not listen to her. At last they were at a loss themselves for weapons and necessaries, and this difficulty was their punishment. Their bodies were brilliantly adorned, but their cupboards and their sheds were empty. Just one hundred years after the first ship with provisions sailed from the coast, poverty and want made their appearance, hunger spread her wings all over the country, dissension marched proudly about the streets and into the houses, charity found no place, and unity departed. The child asked its mother for food; she had no food to give, only jewels. The women applied to their husbands, the husbands appealed to the counts; the counts had nothing to give, or if they had, they hid it away. Now the jewels must be sold, but while the sailors

[p. 112] [p. 113]

were away for that purpose, the frost came and laid a plank upon the sea and the strait (the Sound). When the frost had made the bridge, vigilance ceased in the land, and treachery took its place. Instead of watching on the shores, they put their horses in their sledges and drove off to Scandinavia. Then the Scandinavians, who hungered after the land of their forefathers, came to Denmark. One bright night they all came. Now, they said, we have a right to the land of our fathers; and while they were fighting about it, the Finns came to the defenceless villages and ran away with the children. As they had no good weapons, they lost the battle, and with it their freedom, and Magy became master. All this was the consequence of their not reading Frya's Tex, and neglecting her counsels. There are some who think that they were betrayed by the counts, and that the maidens had long suspected it; but if any one attempted to speak about it, his mouth was shut by golden chains.

We can express no opinion about it, we can only say to you, Do not trust too much to the wisdom of your princes or of your maidens; but if you wish to keep things straight, everybody must watch over his own passions, as well as the general welfare.

Two years afterwards Magy himself came with a fleet of light boats to steal the lamp from the mother of Texland. This wicked deed he accomplished one stormy winter night, while the wind roared and the hail rattled against the windows. The watchman on the tower hearing the noise, lighted his torch. As soon as the light from the tower fell upon the bastion, he saw that already armed men had got over the wall.

He immediately gave the alarm, but it was too late. Before the guard was ready, there were two thousand people battering the gate. The struggle did not last long.

[p. 114] [p. 115]

[paragraph continues] As the guard had not kept a good watch, they were overwhelmed. While the fight was going on, a rascally Finn stole into the chamber of the mother, and would have done her violence. She resisted him, and threw him down against the wall. When he got up, be ran his sword through her: If you will not have me, you shall have my sword. A Danish soldier came behind him and clave his bead in two. There came from it a stream of black blood and a wreath of blue flame.

The Magy had the mother nursed on his own ship. As soon as she was well enough to speak clearly, the Magy told her that she must sail with him, but that she should keep her lamp and her maidens, and should hold a station higher than she had ever done before. Moreover, he said that he should ask her, in presence of all his chief men, if he would become the ruler of all the country and people of Frya; that she must declare and affirm this, or be would let her die a painful death. Then, when he had gathered all his chiefs around her bed, he asked, in a loud voice, Frana, since you are a prophetess, shall I become ruler over all the lands and people of Frya? Frana did as if she took no notice of him; but at last she opened her lips, and said: My eyes are dim, but the other light dawns upon my soul. Yes, I see it. Hear, Irtha, and rejoice with me. At the time of the submersion of Atland, the first spoke of the Juul stood at the top. After that it went down, and our freedom with it. When two spokes, or two thousand years, shall have rolled down, the sons shall arise who have been bred of the fornication of the princes and priests with the people, and shall witness against their fathers. They shall all fall by murder, but what they have proclaimed shall endure,

[p. 116] [p. 117]

and shall bear fruit in the bosoms of able men, like good seed which is laid in thy lap. Yet a thousand years shall the spoke descend, and sink deeper in darkness, and in the blood shed over yon by the wickedness of the princes and priests. After that, the dawn shall begin to glow. When they perceive this, the false princes and priests will strive and wrestle against freedom; but freedom, love, and unity will take the people under their protection, and rise out of the vile pool. The light which at first only glimmered shall gradually become a flame. The blood of the bad shall flow over your surface, but you must not absorb it. At last the poisoned animals shall eat it, and die of it. All the stories that have been written in praise of the princes and priests shall be committed to the flames. Thenceforth your children shall live in peace. When she had finished speaking she sank down.

The Magy, who had not understood her, shrieked out, I have asked you if I should become master of all the lands and people of Frya, and now you have been speaking to another. Frana raised herself up, stared at him, and said, Before seven days have passed your soul shall haunt the tombs with the night-birds, and your body shall be at the bottom of the sea. Very good, said the Magy, swelling with rage; say that I am coming. Then he said to his executioners, Throw this woman overboard. This was the end of the last of the mothers. We do not ask for revenge. Time will provide that; but a thousand thousand times we will call with Frya, Watch! watch! watch!

Footnotes

^111:* Dena marks, the low marches.

^111:+ 2193-1602 is 691 years before Christ.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HOW IT FARED AFTERWARDS WITH THE MAGY.

After the murder of the mother, he brought the lamp and the maidens into his own ship, together with all

[p. 118] [p. 119]

the booty that he chose. Afterwards he went p the Flymeer because he wished to take the maiden of Medeasblik or Stavoren and install her as mother; but there they were on their guard. The seafaring men of Stavoren and Alderga would gladly have gone to Jon, but the great fleet was out on a distant voyage; so they proceeded in their small fleet to Medeasblik, and kept themselves concealed in a sheltered place behind trees. The Magy approached Medeasblik in broad daylight; nevertheless, his men boldly stormed the citadel. But as they landed from the boats, our people sallied forth from the creek, and shot their arrows with balls of burning turpentine upon the fleet. They were so well aimed that many of the ships were instantly on fire. Those left to guard the ships shot at us, but they could not reach us. When at last a burning ship drifted towards the ship of the Magy, he ordered the man at the helm to sheer off, but this man was the Dane who had cleft the head of the Finn. He said, You sent our Eeremoeder to the bottom of the sea to say that you were coming. In the bustle of the fight you might forget it; now I will take care that you keep your word. The Magy tried to push him off, but the sailor, a real Frisian and strong as an ox, clutched his head with both hands, and pitched him into the surging billows. Then he hoisted up his brown shield, and sailed straight to our fleet. Thus the maidens came unhurt to us; bat the lamp was extinguished, and no one knew how that had happened. When those on the uninjured ships heard that the Magy was drowned, they sailed away, because their crews were Danes. When the fleet was far enough off, our sailors turned and shot their burning arrows at the Finns. When the Finns saw that, and found that they were betrayed, they fell into confusion, and lost all discipline and order. At this moment the garrison sallied

[p. 120] [p. 121]

forth from the citadel. Those who resisted were killed, and those who fled found their death in the marshes of the Krylinger wood.

  

POSTSCRIPT.

When the sailors were in the creek, there was a wag from Stavoren among them, who said, Medea may well laugh if we rescue her from her citadel. Upon this, the maidens gave to the creek the name Medea meilakkia [**] (Lake of Medea). The occurrences that happened after this everybody can remember. The maidens ought to relate it in their own way, and have it well inscribed. We consider that our task is fulfilled. Hail!

 

 

THE END OF THE BOOK.

 

 

 

Footnotes

^121:* Medemi lacus, Lake of Medea's laughter.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122] [p. 123]

  

THE WRITINGS OF ADELBROST AND APOLLONIA.

My name is Adelbrost, the son of Apol and Adela. I was elected by my people as Grevetman over the Lindaoorden. Therefore I will continue this book in the same way as my mother has spoken it.

After the Magy was killed and Fryasburgt was restored, a mother had to be chosen. The mother had not named her successor, and her will was nowhere to be found. Seven months later a general assembly was called at Grenega (Groningen) [**], because it was on the boundary of Saxamarken. My mother was chosen, but she would not be the mother. She had saved my father's life, in consequence of which they had fallen in love with each other, and she wished to marry. Many people wished my mother to alter her decision, but she said an Eeremoeder ought to be as pure in her conscience as she appears outwardly, and to have the same love for all her children. Now, as I love Apol better than anything else in the world, I cannot be such a mother. Thus spoke and reasoned Adela, but all the other maidens wished to be the mother. Each state was in favour of its own maiden, and would not yield. Therefore none was chosen, and the kingdom was without any restraint. From what follows you will understand Liudgert, the king who had lately died, had been chosen in the lifetime of the mother, and seemingly with the love and confidence of all the states. It was his turn to live at the great court of Dokhem [*+], and in the lifetime of the mother great honour was done to him there, as there were more messengers and knights there than had ever been seen there before. But now he was lonely and forsaken,

[p. 124] [p. 125]

because every one was afraid that he would set himself above the law, and rule them like the slave kings. Every headman imagined that he did enough if he looked after his own state, and did not care for the others. With the Burgtmaagden it was still worse. Each of them depended upon her own judgment, and whenever a Grevetman did anything without her, she raised distrust between him and his people. If any case happened which concerned several states, and one maid had been consulted, the rest all exclaimed that she had spoken only in the interest of her own state. By such proceedings they brought disputes among the states, and so severed the bond of union that the people of one state were jealous of those of the rest, or at least considered them as strangers; the consequence of which was that the Gauls or Truwenden (Druids) took possession of our lands as far as the Scheldt, and the Magy as far as the Wesara. How this happened my mother has explained, otherwise this book would not have been written, although I have lost all hope that it would be of any use. I do not write in the hope that I shall win back the land or preserve it: in my opinion that is impossible. I write only for the future generations, that they may all know in what way we were lost, and that each may learn that every crime brings its punishment.

My name is Apollonia. Two-and-thirty days after my mother's death my brother Adelbrost was found murdered on the wharf, his skull fractured and his limbs torn asunder. My father, who lay ill, died of fright. Then my younger brother, Apol, sailed from here to the west side of Schoonland. There he built a citadel named Lindasburgt [**], in order there to avenge our wrong. Wr-alda accorded him many years for that. He had five sons, who all caused fear

[p. 126] [p. 127]

to Magy, and brought fame to my brother. After the death of my mother and my brother, all the bravest of the land joined together and made a covenant, called the Adelbond. In order to preserve us from injury, they brought me and my youngest brother, Adelhirt, to the burgt--me to the maidens, and him to the warriors. When I was thirty years old I was chosen as Burgtmaagd, and my brother at fifty was chosen Grevetman. From mother's side my brother was. the sixth, but from father's side the third. 'By right, therefore, his descendants could not put "overa Linda" after their names, but they all wished to do it in honour of their mother. In addition to this, there was given to us also a copy of "The Book of Adela's Followers." That gave me the most pleasure, because it came into the world by my mother's wisdom. In the burgt I have found other writings also in praise of my mother. All this I will write afterwards.

These are the writings left by Bruno, who was the writer of this burgt. After the followers of Adele had made copies, each in his kingdom, of what was inscribed upon the walls of the burgt, they resolved to choose a mother. For this purpose a general assembly was called at this farm. By the first advice of Adela, Teuntje was recommended. That would have been arranged, only that my Burgtmaagd asked to speak: she had always supposed that she would be chosen mother, because she was at the burgt from which mothers had generally been chosen. When she was allowed to speak, she opened her false lips and said: You all seem to place great value on Adela's advice, but that shall not shut my mouth. Who is Adele, and whence comes it that you respect her so highly? She was what I am now, a Burgtmaagd of this

[p. 128] [p. 129]

place; is she, then, wiser and better than I and all the others? or is she more conversant with our laws and customs? If that had been the case, she would have become mother when she was chosen; but instead of that, she preferred matrimony to a single life, watching over herself and her people. She is certainly very clear-sighted, but my eyes are far from being dim. I have observed that she is very much attached to her husband, which is very praiseworthy; but I see, likewise, that Teuntje is Apol's niece. Further I say nothing.

The principal people understood very well which way the wind blew with her; but among the people there arose disputes, and as most of the people came from here, they would not give the honour to Teuntje. The conferences were ended, knives were drawn, and no mother was chosen. Shortly afterwards one of oar messengers killed his comrade. As he had been a man of good character hitherto, my Burgtmaagd had permission to help him over the frontier; but instead of helping him over to Twiskland (Germany), she fled with him herself to Wesara, and then to the Magy. The Magy, who wished to please his sons of Frye, appointed her mother of Godaburgt, in Schoonland; but she wished for more, and she told him that if he could get Adele out of the way he might become master of the whole of Frya's land. She said she hated Adele for having prevented her from being chosen mother. If be would promise her Tex-land, her messenger should serve as guide to his warriors. All this was confessed by her messenger.

Footnotes

^123:* Grenega is Groningen.

^123:+ Dokhem is Dokkum.

^125:* Lindasburch, on Cape Lindanaes, Norway.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE SECOND WRITING.

Fifteen months after the last general assembly, at the festival of the harvest month, everybody gave himself

[p. 130] [p. 131]

up to pleasure and merry-making, and no one thought of anything but diversion; but Wr-alda wished to teach us that watchfulness should never be relaxed. In the midst of the festivities the fog came and enveloped every place in darkness. Cheerfulness melted away, but watchfulness did not take its place. The coastguard deserted their beacons, and no one was to be seen on any of the paths. When the fog rose, the sun scarcely appeared among the clouds; but the people all came out shouting with joy, and the young folks went about singing to their bagpipes [**], filling the air with their melody. But while every one was intoxicated with pleasure, treachery had landed with its horses and riders. As usual, darkness had favoured the wicked, and they had slipped in through the paths of Linda's wood. Before Adela's door twelve girls led twelve lambs, and twelve boys led twelve calves. A young Saxon bestrode a wild bull which he had caught and tamed. They were decked with all kinds of flowers, and the girls' dresses were fringed with gold from the Rhine.

When Adele came out of her house, a shower of flowers fell on her head; they all cheered loudly, and the fifes of the boys were heard over everything. Poor Adele! poor people! how short will be your joy! When the procession was out of sight, a troop of Magyar soldiers rushed up to Adela's house. Her father and her husband were sitting on the steps. The door was open, and within stood Adelbrost her son. When be saw the danger of his parents, he took his bow from the wall and shot the leader of the pirates, who staggered and fell on the grass. The second and third met a similar fate. In the meantime his parents had seized their weapons, and went slowly to Jon's house. They would soon have been taken, but

[p. 132] [p. 133]

[paragraph continues] Adela came. She had learned in the burgt to use all kinds of weapons. She was seven feet high, and her sword was the same length. She waved it three times over her head, and each time a knight bit the earth. Reinforcements came, and the pirates were made prisoners; but too late--an arrow had penetrated her bosom! The treacherous Magy had poisoned it, and she died of it.

Footnotes

^131:* Gurbam. C. Niebuhr, Travels, vol. L p. 174. The bagpipe is called by the Egyptians Sumara el Kurbe.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE ELEGY OF THE BURGTMAAGD.

Yes, departed friend, thousands are arrived, and more are coming. They wish to hear the wisdom of Adela. Truly, she was a princess, for she had always been the leader. O Sorrow, what good can you do!

Her garments of linen and [**] wool she spun and wove herself. How could she add to her beauty? Not with pearls, for her teeth were more white; not with gold, for her tresses were more brilliant; not with precious stones, for her eyes, though soft as those of a lamb, were so lustrous that you could scarcely look into them. But why do I talk of beauty? Frya was certainly not more beautiful; yes, my friends, Frya, who possessed seven perfections, of which each of her daughters inherited one, or at most three. But even if she had been ugly, she would still have been dear to us. Is she warlike? Listen, my friend. Adele was the only daughter of our Grevetman. She stood seven feet high. Her wisdom exceeded her stature, and her courage was equal to both together. Here is an instance. There was once a turf-ground on fire. Three children got upon yonder gravestone. There was a furious wind. The people were all shouting, and the mother was helpless. Then came Adela. What are you all standing still here for? she cried. Try to

[p. 134] [p. 135]

help them, and Wr-alda will give you strength. Then she ran to the Krylwood and got some elder branches, of which she made a bridge. The others then came to assist her, and the children were saved. The children bring flowers to the place every year. There came once three Phoenician sailors, who began to ill-treat the children, when Adela, having heard their screams, beat the scoundrels till they were insensible, and then, to prove to them what miserable wretches they were, she tied them all three to a spindle.

The foreign lords came to look after their people, and when they saw how ridiculously they had been treated they were very angry, till they were told what had happened. Upon that they bowed themselves before Adele, and kissed the hem of her garment. But come, distant living friend. The birds of the forest fled before the numerous visitors. Come, friend, and you shall hear her wisdom. By the gravestone of which mention has already been made her body is buried. Upon the stone the following words are inscribed:--

TREAD SOFTLY, FOR HERE LIES ADELA.

The old legend which is written on the outside wall of the city tower is not written in "The Book of Adela's Followers." Why this has been neglected I do not know; but this book is my own, so I will put it in out of regard to my relations.

Footnotes

^133:* To hnekka, a high petticoat reaching up to the neck.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE OLDEST DOCTRINE.

Hail to all the well-intentioned children of Frya!

[p. 136] [p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Through them the earth shall become holy. Learn and announce to the people Wr-alda is the ancient of ancients, for he created all things. Wr-alda is all in all, for he is eternal and everlasting. Wr-alda is omnipresent but invisible, and therefore is called a spirit. All that we can see of him are the created beings who come to life through him and go again, because from Wr-alda all things proceed and return to him. Wr-alda is the beginning and the end. Wr-alda is the only almighty being, because from him all other strength comes, and returns to him. Therefore he alone is the creator, and nothing exists without him. Wr-alda established eternal principles, upon which the laws of creation were founded, and no good laws could stand on any other foundation. But although everything is derived from Wr-alda, the wickedness of men does not come from him. Wickedness comes from heaviness, carelessness, and stupidity; therefore they may well be injurious to men, but never to Wr-alda. Wr-alda is wisdom, and the laws that he has made are the books from which we learn, nor is any wisdom to be found or gathered but in them. Men may see a great deal, but Wr-alda sees everything. Men can learn a great deal, but Wr-alda knows everything. Men can discover much, but to Wr-alda everything is open. Mankind are male and female, but Wr-alda created both. Mankind love and hate, but Wr-alda alone is just. Therefore Wr-alda is good, and there is no good without him. In the progress of time all creation alters and changes, but goodness alone is unalterable; and since Wr-alda is good, he cannot

[p. 138] [p. 139]

change. As he endures, he alone exists; everything else is show.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE SECOND PART OF THE OLDEST DOCTRINE.

Among Finda's people there are false teachers, who, by their over-inventiveness, have become so wicked that they make themselves and their adherents believe that they are the best part of Wr-alda, that their spirit is the best part of Wr-alda's spirit, and that Wr-alda can only think by the help of their brains.

That every creature is a part of Wr-alda's eternal being, that they have stolen from us; but their false reasoning and ungovernable pride have brought them on the road to ruin. If their spirit was Wr-alda's spirit, then Wr-alda would be very stupid, instead of being sensible and wise; for their spirit labours to create beautiful statues, which they afterwards worship. Finda's people are a wicked people, for although they presumptuously pretend among themselves that they are gods, they proclaim the unconsecrated false gods, and declare everywhere that these idols created the world and all that therein is--greedy idols, full of envy and anger, who desire to be served and honoured by the people, and who exact bloody sacrifices and rich offerings; but these presumptuous and false men, who call themselves God's servants and priests, receive and collect everything in the name of the idols that have no real existence, for their own benefit.

They do all this with an easy conscience, as they think themselves gods not answerable to any one. If there are some who discover their tricks and expose them, they hand them over to the executioners to be burnt for their calumnies, with solemn ceremonies in honour of the false gods;

[p. 140] [p. 141]

but really in order to save themselves. In order that our children may be protected against their idolatrous doctrine, the duty of the maidens is to make them learn by heart the following: Wr-alda existed before all things, and will endure after all things. Wr-alda is also eternal and everlasting, therefore nothing exists without him. From Wr-alda's life sprang time and all living things, and his life takes away time and every other thing. These things must be made clear and manifest in every way, so that they can be made clear and comprehensible to all. When we have learned thus much, then we say further: In what regards our existence, we are a part of Wr-alda's everlasting being, like the existence of all created beings; but as regards our form, our qualities, our spirit, and all our thoughts, these do not belong to the being. All these are passing things which appear through Wr-alda's life, and which appear through his wisdom, and not otherwise; but whereas his life is continually progressing, nothing can remain stationary, therefore all created things change their locality, their form, and their thoughts. So neither the earth nor any other created object can say, I am; but rather, I was. So no man can say, I think; but rather, I thought. The boy is greater and different from the child; he has different desires, inclinations, and thoughts. The man and father feels and thinks. differently from the boy, the old man just the same. Everybody knows that. Besides, everybody knows and must acknowledge that he is now changing, that he changes every minute even while he says, I am, and that his thoughts change even while he says, I think. Instead, then, of imitating Finda's wicked people, and saying, I am the best part of Wr-alda, and through us alone he can think,

[p. 142] [p. 143]

we proclaim everywhere where it is necessary, We, Frya's children, exist through Wr-alda's life--in the beginning mean and base, but always advancing towards perfection without ever attaining the excellence of Wr-alda himself. Our spirit is not Wr-alda's spirit, it is merely a shadow of it. When Wr-alda created us, he lent us his wisdom, brains, organs, memory, and many other good qualities. By this means we are able to contemplate his creatures and his laws; by this means we can learn and can speak of them always, and only for our own benefit. If Wr-alda had given us no organs, we should have known nothing, and been more irrational than a piece of sea-weed driven up and down by the ebb and flood.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIS IS WRITTEN ON PARCHMENT--"SKRIVFILT." SPEECH AND ANSWER TO OTHER MAIDENS AS AN EXAMPLE.

An unsociable, avaricious man came to complain to Troost, who was the maid of Stavia. He said a thunderstorm had destroyed his house. He had prayed to Wr-alda, but Wr-alda had given him no help. Are you a true Frisian? Troost asked. From father and forefathers, replied the man. Then she said, I will sow something in your conscience, in confidence that it will take root, grow, and bear fruit. She continued, When Frya was born, our mother stood naked and bare, unprotected from the rays of the sun. She could ask no one, and there was no one who could give her any help. Then Wr-alda wrought in her conscience inclination and love, anxiety and fright. She looked round her, and her inclination chose the best. She sought a hiding-place under the sheltering lime-trees, but the rain came, and the difficulty was that she got wet. She had seen.

[p. 144] [p. 145]

how the water ran down the pendent leaves; so she made a roof of leaves fastened with sticks, but the wind blew the rain under it. She observed that the stem would afford protection. She then built a wall of sods, first on one side, and then all round. The wind grew stronger and blew away the roof, but she made no complaint of Wr-alda. She made a roof of rushes, and put stones upon it. Having found how hard it is to toil alone, she showed her children how and why she had done it. They acted and thought as she did. This is the way in which we became possessed of houses and porches, a street, and lime-trees to protect us from the rays of the sun. At last we have built a citadel, and all the rest. If your house is not strong enough, then you must try and make another. My house was strong enough, he said, but the flood and the wind destroyed it. Where did your house stand? Troost asked. On the bank of the Rhine, he answered. Did it not stand on a knoll? Troost asked. No, said the man; my house stood alone on the bank. I built it alone, but I could not alone make a hillock. I knew it, Troost answered; the maidens told me. All your life you have avoided your neighbours, fearing that you might have to give or do something for them; but one cannot get on in the world in that way, for Wr-alda, who is kind, turns away from the niggardly. Fasta has advised us, and it is engraved in stone over all our doors. If you are selfish, distrustful towards your neighbours, teach your neighbours, help your neighbours, and they will return the same to yon. If this advice is not good enough for you, I can give you no better. The man blushed for shame, and slunk away.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146] [p. 147]

  

NOW I WILL WRITE MYSELF, FIRST ABOUT MY CITADEL, AND THEN ABOUT WHAT I HAVE BEEN ABLE TO SEE.

My city lies near the north end of the Liudgaarde. The tower has six sides, and is ninety feet high, fiat-roofed, with a small house upon it out of which they look at the stars. On either side of the tower is a house three hundred feet long, and twenty-one feet broad, and twenty-one feet high, besides the roof, which is round. All this is built of hard-baked bricks, and outside there is nothing else. The citadel is surrounded by a dyke, with a moat thirty-six feet broad and twenty-one feet deep. If one looks down from the tower, he sees the form of the Juul. In the ground among the houses on the south side all kinds of native and foreign herbs grow, of which the maidens must study the qualities. Among the houses on the north side there are only fields. The three houses on the north are full of corn and other necessaries; the two houses on the south are for the maidens to live in and keep school. The most southern house is the dwelling of the Burgtmaagd. In the tower hangs the lamp. The walls of the tower are decorated with precious stones. On the south wall the Tex is inscribed. On the right side of this are the formulae, and on the other side the laws; the other things are found upon the three other sides. Against the dyke, near the house of the Burgtmaagd, stand the oven and the mill, worked by four oxen. Outside the citadel wall is the place where the Burgtheeren and the soldiers live. The fortification outside is an hour long--not a seaman's hour, but an hour of the sun, of which twenty-four go to a day. Inside it is a plain five feet below the top. On it are three hundred crossbows covered with wood and leather.

Besides the houses of the inhabitants, there are along

[p. 148] [p. 149]

the inside of the dyke thirty-six refuge-houses for the people who live in the neighbourhood. The field serves for a camp and for a meadow. On the south side of the outer fortification is the Liudgaarde, enclosed by the great wood of lime-trees. Its shape is three-cornered, with the widest part outside, so that the sun may shine in it, for there are a great number of foreign trees and flowers brought by the seafarers. All the other citadels are the same shape as ours, only not so large; but the largest of all is that of Texland. The tower of the Fryaburgt is so high that it rends the sky, and all the rest is in proportion to the tower. In our citadel this is the arrangement: Seven young maidens attend to the lamp; each watch is three hours. In the rest of their time they do housework, learn, and sleep. When they have watched for seven years, they are free; then they may go among the people, to look after their morals and to give advice. When they have been three years maidens, they may sometimes accompany the older ones.

The writer must teach the girls to read, to write, and to reckon. The elders, or "Greva," must teach them justice and duty, morals, botany, and medicine, history, traditions, and singing, besides all that may be necessary for them to give advice. The Burgtmaagd must teach them how to set to work when they go among the people. Before a Burgtmaagd can take office, she must travel through the country a whole year. Three grey-headed Burgtheeren and three old maidens must go with her. This was the way that I did. My journey was along the Rhine--on this side up, and on the other side down. The higher I went, the poorer the people seemed to be. Everywhere about the Rhine the people dug holes, and the sand that was got out was poured with water over fleeces to get the gold, but the girls did not wear golden crowns of it. Formerly they were

[p. 150] [p. 151]

more numerous, but since we lost Schoonland they have gone up to the mountains. There they dig ore and make iron. Above the Rhine among the mountains I have seen Marsaten. The Marsaten are people who live on the lakes. Their houses are, built upon piles, for protection from the wild beasts and wicked people. There are wolves, bears, and horrible lions [**]. Then come the Swiss [*+], the nearest to the frontiers of the distant Italians, the followers of Kalta and the savage Twiskar, all greedy for robbery and booty. The Marsaten gain their livelihood by fishing and hunting. The skins are sewn together by the women, and prepared with birch bark. The small skins are as soft as a woman's skin. The Burgtmaagd at Fryasburgt [*++] (Freiburg) told us that they were good, simple people; but if I had not heard her speak of them first, I should have thought that they were not Frya's people, they looked so impudent. Their wool and herbs are bought by the Rhine people, and taken to foreign countries by the ship captains. Along the other side of the Rhine it was just the same as at Lydasburcht [* section] (Leiden). There was a great river or lake [***], and upon this lake also there were people living upon piles. But they were not Frya's people; they were black and brown men who had been employed as rowers to bring home the men who had been making foreign voyages, and they had to stay there till the fleet went back.

At last we came to Alderga. At the head of the south harbour lies the Waraburgt, built of stone, in which all kinds of clothes, weapons, shells, and horns are kept, which were brought by the sea-people from distant lands. A quarter of an hour's distance from there is Alderga, a great river surrounded by houses, sheds, and gardens, all richly decorated. In the river lay a great fleet ready, with banners of all sorts of colours. On Frya's day the shields were hung on board likewise. Some shone

[p. 152] [p. 153]

like the sun. The shields of the sea-king and the admiral were bordered with gold. From the river a canal was dug going past the citadel. Forana [**] (Vroonen), with a narrow outlet to the sea. This was the egress of the fleet; the Fly was the ingress [*+]. On both sides of the river are fine houses built, painted in bright colours. The gardens are all surrounded by green hedges. I saw there women wearing felt tunics, as if it were writing felt. [*1] Just as at Staveren, the girls wore golden crowns on their heads, and rings on their arms and ankles. To the south of Forana lies Alkmarum. Alkmarum is a lake or river in which there is an island. On this island the black and brown people must remain, the same as at Lydasburgt. The Burgtmaagd of Forana told me that the burgtheeren go every day to teach them what real freedom is, and how it behoves men to live in order to obtain the blessing of Wr-alda's spirit [*++]. If there was any one who was willing to listen and could comprehend, he was kept there till he was fully taught. That was done in order to instruct the distant people, and to make friends everywhere. I had been before in the Saxenmarken, at the Mannagardaforda [* section] castle (Munster). There I saw more poverty than I could discover wealth here. She answered: So whenever at the Saxenmarken a young man courts a young girl, the girls ask : Can you keep your house free from the banished Twisklanders? Have you ever killed any of them ? How many cattle have you already caught, and how many bear and wolfskins have you brought to market ? And from this it comes that the Saxons have left the cultivation of the soil to the women, that not one in a hundred can read or write ; from this it comes, too, that no one has a motto on his shield, but only a misshapen form of some animal that he has killed;

[p. 154] [p. 155]

and lastly, from this comes also that they are very warlike, but sometimes as stupid as the beasts that they catch, and as poor as the Twisklanders with whom they go to war. The earth and the sea were made for Frya's people. All our rivers run into the sea. The Lydas people and the Findas people will exterminate each other, and we must people the empty countries. In movement and sailing is our prosperity. If you wish the highlanders to share our riches and wisdom, I will give you a piece of advice. Let the girls, when they are asked to marry, before they say yes, ask their lovers: What parts of the world have you travelled in? What can you tell your children about distant lands and distant people? If they do this, then the young warriors will come to us; they will become wiser and richer, and we shall have no occasion to deal with those nasty people. The youngest of the maids who were with me came from the Saxenmarken. When we came back she asked leave to go home. Afterwards she became Burgtmaagd there, and that is the reason why in these days so many of our sailors are Saxons.

 

 

END OF APOLLONIA'S BOOK

 

 

 

Footnotes

^151:* Lions in Europe, see Herodotus, vii. 125.

^151:+ Swetsar are Swiss.

^151:++ Fryasburch is Freiburg.

^151: section Lydasburch is Leyden, the city.

^151:** Flyt, jeftha mare, is a lake or sea.

^153:1 Felt, very thin and compressed, with a smooth surface.

^153:* Forana is Vroonen.

^153:+ Engamuda is Egmond.

^153:++ Diodorus Siculus. v. 27, on the Gauls.

^153: section Mannagardaforda is Munster.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156] [p. 157]

  

THE WRITINGS OF FRETHORIK AND WILJOW.

MY name is Frethorik, surnamed oera Linda, which means over the Linden. In Ljndwardia I was chosen as Asga. Ljndwardia is a new village within the fortification of the Ljudgaarda, of which the name has fallen into disrepute. In my time much has happened. I had written a good deal about it, but afterwards much more was related to me. I will write an account of both one and the other after this book, to the honour of the good people and to the disgrace of the bad.

In my youth I heard complaints on all sides. The bad time was coming; the bad time did come--Frya had forsaken us. She withheld from us all her watch-maidens, because monstrous idolatrous images had been found within our landmarks. I burnt with curiosity to see those images. In our neighbourhood a little old woman tottered in and out of the houses, always calling out about the bad times. I came to her; she stroked my chin; then I became bold, and asked her if she would show me the bad times and the images. She laughed good-naturedly, and took me to the citadel. An old man asked me if I could read and write. No, I said. Then you must first go and learn, he replied, otherwise it may not be shown to you. I went daily to the writer and learnt. Eight years afterwards I heard that our Burgtmaagd had been unchaste, and that some of the burgtheeren had committed treason with the Magy, and many people took their part. Everywhere disputes arose. There were children rebelling against their parents; good

[p. 158] [p. 159]

people were secretly murdered. The little old woman who had brought everything to light was found dead in a ditch. My father, who was a judge, would have her avenged. He was murdered in the night in his own house. Three years after that the Magy was master without any resistance. The Saxmen had remained religious and upright. All the good people fled to them. My mother died of it. Now I did like the others. The Magy prided himself upon his canning, but Irtha made him know that she would not tolerate any Magy or idol on the holy bosom that had borne Frya. As a wild horse tosses his mane after he has thrown his rider, so Irtha shook her forests and her mountains. Rivers flowed over the land; the sea raged; mountains spouted fire to the clouds, and what they vomited forth the clouds flung upon the earth. At the beginning of the Arnemaand (harvest month) the earth bowed towards the north, and sank down lower and lower. In the Welvenmaand (winter month) the low lands of Fryasland were buried under the sea. The woods in which the images were, were torn up and scattered by the wind. The following year the frost came in the Hardemaand (Louwmaand, January), and laid Fryasland concealed under a sheet of ice. In Sellemaand (Sprokkelmaand, February) there were storms of wind from the north, driving mountains of ice and stones. When the spring-tides came the earth raised herself up, the ice melted; with the ebb the forests with the images drifted out to sea. In the Winne, or Minnemaand (Bloeimaand, May), every one who dared went home. I came with a maiden to the citadel Liudgaarde. How sad it looked there. The forests of the Lindaoorden were almost all gone. Where Liudgaarde used to be was sea. The waves swept over the fortifications. Ice had destroyed the tower, and the houses lay heaped over each other. On the slope of the dyke I found a stone

[p. 160] [p. 161]

on which the writer had inscribed his name. That was a sign to me. The same thing had happened to other citadels as to ours. In the upper lands they had been destroyed by the earth, in the lower lands by the water. Fryasburgt, at Texland, was the only one found uninjured, but all the land to the north was sunk under the sea, and has never been recovered. At the mouth of the Flymeer, as we were told, thirty salt swamps were found, consisting of the forest and the ground that had been swept away. At Westflyland there were fifty. The canal which had run across the land from Alderga was filled up with sand and destroyed. The seafaring people and other travellers who were at home had saved themselves, their goods, and their relations upon their ships. But the black people at Lydasburgt and Alkmarum had done the same; and as they went south they saved many girls, and as no one came to claim them, they took them for their wives. The people who came back all lived within the lines of the citadel, as outside there was nothing but mud and marsh. The old houses were all smashed together. People bought cattle and sheep from the upper lands, and in the great houses where formerly the maidens were established cloth and felt were made for a livelihood. This happened 1888 years after the submersion of Atland [**].

For 282 [*+] years we had not had an Eeremoeder, and now, when everything seemed lost, they set about choosing one. The lot fell upon Gosa, surnamed Makonta. She was Burgtmaagd at Fryasburgt, in Texland. She had a clear head and strong sense, and was very good; and as her citadel was the only one that had been spared, every one saw in that her call. Ten years after that the seafarers came from Forana and Lydasburgt. They wished to drive the black men, with their wives and children, out of the country. They wished to obtain the opinion of the mother upon the subject. She asked them:

[p. 162] [p. 163]

[paragraph continues] Can you send them all back to their country? If so, then lose no time, or they will find no relatives alive. No, they said. Goss replied: They have eaten your bread and salt; they have placed themselves entirely under your protection. You must consult your own hearts. But I will give you one piece of advice. Keep them till you are able to send them back, but keep them outside your citadels. Watch over their morals, and educate them as if they were Frya's sons. Their women are the strongest here. Their blood will disappear like smoke, till at last nothing but Frya's blood will remain in their descendants. So they remained here. Now, I should wish that my descendants should observe in how far Goss spoke the truth. When our country began to recover, there came troops of poor Saxon men and women to the neighbourhoods of Staveren and Alderga, to search for gold and other treasures in the swampy lands. But the sea-people would not permit it, so they went and settled in the empty village of the West Flyland in order to preserve their lives.

Footnotes

^161:* 2193-1888 is 305 before Christ.

^161:+ Since 587 before Christ. See pages <page 110> and <page 112>.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOW I WILL RELATE HOW THE GEERTMAN AND MANY FOLLOWERS OF HELLENIA CAME BACK.

Two years after Gosa had become the mother (303 B.C.) [**] there arrived a fleet at Flymeer. The people shouted "Ho-n-seen" (What a blessing). They sailed to Staveren, where they shouted again. Their flags were hoisted, and at night they shot lighted arrows [*+] into the air. At daylight some of them rowed into the harbour in a boat, shouting again, "Ho-n-seen." When they landed a young fellow jumped upon the rampart. In his hand he held a shield on which bread and salt were laid. After him came a grey-headed man, who said we come from

[p. 164] [p. 165]

the distant Greek land to preserve our customs. Now we wish you to be kind enough to give us as much land as will enable us to live. He told a long story, which I will hereafter relate more fully. The old man did not know what to do. They sent messengers all round, also to me. I went, and said now that we have a mother it behoves us to ask her advice. I went with them myself. The mother, who already knew it all, said: Let them come, they will help us to keep our lands, but do not let them remain in one place, that they may not become too powerful over us. We did as she said, which was quite to their liking. Fryso remained with his people at Staveren, which they made again into a port as well as they could. Wichhirte went with his people eastwards to the Emude. Some of the descendants of Jon who imagined that they sprang from the Alderga people went there. A small number, who fancied that their forefathers had come from the seven islands, went there and set themselves down within the enclosure of the citadel of Walhallagara. Liudgert, the admiral of Wichhirt, was my comrade, and afterwards my friend. Out of his diary I have taken the following history.

After we had been settled 12 times 100 and twice 12 years [*+] in the Five Waters (Punjab), whilst our naval warriors were navigating all the seas they could find, came Alexander [**] the King, with a powerful army descending the river towards our villages. No one could withstand him; but we sea-people, who lived by the sea, put all our possessions on board ships and took our departure. When Alexander heard that such a large fleet had escaped him, he became furious, and swore that he would burn all the villages if we did not come back. Wichhirte was ill in bed. When Alexander heard that, he waited till he was better. After that he came to him, speaking very kindly--but he deceived,

[p. 166] [p. 167]

as he had done before. Wichhirte answered: Oh greatest of kings, we sailors go everywhere; we have heard of your great deeds, therefore we are full of respect for your arms, and still more for your wisdom; but we who are free-born Fryas children, we may mot become your slaves; and even if I would, the others would sooner die, for so it is commanded in our laws. Alexander said: I do not desire to take your land or make slaves of your people, I only wish to hire your services. That I will swear by both our Gods, so that no one may be dissatisfied. When Alexander shared bread and salt with him, Wichhirte had chosen the wisest part. He let his son fetch the ships. When they were all come back Alexander hired them all. By means of them he wished to transport his people to the holy Ganges, which he had not been able to reach. Then he chose among all his people and soldiers those who were accustomed to the sea. Wichhirte had fallen sick again, therefore I went alone with Nearchus, sent by the king. The voyage came to an end without any advantage, because the Joniers and the Phoenicians were always quarrelling, so that Nearchus himself could not keep them in order. In the meantime, the king had not sat still. He had let his soldiers cut down trees and make planks, with which, with the help of our carpenters, he had built ships. Now he would himself become a sea-king, and sail with his whole army up the Ganges; but the soldiers who came from the mountainous countries were afraid of the sea. When they heard that they must sail, they set fire to the timber yards, and so our whole village was laid in ashes. At first we thought that this had been done by Alexander's orders, and we were all ready to cast ourselves into the sea: but Alexander was furious, and wished his own people to kill the soldiers. However, Nearchus,

[p. 168] [p. 169]

who was not only his chief officer, but also his friend, advised him not to do so. So he pretended to believe that it had happened by accident, and said no more about it. He wished now to return, but before going he made an inquiry who really were the guilty ones. As soon as he ascertained it, he had them all disarmed, and made them build a new village. His own people he kept under arms to overawe the others, and to build a citadel. We were to take the women and children with us. When we arrived at the mouth of the Euphrates, we might either choose a place to settle there or come back. Our pay would be guaranteed to us the same in either case. Upon the new ships which had been saved from the fire he embarked the Joniers and the Greeks. He himself went with the rest of his people along the coast, through the barren wilderness; that is, through the land that she had heaved up out of the sea when she had raised up the strait as soon as our forefathers had passed into the Red Sea.

When we arrived at New Gertmania (New Gertmania is the port that we had made in order to take in water), we met Alexander with his army. Nearchus went ashore, and stayed three days. Then we proceeded further on. When we came to the Euphrates, Nearchus went ashore with the soldiers and a large body of people; but he soon returned, and said, The Bing requests you, for his sake, to go a voyage up the Red Sea; after that each shall receive as much gold as he can carry. When we arrived there, he showed us where the strait had formerly been. There he spent thirty-one days, always looking steadily towards the desert.

At last there arrived a great troop of people, bringing with them 200 elephants, 1000 camels, a quantity of timber, ropes, and all kinds of implements necessary to drag our fleet to the Mediterranean Sea. This astounded us, and seemed

[p. 170] [p. 171]

most extraordinary; but Nearchus told us that his king wished to show to the other kings that he was more powerful than any kings of Tyre had ever been. We were only to assist, and that surely could do us no harm. We were obliged to yield, and Nearchus knew so well how to regulate everything, that before three months had elapsed our ships lay in the Mediterranean Sea. When Alexander ascertained how his project had succeeded, he became so audacious that he wished to dig out the dried-up strait in defiance of Irtha; but Wr-alda deserted his soul, so that he destroyed himself by wine and rashness before he could begin it. After his death his kingdom was divided among his princes. They were each to have preserved a share for his sons, but that was not their intention. Each wished to keep his own share, and to get more. Then war arose, and we could not return. Nearchus wished us to settle on the coast of Phoenicia, but that no one would do. We said we would rather risk the attempt to return to Fryasland. Then he brought us to the new port of Athens, where all the true children of Frya had formerly gone. We went, soldiers with our goods and weapons. Among the many princes Nearchus had a friend named Antigonus. These two had only one object in view, as they told us--to help the royal race, and to restore freedom to all the Greek lands. Antigonus had, among many others, one son named Demetrius, afterwards called the "City Winner." He went once to the town of Salamis, and after he had been some time fighting there, he had an engagement with the fleet of Ptolemy. Ptolemy was the name of the prince who reigned over Egypt. Demetrius won the battle, not by his own soldiers, but because we helped him. We had done this out of friendship for Nearchus, because we knew that he was of bastard birth by his white skin, blue eyes, and

[p. 172] [p. 173]

fair hair. Afterwards, Demetrius attacked Rhodes [**], and we transported thither his soldiers and provisions. When we made our last voyage to Rhodes, the war was finished. Demetrius had sailed to Athens. When we came into the harbour, the whole village was in deep mourning. Friso, who was king over the fleet, had a son and a daughter so remarkably fair, as if they had just come out of Fryasland, and more beautiful than any one could picture to himself. The fame of this went all over Greece, and came to the ears of Demetrius. Demetrius was vile and immoral, and thought he could do as he pleased. He carried off the daughter. The mother did not dare await the return of her joi [*+] (the sailors wives call their husbands joi or zoethart (sweetheart). The men call their wives troost (comfort) and fro or frow, that is, vreuyde (delight) and frolic; that is the same as vreugde.

As she dared not wait for her husband's return, she went with her son to Demetrius, and implored him to send back her daughter; but when Demetrius saw the son he had him taken to his palace, and did to him as he had done to his sister. He sent a bag of gold to the mother, which she flung into the sea. When she came home she was out of her mind, and ran about the streets calling out: Have you seen my children. Woe is me! let me find a place to hide in, for my husband will kill me because I have lost his children.

When Demetrius heard that Friso had come home, he sent messengers to him to say that he had taken his children to raise them to high rank, and to reward him for his services. But Friso was proud and passionate, and sent a messenger with a letter to his children, in which he recommended them to accept the will of Demetrius, as he wished to promote their happiness; but the messenger had another letter with poison, which he ordered them to take:

[p. 174] [p. 175]

But, said he, your bodies have been defiled against your will. That you are not to blame for; but if your souls are not pure, you will never come into Walhalla. Your spirits will haunt the earth in darkness. Like the bats and owls, you will hide yourselves in the daytime in boles, and in the night will come and shriek and cry about our graves, while Frya must turn her head away from you. The children did as their father had commanded. The messenger had their bodies thrown into the sea, and it was reported that they had fled. Now Friso wished to go with all his people to Frya's land, where he had been formerly, but most of them would not go. So Friso set fire to the village and all the royal storehouses; then no one could remain there, and all were glad to be out of it. We left everything behind us except wives and children, but we had an ample stock of provisions and warlike implements.

Friso was not yet satisfied. When we came to the old harbour, he went off with his stout soldiers and threw fire into all the ships that he could reach with his arrows. Six days later we saw the war-fleet of Demetrius coming down upon us. Friso ordered us to keep back the small ships in a broad line, and to put the large ships with the women and children in front. Further, he ordered us to take the crossbows that were in the fore part and fix them on the sterns of the ships, because, said he, we must fight a retreating battle. No man must presume to pursue a single enemy--that is my order. While we were busy about this, all at once the wind came ahead, to the great alarm of the cowards and the women, because we had no slaves except those who had voluntarily followed us. Therefore we could not escape the enemy by rowing. But Wr-alda knew well why he

[p. 176] [p. 177]

did this; and Friso, who understood it, immediately had the fire-arrows placed on the crossbows. At the same time he gave the order that no one should shoot before he did, and that we should all aim at the centre ship. If we succeeded in this, he said, the others would all go to its assistance, and then everybody might shoot as he best was able. When we were at a cable and a half distance from them the Phoenicians began to shoot, but Friso did not reply till the first arrow fell six fathoms from his ship. Then he fired, and the rest followed. It was like a shower of fire; and as our arrows went with the wind, they all remained alight and reached the third line. Everybody shouted and cheered, but the screams of our opponents were so loud that our hearts shrank. When Friso thought that it was sufficient he called us off, and we sped away; but after two days' slow sailing another fleet of thirty ships came in sight and gained upon us. Friso cleared for action again, but the others sent forward a small rowing-boat with messengers, who asked permission to sail with us, as they were Joniers. They had been compelled by Demetrius to go to the old haven; there they had heard of the battle, and girding on their stout swords, had followed us. Friso, who had sailed a good deal with the Joniers, said Yes; but Wichirte, our king, said No. The Joniers, said he, are worshippers of heathen gods; I myself have heard them call upon them. That comes from their intercourse with the real Greeks, Friso said. I have often done it myself, and yet I am as pious a Fryas man as any of you. Friso was the man to take us to Friesland, therefore the Joniers went with us. It seems that this was pleasing to Wr-alda, for before three months were past we coasted along Britain, and three days later we could shout huzza.

Footnotes

^163:* 303 before Christ.

^163:+ Barnpila, De falarica, Livy, xxi. 8.

^165:* Alexander at the Indus, 327 before Christ.

^165:+ 327+1224 is 1551 before Christ.

^173:* 305 before Christ.

^173:+ Joi en trast. At Scheveningen you still hear "Joei en troos." Joi is the French joye.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178] [p. 179]

  

THIS WRITING HAS BEEN GIVEN TO ME ABOUT NORTHLAND AND SCHOONLAND (SCANDINAVIA).

When our land was submerged I was in Schoonland. It was very bad there. There were great lakes which rose from the earth like bubbles, then burst asunder, and from the rents flowed a stuff like red-hot iron. The tops of high mountains fell and destroyed whole forests and villages. I myself saw one mountain torn from another and fall straight down. When I afterwards went to see the place there was a lake there. When the earth was composed there came a duke of Lindasburgt with his people, and one maiden who cried everywhere, Magy is the cause of all the misery that we have suffered. They continued their progress, and their hosts increased. The Malty fled, and his corpse was found where he had killed himself. Then the Finns were driven to one place where they might live. There were some of mixed blood who were allowed to stay, but most of them went with the Finns. The duke was chosen as king. The temples which had remained whole were destroyed. Since that time the good Northmen come often to Texland for the advice of the mother; still we cannot consider them real Frisians. In Denmark it has certainly happened as with us. The sea-people, who call themselves famous sea-warriors, went on board their ships, and afterwards went back again.

Heil!

Whenever the Carrier has completed a period, then posterity shall understand that the faults and misdeeds that the Brokmannen have brought with them belonged to their forefathers; therefore I will watch, and will describe as much of their manners as I have seen. The Geertmannen I can

[p. 180] [p. 181]

readily pass by. I have not had much to do with them, but as far as I have seen they have mostly retained their language and customs. I cannot say that of the others. Those who descend from the Greeks speak a bad language, and have not much to boast of in their manners. Many have brown eyes and hair. They are envious and impudent, and cowardly from superstition. When they speak, they put the words first that ought to come last. For old they say at; for salt, sat; and for man, ma--too many to mention. They also use abbreviations of names, which have no meaning. The Joniers speak better, but they drop the H, and put it where it ought not to be. When they make a statue of a dead person they believe that the spirit of the departed enters into it; therefore they have hidden their statues of Frya, Fasta, Medea, Thiania, Hellenia, and many others. When a child is born, all the relatives come together and pray to Frya to send her servants to bless the child. When they have prayed, they must neither move nor speak. If the child begins to cry, and continues some time, it is a bad sign, and they suspect that the mother has committed adultery. I have seen very bad things come from that. If the child sleeps, that is a good sign--Frya's servants are come. If it laughs in its sleep, the servants have promised it happiness. Moreover, they believe in bad spirits, witches, sorcerers, dwarfs, and elves, as if they descended from the Finns. Herewith I will finish, and I think I have written more than any of my forefathers. Frethorik.

Frethorik, my husband, lived to the age of 63. Since 108 years he is the first of his race who died a

[p. 182] [p. 183]

peaceable death; all the others died by violence, because they all fought with their own people, and with foreigners for right and duty.

My name is Wiljo. I am the maiden who came home with him from Saxsenmarken. In the course of conversation it came out that we were both of Adela's race--thus our affection commenced, and we became man and wife. He left me with five children, two sons and three daughters. Konreed was my eldest son, Hachgana my second. My eldest daughter is called Adela, my second Frulik, and the youngest Nocht. When I went to Saxsenmarken I preserved three books--the book of songs, the book of narratives, and the Hellenia book.

I write this in order that people may not think they were by Apollonia. I have had a good deal of annoyance about this, and therefore now wish to have the honour of it. I also did more. When Gosa Makonta died, whose goodness and clear-sightedness have become a proverb, I went alone to Texland to copy the writings that she had left; and when the last will of Frana was found, and the writings left by Adela or Hellenia, I did that again. These are the writings of Hellenia. I have put them first because they are the oldest.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HAIL TO ALL TRUE FRISIANS.

In the olden times, the Slavonic race knew nothing of liberty. They were brought under the yoke like oxen. They were driven into the bowels of the earth to dig metals, and had to build houses of stone as dwelling-places for princes and priests. Of all that they did nothing came to themselves, everything must serve to enrich and make more powerful the priests and the princes, and to satisfy them. Under this treatment they grew

[p. 184] [p. 185]

gray and old before their time, and died without any enjoyment; although the earth produces abundantly for the good of all her children. But our runaways and exiles came through Twiskland to their boundaries, and our sailors came to their harbours. From them they heard of liberty, of justice, and laws, without which men cannot exist. This was all absorbed by the unhappy people like dew into an arid soil. When they fully understood this, the most courageous among them began to clank their chains, which grieved the princes. The princes are proud and warlike; there is therefore some virtue in their hearts. They consulted together and bestowed some of their superfluity; but the cowardly hypocritical priests could not suffer this. Among their false gods they had invented also wicked cruel monsters. Pestilence broke out in the country; and they said that the gods were angry with the domineering of the wicked. Then the boldest of the people were strangled in their chains. The earth drank their blood, and that blood produced corn and fruits that inspired with wisdom those who ate them.

Sixteen hundred years ago (she writes, 593 B.C. [**]), Atland was submerged; and at that time something happened which nobody had reckoned upon. In the heart of Findasland, upon a mountain, lies a plain called Kasamyr [*+] (Cashmere) that is "extraordinary." There was a child born whose mother was the daughter of a king, and whose father was a high-priest. In order to hide the shame they were obliged to renounce their own blood. Therefore it was taken out of the town to poor people. As the boy grew up, nothing was concealed from him, so he did all in his power to acquire wisdom. His intellect was so great that he understood everything that he saw or heard. The people regarded him with respect, and the priests were afraid of his questions. When he was of full age he went to his

[p. 186] [p. 187]

parents. They had to listen to some hard language; and to get rid of him they gave him a quantity of jewels, but they dared not openly acknowledge him. Overcome with sorrow at the false shame of his parents, he wandered about. While travelling he fell in with a Frisian sailor who was serving as a slave, and who taught him our manners and customs. He bought the freedom of the slave, and they remained friends till death. Wherever he went he taught the people not to tolerate rich men or priests, and that they must guard themselves against false shame, which everywhere did harm to love and charity. The earth, he said, bestowed her treasures on those who scratch her skin; so all are obliged to dig, and plough, and sow if they wish to reap, but no one is obliged to do anything for another unless it be out of goodwill. He taught that men should not seek in her bowels for gold, or silver, or precious stones, which occasion envy and destroy love. To embellish your wives and daughters, he said, the river offers her pare stream. No man is able to make everybody equally rich and happy, but it is the duty of all men to make each other as equally rich and as happy as possible. Men should not despise any knowledge; but justice is the greatest knowledge that time can teach, because she wards off offences and promotes love.

His first name was Jessos [**], but the priests, who hated him, called him Fo, that is, false; the people called him Krishna, that is, shepherd; and his Frisian friend called him Buddha (purse), because he had in his head a treasure of wisdom, and in his heart a treasure of love.

At last he was obliged to flee from the wrath of the priests; but wherever he went his teaching had preceded him, whilst his enemies followed him like

[p. 188] [p. 189]

his shadow. When Jessos had thus travelled for twelve years he died; but his friends preserved his teaching, and spread it wherever they found listeners.

What do you think the priests did then? That I must tell you, and you must give your best attention to it. Moreover, you must keep guard against their acts and their tricks with all the strength that Wr-alda has given you. While the doctrine of Jessos was thus spreading over the earth, the false priests went to the land of his birth to make his death known. They said they were his friends, and they pretended to show great sorrow by tearing their clothes and shaving their heads. They went to live in caves in the mountains, but in them they had hid all their treasures, and they made in them images of Jessos. They gave these statues to simple people, and at last they said that Jessos was a god, that he had declared this himself to them, and that all those who followed his doctrine should enter his kingdom hereafter, where all was joy and happiness. Because they knew that he was opposed to the rich, they announced everywhere that poverty, suffering, and humility were the door by which to enter into his kingdom, and that those who had suffered the most on earth should enjoy the greatest happiness there. Although they knew that Jessos had taught that men should regulate and control their passions, they taught that men should stifle their passions, and that the perfection of humanity consisted in being as unfeeling as the cold stones. In order to make the people believe that they did as they preached, they pretended to outward poverty; and that they had overcome all sensual feelings, they took no wives. But if any young girl had made a false step, it was quickly forgiven; the weak, they said, were to be assisted, and to save

[p. 190] [p. 191]

their souls men must give largely to the Church. Acting in this way, they had wives and children without households, and were rich without working; but the people grew poorer and more miserable than they had ever been before. This doctrine, which requires the priests to possess no further knowledge than to speak deceitfully, and to pretend to be pious while acting unjustly, spreads from east to west, and will come to our land also.

But when the priests fancy that they have entirely extinguished the light of Frya and Jessos, then shall all classes of men rise up who have quietly preserved the truth among themselves, and have hidden it from the priests. They shall be of princely blood of priests, Slavonic, and Frya's blood. They will make their light visible, so that all men shall see the truth; they shall cry woe to the acts of the princes and the priests. The princes who love the truth and justice shall separate themselves from the priests; blood shall flow, but from it the people will gather new strength. Finda's folk shall contribute their industry to the common good, Linda's folk their strength, and we our wisdom. Then the false priests shall be swept away from the earth. Wr-alda's spirit shall be invoked everywhere and always; the laws that Wr-alda in the beginning instilled into our consciences shall alone be listened to. There shall be neither princes, nor masters, nor rulers, except those chosen by the general voice. Then Frya shall rejoice, and the earth will only bestow her gifts on those who work. All this shall begin 4000 years after the submersion of Atland, and 1000 years later there shall exist no longer either priest or oppression.

Dela, surnamed Hellenia, watch!

[p. 192] [p. 193]

Thus runs Frana's last will: All noble Frisians, Heil! In the name of Wr-alda, of Frya, and of Freedom, I greet you; and pray you if I die before I have named a successor, then I recommend to you Teuntja, who is Burgtmaagd in the citadel of Medeasblik; till now she is the best.

This Gosa has left behind her: Hail to all men! I have named no Eeremoeder, because I know none, and because it is better for you to have no mother than to have one you cannot trust. One bad time is passed by, but there is still another coming. Irtha has not given it birth, and Wr-alda has not decreed it. It comes from the East, out of the bosom of the priests. It will breed so much mischief that Irtha will not be able to drink the blood of her slain children. It will spread darkness over the minds of men like storm-clouds over the sunlight. Everywhere craft and deception shall contend with freedom and justice. Freedom and justice shall be overcome, and we with them. But this success will work out its own loss. Our descendants shall teach their people and their slaves the meaning of three words; they are universal love, freedom, and justice. At first they shall shine, then struggle with darkness, until every man's head and heart has become bright and clear. Then shall oppression be driven from the earth, like the thunder-clouds by the storm-wind, and all deceit will cease to have any more power. Gosa.

Footnotes

^185:* 4193-1600 is 593 years before Christ.

^185:+ Kasamyr is Cashmere.

^187:* Jes-us--not to be confounded with Jesus any more than Krisen (Krishna) with Christ.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 194] [p. 195]

  

THE WRITING OF KONERED.

My forefathers have written this book in succession. I will do this, the more because there exists no longer in my state any citadel on which events are inscribed as used to be the case. My name is Konered (Koenraad). My father's name was Frethorik, my mother's name was Wiljow. After my father's death I was chosen as his successor. When I was fifty years old I was chosen for chief Grevetman. My father has written how the Lindaoorden and Lindgaarden were destroyed. Lindahem is still lost, the Lindaoorden partially, and the north Lindgaarden are still concealed by the salt sea. The foaming sea washes the ramparts of the castle. As my father has mentioned, the people, being deprived of their harbour, went away and built houses inside the ramparts of the citadel; therefore that bastion is called Lindwerd. The sea-people say Linwerd, but that is nonsense. In my youth there was a portion of land lying outside the rampart all mud and marsh; but Frya's people were neither tired nor exhausted when they had a good object in view. By digging ditches, and making dams of the earth that came out of the ditches, we recovered a good space of land outside the rampart, which had the form of a hoof three poles eastward, three southwards, and three westwards. At present we are engaged in ramming piles into the ground to make a harbour to protect our rampart. When the work is finished we shall attract mariners. In my youth it looked very queer, but now there stands a row of houses.

[p. 196] [p. 197]

[paragraph continues] Leaks and deficiencies produced by poverty have been remedied by industry. From this men may learn that Wr-alda, our universal father, protects all his creatures, if they preserve their courage and help each other.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOW I WILL WRITE ABOUT FRISO.

Friso, who was already powerful by his troops, was chosen chief Grevetman of the districts round Staveren. He laughed at our mode of defending our land and our sea-fights; therefore he established a school where the boys might learn to fight in the Greek manner, but I believe that he did it to attach the young people to himself. I sent my brother there ten years ago, because I thought, now that we have not got any mother, it behoves me to be doubly watchful, in order that he may not become our master.

Goss has given us no successors. I will not give any opinion about that; but there are still old suspicious people who think that she and Friso had an understanding about it. When Gosa died, the people from all parts wished to choose another mother; but Friso, who was busy establishing a kingdom for himself, did not desire to have any advice or messenger from Teerland. When the messengers of the Landsaten came to him, he said that Gosa had been far-seeing and wiser than all the counts together, and yet she had been unable to see any light or way out of this affair; therefore she had not had the courage to choose a successor, and to choose a doubtful one she thought would be very bad; therefore she wrote in her last will, It is better to have no mother than to have one on whom you cannot rely. Friso had seen a great deal. He had been brought up in the wars, and he had just learned and gathered as much of the tricks and

[p. 198] [p. 199]

cunning ways of the Gauls and the princes as he required, to lead the other counts wherever he wished. See here how he went to work about that.

Friso had taken here another wife, a daughter of Wilfrethe, who in his lifetime had been chief count of Staveren. By her he had two sons and two daughters. By his wish Kornelia, his youngest daughter, was married to my brother. Kornelia is not good Frisian; her name ought to be written Korn-helia. Weemoed, his eldest daughter, he married to Kauch. Kauch, who went to school to him, is the son of Wichhirte, the king of the Geertmen. But Kauch is likewise not good Frisian, and ought to be Kaap (Koop). So they have learned more bad language than good manners.

Now I must return to my story.

After the great flood of which my father wrote an account, there came many Jutlanders and Letlanders out of the Baltic, or bad sea [**]. They were driven down the Kattegat in their boats by the ice as far as the coast of Denmark, and there they remained. There was not a creature to be seen; so they took possession of the land, and named it after themselves, Jutland. Afterwards many of the Denmarkers returned from the higher lands, but they settled more to the south; and when the mariners returned who had not been lost, they all went together to Zeeland [*+]. By this arrangement the Jutlanders retained the laud to which Wr-alda had conducted them. The Zeeland skippers, who were not satisfied to live upon fish, and who hated the Gauls, took to robbing the Phoenician ships. In the south-west point of Scandinavia there lies Lindasburgt, called Lindasnose, built by one Apol, as is written in the book [*++]. All the people

[p. 200] [p. 201]

who live on the coasts, and in the neighbouring districts, had remained true Frisians; but by their desire for vengeance upon the Gauls, and the followers of Kaltona, they joined the Zeelanders. But that connection did not hold together, because the Zeelanders had adopted many evil manners and customs of the wicked Magyars, in opposition to Frya's people. Afterwards, everybody went stealing on his own account; but when it suited them they held all together. At last the Zeelanders began to be in want of good ships. Their shipbuilders had died, and their forests as well as their land had been washed out to sea. Now there arrived unexpectedly three ships, which anchored off the ringdyk of our citadel. By the disruption of our land they had lost themselves, and had missed Flymond. The merchant who was with them wished to buy new ships from us, and for that purpose had brought all kinds of valuables, which they had stolen from the Celtic country and Phoenician [**] ships. As we had no ships, I gave them active horses and four armed couriers to Friso; because at Stavere, along the Alberga, the best ships of war were built of hard oak which never rots. While these sea rovers remained with us, some of the Jutmen had gone to Tex-land, and thence to Friso. The Zeelanders had stolen many of their strongest boys to row their ships, and many of their finest daughters to have children by. The great Jutlanders could not prevent it, as they were not properly armed. When they had related all their misfortunes, and a good deal of conversation had taken place, Friso asked them at last if they had no good harbours in their country. Oh, yes, they answered; a beautiful one, created by Wr-alda. It is like a bottle, the neck narrow, but in the belly a thousand large boats may lie; but we have no citadel and no defences to keep out

[p. 202] [p. 203]

the pirate ships. Then you should make them, said Friso. That is very good advice, said the Jutlanders; but we have no workmen and no building materials; we are all fishermen and trawlers. The others are drowned or fled to the higher lands. While they were talking in this way, my messengers arrived at the court with the Zeeland gentlemen. Here you must observe how Friso understood deceiving everybody, to the satisfaction of both parties, and to the accomplishment of his own ends. To the Zeelanders he promised that they should have yearly fifty ships of a fixed size for a fixed price, fitted with iron chains and crossbows, and fall rigging as is necessary and useful for men-of-war, but that they should leave in peace the Jutlanders and all the people of Frya's race. But he wished to do more; he wanted to engage all our sea rovers to go with him upon his fighting expedition. When the Zeelanders had gone, he loaded forty old ships with weapons for wall defences, wood, bricks, carpenters, masons, and smiths, in order to build citadels. Witto, or Witte, his son, he sent to superintend. I have never been well informed of what happened; but this much is clear to me, that on each side of the harbour a strong citadel has been built, and garrisoned by people brought by Friso out of Saksenmarken. Witto courted Siuchthirte and married her. Wilhem, her father, was chief Alderman of the Jutmen--that is, chief Grevetman or Count. Wilhem died shortly afterwards, and Witte was chosen in his place.

Footnotes

^199:* Balda jefta kvade se is the Baltic. Juttarland is Jutland.

^199:+ Zeeland is the Danish Islands.

^199:++ See page <page 124>.

^201:* Phonisjar are Punics or Carthaginians.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

WHAT FRISO DID FURTHER.

Of his first wife he still had two brothers-in-law, who were very daring. Hetto--that is, heat--the youngest, he sent as messenger to Kattaburgt, which

[p. 204] [p. 205]

lies far in the Saxsenmarken. Friso gave him to take seven horses, besides his own, laden with precious things stolen by the sea-rovers. With each horse there were two young sea-rovers and two young horsemen, clad in rich garments, and with money in their purses. In the same way as he sent Hetto to Kattaburgt, he sent Bruno that is, brown--the other brother-in-law, to Mannagarda oord. Mannagarda oord was written Mannagarda ford in the earlier part of this book [**], but that is wrong. All the riches that they took with them were given away, according to circumstances, to princes, princesses, and chosen young girls. When his young men went to the tavern to dance with the young people there, they ordered baskets of spice, gingerbread, and tuns of the best beer. After these messengers he let his young people constantly go over to the Saxsenmarken, always with money in their purses and presents to give away, and they spent money carelessly in the taverns. When the Saxsen youths looked with envy at this they smiled, and said, If you dare go and fight the common enemy you would be able to give much richer presents to your brides, and live much more princely. Both the brothers-in-law of Friso had married daughters of the chief princes, and afterwards the Saxsen youths and girls came in whole troops to the Flymeer.

The burgtmaidens and old maidens who still remembered their greatness did not hold with Friso's object, and therefore they said no good of him; but Friso, more cunning than they, let them chatter, but the younger maidens he led to his side with golden fingers. They said everywhere, For a long time we have had no mother, but that comes from our being fit to take care of ourselves. At present it suits us best to have a king to win back our lands that we have lost through the imprudence of our mothers.

[p. 206] [p. 207]

[paragraph continues] Further they said, Every child of Frya has permission to let his voice be heard before the choice of a prince is decided; but if it comes to that, that you choose a king, then also we will have our say. From all that we can see, Wr-alda has appointed Friso for it, for he has brought him here in a wonderful way. Friso knows the tricks of the Gauls, whose language he speaks; he can therefore watch against their craftiness. Then there is something else to keep the eye upon. What count could be chosen as king without the others being jealous of him? All such nonsense the young maidens talked; but the old maidens, though few in number, tapped their advice out of another cask. They said always and to every one: Friso does like the spiders. At night he spreads his webs in all directions, and in the day he catches in them all his unsuspecting friends. Friso says he cannot suffer any priests or foreign princes, but we say that he cannot suffer anybody but himself; therefore he will not allow the citadel of Stevie to be rebuilt; therefore he will not have the mother again. To-day Friso is your counsellor, to-morrow he will be your king, in order to have full power over you. Among the people there now existed two parties. The old and the poor wished to have the mother again, but the young and the warlike wished for a father and a king. The first called themselves mother's sons, the others father's sons, but the mother's sons did not count for much; because there were many ships to build, there was a good time for all kinds of workmen. Moreover, the sea-rovers brought all sorts of treasures, with which the maidens were pleased, the girls were pleased, and their relations and friends.

[p. 208] [p. 209]

When Friso had been nearly forty years at Staveren he died [**]. Owing to him many of the states had been joined together again, but that we were the better for it I am not prepared to certify. Of all the counts that preceded him there was none so renowned as Friso; for, as I said before, the young maidens spoke in his praise, while the old maidens did all in their power to make him hateful to everybody. Although the old women could not prevent his meddling, they made so much fuss that he died without becoming king.

Footnotes

^205:* See page 11.

^209:* 263 before Christ.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

NOW I WILL WRITE ABOUT HIS SON ADEL.

Friso, who had learned our history from the book of the Adelingen, had done everything in his power to win their friendship. His eldest son, whom he had by his wife Swethirte, he named Adel; and although he strove with all his might to prevent the building or restoring any citadels, he sent Adel to the citadel of Texland in order to make himself better acquainted with our laws, language, and customs. When Adel was twenty years old Friso brought him into his own school, and when he had fully educated him he sent him to travel through all the states. Adel was an amiable young man, and in his travels he made many friends, so the people called him Atharik--that is, rich in friends--which was very useful to him afterwards, for when his father died he took his place without a question of any other count being chosen.

While Adel was studying at Texland there was a lovely maiden at the citadel. She came from Saxenmarken, from the state of Suobaland, therefore she was called at Texland Suobene [*+], although her name

[p. 210] [p. 211]

was Ifkja. Adel fell in love with her, and she with him, but his father wished him to wait a little. Adel did as he wished; but as soon as he was dead, sent messengers to Berthold, her father, to ask her in marriage. Berthold was a prince of high-principled feelings. He had sent his daughter to Texland in the hope that she might be chosen Burgtmaagd in her country, but when he knew of their mutual affection he bestowed his blessing upon them. Ifkja was a clever Frisian. As far as I have been able to learn, she always toiled and worked to bring the Frya's people back under the same laws and customs. To bring the people to her side, she travelled with her husband through all Saxenmarken, and also to Geertmannia--as the Geertmen had named the country which they had obtained by means of Goss. Thence they went to Denmark, and from Denmark by sea to Texland. From Texland they went to Westflyland, and so along the cost to Walhallagara; thence they followed the Zuiderryn (the Waal), till, with great apprehension, they arrived beyond the Rhine at the Marsaten of whom our Apollonia has written [**]. When they had stayed there a little time, they returned to the lowlands. When they had been some time descending towards the lowlands [*+], and had reached about the old citadel of Aken, four of their servants were suddenly murdered and stripped. They had loitered a little behind. My brother, who was always on the alert, had forbidden them to do so, but they did not listen to him. The murderers that had committed this crime were Twisklanders, who had at that time audaciously crossed the Rhine to murder and to steal. The Twisklanders are banished and fugitive children of Frya,

[p. 212] [p. 213]

but their wives they have stolen from the Tartars. The Tartars are a brown tribe of Finda's people, who are thus named because they make war on everybody. They are all horsemen and robbers. This is what makes the Twisklanders so bloodthirsty. The Twisklanders who had done the wicked deed called themselves Frijen or Franken. There were among them, my brother said, red, brown, and white men. The red and brown made their hair white with lime-water [**]--but as their faces remained brown, they were only the more ugly. In the same way as Apollonia, they visited Lydasburgt and the Alderga. Afterwards they made a tour of all the neighbourhood of Stavera. They behaved with so much amiability, that everywhere the people wished to keep them. Three months later, Adel sent messengers to all the friends that he had made, requesting them to send to him their "wise men" in the month of May. [*+]

[p. 214] [p. 215]

his wife, he said, who had been maagd of Texland, had received a copy of it. In Texland many writings are still found which are not copied in the book of the Adelingen. One of these writings had been placed by Goss with her last will, which was to be opened by the oldest maiden, Albetha, as soon as Friso was dead.

Footnotes

^209:+ Hamconius, page 8. Suobinna.

^211:* See page 150.

^211:+ Delta, still in use in North Holland for swampy land.

^213:* Diodorus Siculus, V. 28.

^213:+ Here the copyist, Hiddo oera Linda, has turned over a leaf too much, and has thus omitted two pages.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

HERE IS THE WRITING WITH GOSA'S ADVICE.

When Wr-alda gave children to the mothers of mankind, he gave one language to every tongue and to all lips. This gift Wr-alda had bestowed upon men in order that by its means they might make known to each other what must be avoided and what must be followed to find salvation, and to hold salvation to all eternity. Wr-alda is wise and good, and all-foreseeing. As he knew that happiness and holiness would flee from the earth when wickedness could overcome virtue, he has attached to the language an equitable property. This property consists in this, that men can neither lie nor use deceitful words without stammering or blushing, by which means the innately bad are easily known.

As thus our language opens the way to happiness and blessedness, and thus helps to guard against evil inclinations, it is rightly named the language of the gods, and all those by whom it is held in honour derive honour from it. But what has happened? As soon as among our half brothers and sisters deceivers arose, who gave themselves out as servants of the good, it soon became otherwise. The deceitful priests and the malignant princes, who always clung together, wished to live according to their own inclinations, without regard to the laws of right. In their wickedness they went

[p. 216] [p. 217]

so far as to invent other languages, so that they might speak secretly in anybody's presence of their wicked and unworthy affairs without betraying themselves by stammering, and without showing a blush upon their countenances. Bat what has that produced? Just as the seed of good herbs which has been sown by good men in the open day springs up from the ground, so time brings to light the evil seed which has been sown by wicked men in secret and in darkness.

The wanton girls and effeminate youths who consorted with the immoral priests and princes, taught the new language to their companions, and thus spread it among the people till God's language was clean forgotten. Would you know what came of all this? how that stammering and blushing no longer betrayed their evil doings;--virtue passed away, wisdom and liberty followed; unity was lost, and quarrelling took its place; love flew away, and unchastity and envy met round their tables; and where previously justice reigned, now it is the sword. All are slaves--the subjects of their masters, envy, bad passions and covetousness. If they had only invented one language things might possibly have still gone on well; but they invented as many languages as there are states, so that one people can no more understand another people than a cow a dog, or a wolf a sheep. The mariners can bear witness to this. From all this it results that all the slave people look upon each other as strangers; and that as a punishment of their inconsiderateness and presumption, they must quarrel and fight till they are all destroyed.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218] [p. 219]

  

HERE IS MY COUNSEL.

If you wish that you alone should inherit the earth, you must never allow any language but God's language to pass your lips, and take care that your own language remains free from outlandish sounds. If you wish that some of Lyda's children and some of Finda's children remain, you must do the same. The language of the East Schoonlanders has been perverted by the vile Magyars, and the language of the followers of Kaltana has been spoiled by the dirty Gauls. Now, we have been weak enough to admit among us the returned followers of Hellenia, but I anxiously fear that they will reward our weakness by debasing our pure language.

Many things have happened to us, but among all the citadels that have been disturbed and destroyed in the bad time, Irtha has preserved Fryasburgt uninjured; and I may remark that Frya's or God's language has always remained here untainted.

Here in Texland, therefore, schools should be established; and from all the states that have kept to the old customs the young people should be sent here, and afterwards those whose education is complete can help those who remain at home. If foreigners come to buy ironwares from you, and want to talk and bargain, they must come back to God's language. If they learn God's language, then the words, "to be free" and "to have justice," will come to them, and glimmer and glitter in their brains to a perfect light, and that flame will destroy all bad princes and hypocritical dirty priests.

The native and foreign messengers were pleased with that writing, but no schools came from it. Then Adel established schools himself. Every year Adel and Ifkja went to inspect the schools. If they found a friendly feeling

[p. 220] [p. 221].

existing between the natives and foreigners, they were extremely pleased. If there were any who had sworn friendship together, they assembled the people, and with great ceremony let them inscribe their names in a book which was called the Book of Friendship, and afterwards a festival was held. All these customs were kept up in order to bring together the separate branches of Frya's race; but the maidens who were opposed to Adel and Ifkja said that they did it for no other reason than to make a name for themselves, and to bring all the other states under their subjection.

Among my father's papers I found a letter from Liudgert the Geertman [**]. Omitting some passages which only concern my father, I proceed to relate the rest.

Punjab, that is five rivers, and by which we travel, is a river of extraordinary beauty, and is called Five Rivers, because four other streams flow into the sea by its mouth. Far away to the eastward is another large river, the Holy or Sacred Ganges. Between these two rivers is the land of the Hindoos. Both rivers run from the high mountains to the plains. The mountains in which their sources lie are so high that they reach the heavens (laia), and therefore these mountains are called Himmellaia. Among the Hindoos and others out of these countries there are people who meet together secretly. They believe that they are pure children of Finda, and that Finda was born in the Himmellaia mountains, whence she went with her children to the lowlands. Some of them believe that she, with her children, floated down upon the foam of the Ganges, and that that is the reason why the river is called the Sacred Ganges. But the priests, who came from another country, traced out these people and had them burnt, so that they

[p. 222] [p. 223]

do not dare to declare openly their creed. In this country all the 'priests are fat and rich. In their churches there are all kinds of monstrous images, many of them of gold. To the west of the Punjab are the Yren (Iraniers), or morose (Drangianen), the Gedrosten (Gedrosiers), or runaways, and the Urgetten, or forgotten. These names are given by the priests out of spite, because they fled from their customs and religion. On their arrival our forefathers likewise established themselves to the east of the Punjab, but on account of the priests they likewise went to the west. In that way we learned to know the Yren and other people. The Yren are not savages, but good people, who neither pray to nor tolerate images; neither will they suffer priests or churches; but as we adhere to the light of Fasts, so they everywhere maintain fire in their houses. Coming still further westward, we arrive at the Gedrosten. Regarding the Gedrosten: They have been mixed with other people, and speak a variety of languages. These people are really savage murderers, who always wander about the country on horseback hunting and robbing, and hire themselves as soldiers to the surrounding princes, at whose command they destroy whatever they can reach.

The country between the Punjab and the Ganges is as flat as Friesland near the sea, and consists of forests and fields, fertile in every part, but this does not prevent the people from dying by thousands of hunger. The famines, however, must not be attributed to Wr-alda or Irtha, but to the princes and priests. The Hindoos are timid and submissive before their princes, like hinds before wolves. Therefore the Yren and others have called them Hindoos, which means hinds. But their timidity is frightfully abused. If strangers come to purchase corn, everything is turned

[p. 224] [p. 225]

into money, and this is not prevented 'by the priests, because they, being more crafty and rapacious than all the princes put together, know very well that all the money will come into their pockets. Besides what the people suffer from their princes, they suffer a great deal from poisonous and wild beasts. There are great elephants that sometimes go about in whole flocks and trample down cornfields aid whole villages. There are great black and white cats which are called tigers. They are as large as calves, and they devour both men and beasts. Besides other creeping animals there are snakes from the size of a worm to the size of a tree. The largest can swallow a cow, but the smallest are the most deadly. They conceal themselves among the fruits and flowers, and surprise the people who come to gather them. Any one who is bitten by them is sure to die, as Irtha has given no antidote to their poison, because the people have so given themselves up to idolatry. There are, besides, all sorts of lizards, tortoises, and crocodiles. All these reptiles, like the snakes, vary from the size of a worm to the trunk of a tree. According to their size and fierceness, they have names which I cannot recollect, but the largest are called alligators, because they eat as greedily the putrid cattle that float down the stream as they do living animals that they seize. On the west of the Punjab where we come from, and where I was born, the same fruits and crops grow as on the east side. Formerly there existed also the same crawling animals, but our forefathers burnt all the underwood, and so diligently hunted all the wild animals, that there are scarcely any left. To the extreme west of the Punjab there is found rich clay land

[p. 226] [p. 227]

as well as barren heaths, which seem endless, occasionally varied lovely spots on which the eye rests enchanted. Among the fruits there are many that I have not found here. Among the various kinds of corn some is as yellow as gold. There are also golden apples, of which some are as sweet as honey and others as sour as vinegar. In our country there are nuts as large as a child's head. They contain cheese and milk. When they are old oil is made from them. Of the husks ropes are made, and of the shells cups and other household utensils are made. I have found in the woods here bramble and holly berries. In my country we have trees bearing berries, as large as your lime-trees, the berries of which are much sweeter and three times as large as your gooseberries. When the days are at the longest, and the sun is in the zenith, a man's body bas no shadow. If you sail very far to the south and look to the east at midday, the sun shines on your left side as it does in other countries on the right side. With this I will finish. It will be easy for you, by means of what I have written, to distinguish between false accounts and true descriptions.--Your .

Footnotes

^221:* See page <page 164>.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE WRITING OF BEEDEN.

My name is Beeden, son of Hachgana. My uncle, not having married, left no children. I was elected in his place. Adel, the third king of that name, approved of the choice, provided I should acknowledge him as master. In addition to the entire inheritance of my uncle, he gave me some land which joined my inheritance, on condition that I would settle people there who should never his people [**]

[p. 228] [p. 229]

therefore I will allow it a place here.

Footnotes

^227:* Here there are wanting in the manuscript twenty pager (perhaps more), in which Beeden has written about the King, Adel the Third, called Ubbo by the writers of our chronicles.

     
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

  

LETTER OF RIKA THE OUDMAAGD, READ AT STAVEREN AT THE JUUL FEAST.

My greeting to all of you whose forefathers came here with Friso. According to what you say, you are not guilty of idolatry. I will not speak about that now, but will at once mention a failing which is very little better. You know, or you do not know, how many titles Wr-alda has; but you all know that he is named universal provider, because that everything comes and proceeds from him for the sustenance of his creatures. It is true that Irtha is named sometimes the feeder of all, because she brings forth all the fruits and grains on which men and beasts are fed; but she would not bear any fruit or grain unless Wr-alda gave her the power. Women who nourish their children at their breasts are called nurses, but if Wr-alda did not give them milk the children would find no advantage; so that, in short, Wr-alda really is the nourisher. That Irtha should be called the universal nourisher, and that a mother should be called a feeder, one can understand, figuratively speaking; but that a father should be called a feeder, because he is a father, goes against all reason. Now I know whence all this folly comes. Listen to me. It comes from our enemies; and if this is followed up you will become slaves, to the sorrow of Frya and to the punishment of your pride. I will tell you what happened to the slave people; from that you may take warning. The foreign kings, who follow their own will, place Wr-alda below the crown. From envy that Wr-alda is called the universal father, they wish also to be called fathers of the people. Now, everybody knows that kings do not regulate

[p. 230] [p. 231]

the productiveness of the earth; and that they have their sustenance by means of the people, but still they will persist in their arrogance. In order to attain their object they were not satisfied from the beginning with free gifts, but imposed a tax upon the people. With the tax thus raised they hired foreign soldiers, whom they retained about their courts. Afterwards they took as many wives as they pleased, and the smaller princes and gentry did the same. When, in consequence, quarrels and disputes arose in the households, and complaints were made about it, they said every man is the father (feeder) of his household, therefore he shall be master and judge over it. Thus arose arbitrariness, and as the men ruled over their households the kings would do over their people. When the kings had accomplished that, they should be called fathers of the people, they had statues of themselves made, and erected in the churches beside the statues of the idols, and those who would not bow down to them were either killed or put in chains. Your forefathers and the Twisklanders had intercourse with the kings, and learned these follies from them. But it is not only that some of your men have been guilty of stealing titles, I have also much to complain of against your wives. If there are men among you who wish to put themselves on a level with Wr-alda, there are also women who wish to consider themselves equals of Frya. Because they have borne children, they call themselves mothers; but they forget that Frya bore children without having intercourse with a man. Yes, they not only have desired to rob Frya and the Eeremoeders of their honourable title (with whom they cannot put themselves upon an equality), but they do the same with the honourable titles of their fellow-creatures. There are women who allow themselves to be called ladies,

[p. 232] [p. 233]

although they know that that only belongs to the wives of princes. They also let their daughters be called maagden, although they know that no young girls are so called unless. they belong to a citadel. Yon all fancy that you are the better for this name-stealing, but you forget that jealousy clings to it, and that every wrong sows the seed of its own rod. If you do not alter your course, in time it will grow so strong that you cannot see what will be the end. Your descendants will be flogged by it, and will not know whence the stripes come. But although you do not build citadels for the maidens and leave them to their fate, there will still remain some who will come out of woods and caves, and will prove to your descendants that you have by your disorderliness been the cause of it. Then you will be damned. Your ghosts will rise frightened out of their graves. They will call upon Wr-alda, Frya, and her maidens, but they shall receive no succour before the Juul shall enter upon a pew circuit, and that will only be three thousand years after this century. [**]

 

 

THE END OF RIKA'S LETTER.

 

Footnotes

^233:* Here the writing of Beeden ends. In the manuscript two successive pages are missing according to the paging, but no doubt there are more wanting. The abrupt opening of what follows shows that the beginning of the following writing has been lost, and, in consequence, also the notification of the name of the writer, who may have been a son or a grandson of Beeden.

    
The Oera Linda Book, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, [1876], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234] [p. 235]

  

Fragment.

This page begins in the middle of the sentence. There do not appear to be any missing pages in the source book.--JBH.

... therefore I will first write about black Adel. Black Adel was the fourth king after Friso. In his youth he studied first at Texland, and then at Staveren, and afterwards travelled through all the states. When he was twenty-four years old his father had him elected Asega-Asker. As soon as be became Asker he always took the part of the poor. The rich, he said, do enough of wrong b means of their wealth, therefore we ought to take Care that the poor look up to us. By arguments of this kind he became the friend of the poor and the terror of the rich. It was carried so far that his father looked up to him. When his father died he succeeded, and then he wished to retain his office as well, as the kings of the East used to do. The rich would not suffer this, so all the people rose up, and the rich were glad to get out of the assembly with whole skins. From that time there was no more talk of equality. He oppressed the rich and flattered the poor, by whose assistance he succeeded in all his wishes. King Askar, as he was always called, was seven feet high, and his strength was as remarkable as his height. He had a clear intellect, so that he understood all that was talked about, but in his actions he did not display much wisdom. He had a handsome countenance and a smooth tongue, but his soul was blacker than his hair. When he had been king for a year, he obliged all the young men in the state to come once a year to the camp to have a sham fight. At first he had some trouble with it, but at last it became such a habit that old and young came from all sides to ask if they might take part in it. When he had brought it to this point, he established military schools. The rich complained that their

[p. 236] [p. 237]

children no longer learned to read and write. Askar paid no attention to it; but shortly afterwards, when a sham fight was held, he mounted a throne and spoke aloud: The rich have come to complain to me that their boys do not learn to read and write. I answered nothing; but I will now declare my opinion, and let the general assembly decide. While they all regarded him with curiosity, he said further: According to my ides, we ought to leave reading and writing at present to the maagden and wise people. I do not wish to speak ill of our forefathers; I will only say that in the times so vaunted by some, the Burgtmaagden introduced disputes into our country, which the mothers were unable, either first or last, to put an end to. Worse still, while they talked and chattered about useless customs the Gauls came and seized all our beautiful southern country. Even at this very time our degenerate brothers and their soldiers have already come over the Scheldt. It therefore remains for us to choose whether we will carry a yoke or a sword. If we wish to be and to remain free, it behoves our young men to leave reading and writing alone for a time; and instead of playing games of swinging and wrestling, they must learn to play with sword and spear. When we are completely prepared, and the boys are big enough to carry

helmet and shield and to use their weapons, then, with your help, I will attack the enemy. The Gauls may then record the defeat of their helpers and soldiers upon our fields with the blood that flows from their wounds. When we have once expelled the enemy, then we must follow it up till there are no more Gauls, Slaves, or Tartars to be driven out of Frya's inheritance. That is right, the majority shouted, and the rich did not dare to open their mouths.

[p. 238] [p. 239]

[paragraph continues] He must certainly have thought over this address and had it written out, for on the evening of the same day there were copies in at least twenty different hands, and they all sounded the same. Afterwards he ordered the ship people to make double prows, upon which steel crossbows could be fixed. Those who were backward in doing this were fined, and if they swore that they had no means, the rich men of the village were obliged to pay. Now we shall see what resulted from all this bustle. In the north part of Britain there exists a Scotch people--the most of them spring from Frya's blood--some of them are descended from the followers of Keltana, and, for the rest, from Britons and fugitives who gradually, in the course of time, took refuge there from the tin mines. Those who come from the tin mines have wives, either altogether foreign or of foreign descent. They are all under the dominion of the Gauls. Their arms are wooden bows and arrows pointed with stag's-horn or flint. Their houses are of turf and straw, and some of them live in caves in the mountains. Sheep that they have stolen form their only wealth. Some of the descendants of Keltana's followers still have iron weapons, which they have inherited from their forefathers. In order to make myself well understood, I must let alone for a while my account of the Scotch people, and write something about the near Krekalanders (Italians. The Krekalanders formerly belonged to us only, but from time immemorial descendants of Lyda and Finda have established themselves there. Of these last there came in the end a whole troop from Troy. Troy is the name of a town that the far Krekalanders (Greeks) had taken and destroyed. When the Trojans had nestled themselves among the near Krekalanders, with time and industry they built a strong town with walls and citadels named Rome, that is,

[p. 240] [p. 241]

[paragraph continues] Spacious. When this was done, the people by craft and force made themselves masters of the whole. land. The people who live on the south side of the Mediterranean Sea, come for the most part from Phoenicia. The Phoenicians [**] (Puniers or Carthaginians) are a bastard race of the blood of Frya, Finda, and Lyda. The Lyda people were there as slaves, but by the unchastity of the women these black people have degenerated the other people and dyed them brown. These people and the Romans are constantly struggling for the supremacy over the Mediterranean Sea. The Romans, moreover, live at enmity with the Phoenicians; and their priests, who wish to assume the sole government of the world, cannot bear the sight of the Gauls. First they took from the Phoenicians Marseilles--then all the countries lying to the south, the west, and the north, as well as the southern part of Britain--and they have always driven away the Phoenician priests, that is the Gauls, of whom thousands have sought refuge in North Britain. A short time ago the chief of the Gauls was established in the citadel, which is called Kerenac (Karnac), that is the corner, whence he issued his commands to the Gauls. All their gold was likewise collected there. Keeren Herne (chosen corner), or Kerenac, is a stone citadel which did belong to Kalta. Therefore the maidens of the descendants of Kaltana's followers wished to have the citadel again. Thus through the enmity of the maidens and the Gaul's, hatred and quarrelling spread ever the mountain country with fire and sword. Our sea people often came there to get wool, which they paid for with prepared hides and linen. Askar had often gone with them, and had secretly made friendship with the maidens and some princes, and bound himself to drive the Gauls out of Kerenac. When he came back there again he gave to the princes and the fighting men iron helmets and steel bows. War had come with him, and soon blood was streaming down

[p. 242] [p. 243]

the slopes of the mountains. When Askar thought a favourable opportunity occurred, he went with forty ships and took Kerenac and the chief of the Gauls, with all his gold. The people with whom he fought against the soldiers of the Gauls, he had enticed out of the Saxenmarken by promises of much booty and plunder. Thus nothing was left to the Gauls. After that he took two islands for stations for his ships, from which he used later to sally forth and plunder all the Phoenician ships and towns that he could reach. When he returned he brought nearly six hundred of the finest youths of the Scotch mountaineers with him. He said that they had been given him as hostages, that he might be sure that the parents would remain faithful to him; but this was untrue. He kept them as a bodyguard at his court, where they had daily lessons in riding and in the use of all kinds of arms. The Denmarkers, who proudly considered themselves sea-warriors above all the other sea-people, no sooner heard of the glorious deeds of Askar, than they became jealous of him to such a degree, that they would bring war over the sea and over his lands. See here, then, how he was able to avoid a war. Among the ruins of the destroyed citadel of Stavia there was still established a clever Burgtmaagd, with a few maidens. Her name was Reintja, and she was famed fur her wisdom. This maid offered her assistance to Askar, on condition that he should afterwards rebuild the citadel of Stavin. When he had bound himself to do this, Reintja went with three maidens to Hals [**] (Holstein). She travelled by night, and by day she made speeches in all the markets and in all the assemblies. Wr-alda, she said, had told her by his thunder that all the Frya's people must become friends, and united as brothers and sisters, otherwise Finda's people would come and sweep them off the face of the earth. After the thunder Frya's seven watch-maidens appeared to her in a dream seven nights in succession. They had

[p. 244] [p. 245]

said, Disaster hovers over Frya's land with yoke and chains; therefore all the people who have sprung from Frya's blood must do away with their surnames, and only call themselves Frya's children, or Frya's people. They must all rise up and drive. Finda's people out of Frya's inheritance. If you will not do that, you will bring the slave-chains round your necks, and the foreign chiefs will ill-treat your children and flog them till the blood streams into your graves. Then shall the spirits of your forefathers appear to you, and reproach your cowardice and thoughtlessness. The stupid people who, by the acts of the Magyars, were already so much accustomed to folly, believed all that she said, and the mothers clasped their children to their bosoms. When Reintja had brought the king of Holstein and the others to an agreement, she sent messengers to Askar, and went herself along the Baltic Sea. From there she went to the Lithauers (Face-hewers), so called because they always strike at their enemy's face. The Lithauers are fugitives and banished people of our own race, who wander about in the Twisklanden. Their wives have been mostly stolen from the Tartars. The Tartars are a branch of Finda's race, and are thus named by the Twisklanders because they never will be at peace, but provoke people to fight. She proceeded on beyond the Saxsenmarken, crossing through the other Twisklanders in order always to repeat the same thing. After two years had passed, she came along the Rhine home. Among the Twisklanders she gave herself out for a mother, and said that they might return as free and true people; but then they must go over the Rhine and drive the Gauls out of Frya's south lands. If they did that, then her King Askar would go over the Scheldt and win back the land. Among the Twisklanders many bad customs of the Tartars and Magyars have crept in, but likewise many of our

[p. 246] [p. 247]

laws have remained. Therefore they still have Maagden, who teach the children and advise the old. In the beginning they were opposed to Reintja, but at last she was followed, obeyed, and praised by them where it was useful or necessary.

As soon as Askar heard from Reintja's messengers how the Jutlanders were disposed, he immediately, on his side, sent messengers to the King of Hals. The ship in which the messengers went was laden with women's ornaments, and took also a golden shield on which Askar's portrait was artistically represented. These messengers were to ask the King's daughter, Frethogunsta, in marriage for Askar. Frethogunsta came a year after that to Staveren. Among her followers was a Magy, for the Jutlanders had been long ago corrupted. Soon after Askar had married Frethogunsta, a church was built at Staveren. In the church were placed monstrous images, bedecked with gold-woven dresses. It is also said that Askar, by night, and at unseasonable times, kneeled to them with Frethogunsta; but one thing is certain, the citadel of Stavia was never rebuilt. Reintja was already come back, and went angrily to Prontlik the mother, at Texland, to complain. Prontlik sent out messengers in all directions, who proclaimed that Askar is gone over to Idolatry. Askar took no notice of this, but unexpectedly a fleet arrived from Hals. In the night the maidens were driven out of the citadel, and in the morning there was nothing to be seen of the citadel but a glowing heap of rubbish. Prontlik and Reintja came to me for shelter. When I reflected upon it, I thought that it might prove bad for my state. Therefore, we hit upon a plan which might serve us all. This is the way we went to work. In the middle of the Krijlwood, to the east of Liudwerd, lies our place of refuge, which can only be reached by a concealed path. A long time ago I had

[p. 248] [p. 249]

established a garrison of young men who all hated Askar, and kept away all other people. Now it was come to such a pitch among us, that many women, and even men, talked about ghosts, white women, and gnomes, just like the Denmarkers. Askar had made use of all these follies for his own advantage, and we wished to do the same. One dark night I brought the Maagden to the citadel, and afterwards they went with their serving-maids dressed in white along the path, so that nobody dare go there any more. When Askar thought he had his hands free, he let the Magyars travel through his states under all kinds of names, and, except in my state, they were not turned away anywhere. After that Askar had become so connected with the Jutlanders and the Denmarkers, they all went roving together; but it produced no real good to them. They brought all sorts of foreign treasures home, and just for that reason the young men would learn no trades, nor work in the fields; so at last he was obliged to take slaves; but that was altogether contrary to Wr-alda's wish and to Frya's counsel. Therefore the punishment Was sure to follow it. This is the way in which the punishment came. They had all together taken a whole fleet that came out of the Mediterranean Sea. This fleet was laden with purple cloths and other valuables that came from Phoenicia. The weak people of the fleet were put ashore south of the Seine, but the strong people were kept to serve as slaves. The handsomest were retained ashore, and the ugly and black were kept on board ship as rowers. In the Fly the plunder was divided, but, without their knowing it, they divided the punishment too. Of those who were placed in the foreign ships six died of colic. It was thought that the food and

[p. 250] [p. 251]

drink were poisoned, so it was all thrown overboard, but the colic remained all the same. Wherever the slaves or the goods came, there it came too. The Saxsenmen took it over to their marches. The Jutlanders brought it to Schoonland and along the coasts of the Baltic Sea, and with Askar's mariners it was taken to Britain. We and the people of Grenega did not allow either the people or the goods to come over our boundaries, and therefore we remained free from it. How many people were carried off by this disease I cannot tell; but Prontlik, who heard it afterwards from the maidens, told me that Askar had helped out of his states a thousand times more free-men than he had brought dirty slaves in. When the pest had ceased, the Twisklanders who had become free came to the Rhine, but Askar would not put himself on an equality with the princes of that vile degenerate race. He would not suffer them to call themselves Frya's children, as Reintja had offered them, but he forgot then that he himself had black hair. Among the Twisklanders there were two tribes who did not call themselves Twisklanders. One came from the far south-east, and called themselves Allemannen. They had given themselves this name when they had no women among them, and were wandering as exiles in the forests. Later on they stole women from the slave people like the Lithauers, but they kept their name. The other tribe, that wandered about in the neighbourhood, called themselves Franks, not because they were free, but the name of their first king was Frank, who, by the help of the degenerate maidens, had had himself made hereditary king over his people. The people nearest to him called themselves Thioth--his sons--that is, sons of the people. They had remained free, because they never would acknowledge any king, or prince, or master except those chosen by general consent in a general assembly. Askar had

[p. 252] [p. 253]

already learned from Reintja that the Twisklander princes were almost always at war with each other. He proposed to them that they should choose a duke from his people, because, as he said, he was afraid that they would quarrel among themselves for the supremacy. He said also that his princes could speak with the Gauls. This, he said, was also the opinion of the mother. Then the princes of the Twisklanders came together, and after twenty-one days they chose Alrik as duke. Alrik was Askar's nephew. He gave him two hundred Scotch and one hundred of the greatest Saksmannen to go with him as a bodyguard. The princes were to send twenty-one of their sons as hostages for their fidelity. Thus far all had gone according to his wishes; but when they were to go over the Rhine, the king of the Franks would not be under Alrik's command. Thereupon all was confusion. Askar, who thought that all was going on well, landed with his ships on the other side of the Scheldt; but there they were already aware of his coming, and were on their guard. He had to flee as quickly as he had come, and was himself taken prisoner. The Gauls did not know whom they had taken, so he was afterwards exchanged for a noble Gaul whom Askar's people had taken with them. While all this was going on, the Magyars went about audaciously over the lands of our neighbours. Near Egmuda, where formerly the citadel Forana had stood, they built a church larger and richer than that which Askar had built at Staveren. They said afterwards that Askar had lost the battle against the Gauls, because the people did not believe that Wodin could help them, and therefore they would not pray to him. They went about stealing young children, whom they kept and brought up in the mysteries of their abominable doctrines. Were there people who

 

 

[Here the manuscript ends abruptly.]

 

 

Footnotes

^241:* Phonsiar are Carthaginians.

^243:* Hals is Holstein.

 

    


===== BOOK: olfb.txt =====


The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

THE OLIVE FAIRY BOOK

EDITED BY

ANDREW LANG

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

LONDON, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA

[1907]

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*Madschun]

[*The Blue Parrot]

[*Geirlaug the King's Daughter]

[*The Story of Little King Loc]

[*'A Long-bow Story']

[*Jackal or Tiger?]

[*The Comb and the Collar]

[*The Thanksgiving of the Wazir]

[*Samba the Coward]

[*Kupti and Imani]

[*The Strange Adventures of Little Maia]

[*Diamond cut Diamond]

[*The Green Knight]

[*The Five Wise Words of the Guru]

[*The Golden-headed Fish]

[*Dorani]

[*The Satin Surgeon]

[*The Billy Goat and the King]

[*The Story of Zoulvisia]

[*Grasp all, Lose all]

[*The Fate of the Turtle]

[*The Snake Prince]

[*The Prince and Princess in the Forest]

[*The Clever Weaver]

[*The Boy who found Fear at last]

[*He Wins who Waits]

[*The Steel Cane]

[*The Punishment of the Fairy Gangana]

[*The Silent Princess]

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

PREFACE

Many years ago my friend and publisher, Mr. Charles Longman, presented me with Le Cabinet des Fees ('The Fairy Cabinet'). This work almost requires a swinging bookcase for its accommodation, like the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and in a revolving bookcase I bestowed the volumes. Circumstances of an intimately domestic character, 'not wholly unconnected,' as Mr. Micawber might have said, with the narrowness of my study (in which it is impossible to 'swing a cat'), prevent the revolving bookcase from revolving at this moment. I can see, however, that the Fairy Cabinet contains at least forty volumes, and I think there are about sixty in all. This great plenitude of fairy tales from all quarters presents legends of fairies, witches, genii or Djinn, monsters, dragons, wicked step-mothers, princesses, pretty or plain, princes lucky or unlucky, giants, dwarfs, and enchantments. The stories begin with those which children like best--the old Blue Beard, Puss in Boots, Hop o' my Thumb, Little Red Riding Hood, The Sleeping Beauty, and Toads and Pearls. These were first collected, written, and printed at Paris in 1697. The author was Monsieur Charles Perrault, a famous personage in a great perruque, who in his day wrote large volumes now unread. He never dreamed that he was to be remembered mainly by the shabby little volume with the tiny headpiece pictures--how unlike the fairy way of drawing by Mr. Ford, said to be known as 'Over-the-wall Ford' among authors who play cricket, because of the force with which he swipes! Perrault picked up the rustic tales which the nurse of his little boy used to tell, and he told them again in his own courtly, witty way. They do not seem to have been translated into English until nearly thirty years later, when they were published in English, with the French on the opposite page, by a Mr. Pote, a bookseller at Eton. Probably the younger Eton boys learned as much French as they condescended to acquire from these fairy tales, which are certainly more amusing than the Telemaque of Messire Francois de Salignac de la Motte-Fenelon, tutor of the children of France, Archbishop Duke of Cambrai, and Prince of the Holy Roman Empire.

The success of Perrault was based on the pleasure which the court of Louis XIV. took in fairy tales; we know that they were told among Court ladies, from a letter of Madame de Sevigne. Naturally, Perrault had imitators, such as Madame d'Aulnoy, a wandering lady of more wit than reputation. To her we owe Beauty and the Beast and The Yellow Dwarf. Anthony Hamilton tried his hand with The Ram, a story too prolix and confused, best remembered for the remark, 'Ram, my friend, begin at the beginning!' Indeed, the narrative style of the Ram is lacking in lucidity! Then came The Arabian Nights, translated by Monsieur Galland. Nobody has translated The Arabian Nights so well as Galland. His is the reverse of a scientific rendering, but it is as pleasantly readable as the Iliad and Odyssey would be if Alexandre Dumas had kept his promise to translate Homer. Galland omitted the verses and a great number of passages which nobody would miss, though the anthropologist is supposed to find them valuable and instructive in later scientific translations which do not amuse. Later, Persian Tales, Tales of the Sea, and original inventions, more or less on the fairy model, were composed by industrious men and women. They are far too long--are novels, indeed, and would please no child or mature person of taste. All these were collected in the vast Fairy Cabinet, published in 1786, just before the Revolution. Probably their attempt to be simple charmed a society which was extremely artificial, talked about 'the simple life' and the 'state of nature,' and was on the eve of a revolution in which human nature revealed her most primitive traits in orgies of blood.

That was the end of the Court and of the Court Fairy Tales, and just when they were demolished, learned men like the Grimms and Sir Walter Scott began to take an interest in the popular tales of peasants and savages all the world over. All the world over the tales were found to be essentially the same things. Cinderella is everywhere; a whole book has been written on Cinderella by Miss Cox, and a very good book it is, but not interesting to children. For them the best of the collections of foreign fairy tales are the German stories by the Grimms, the Tales from the Norse, by Sir G. W. Dasent, (which some foolish 'grown-ups' denounced as 'improper'), and Miss Frere's Indian stories. There are hundreds of collections of savage and peasant fairy tales, but, though many of these are most interesting, especially Bishop Callaway's Zulu stories (with the Zulu versions), these do not come in the way of parents and uncles, and therefore do not come in the way of children. It is my wish that children should be allowed to choose their own books. Let their friends give them the money and turn them loose in the book shops! They know their own tastes, and if the children are born bookish, while their dear parents are the reverse, (and this does occur!), then the children make the better choice. They are unaffected in their selections; some want Shakespeares of their own, and some prefer a volume entitled Buster Brown. A few--alas, how few!--are fond of poetry; a still smaller number are fond of history. 'We know that there are no fairies, but history stories are true!' say these little innocents. I am not so sure that there are no fairies, and I am only too well aware that the best 'history stories' are not true.

What children do love is ghost stories. 'Tell us a ghost story!' they cry, and I am able to meet the demand, with which I am in sincere sympathy. Only strong control prevents me from telling the last true ghost story which I heard yesterday. It would suit children excellently well. 'The Grey Ghost Story Book' would be a favourite. At a very early age I read a number of advertisements of books, and wept because I could not buy dozens of them, and somebody gave me a book on Botany! It looked all right, nicely bound in green cloth, but within it was full of all manner of tediousness.

In our Fairy Cabinet, which cannot extend to sixty volumes, we have aimed at pleasing children, not 'grown-ups,' at whom the old French writers directed their romances, but have hunted for fairy tales in all quarters, not in Europe alone. In this volume we open, thanks to Dr. Ignaz Kunos, with a story from the Turks. 'Little King Loc' is an original invention by M. Anatole France, which he very kindly permitted Mrs. Lang to adapt from L'Abeille.

Major Campbell, as previously, tells tales which he collected among the natives of India. But the sources are usually named at the end of each story, and when they are not named children will not miss them. Mrs. Lang, except in cases mentioned, has translated and adapted to the conditions of young readers the bulk of the collection, and Mrs. Skovgaard-Pedersen has done 'The Green Knight' from the Danish. I must especially thank Monsieur Macler for permitting us to use some of his Contes Armeniens (Paris: Ernest Leroux, Editeur).

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

MADSCHUN

Once upon a time there lived, in a small cottage among some hills, a woman with her son, and, to her great grief, the young man, though hardly more than twenty years of age, had not as much hair on his head as a baby. But, old as he looked, the youth was very idle, and whatever trade his mother put him to he refused to work, and in a few days always came home again.

On a fine summer morning he was lying as usual half asleep in the little garden in front of the cottage when the sultan's daughter came riding by, followed by a number of gaily dressed ladies. The youth lazily raised himself on his elbow to look at her, and that one glance changed his whole nature.

'I will marry her and nobody else,' he thought. And jumping up, he went to find his mother.

'You must go at once to the sultan, and tell him that I want his daughter for my wife,' he said.

'WHAT?' shouted the old woman, shrinking back into a corner, for nothing but sudden madness could explain such an amazing errand.

'Don't you understand? You must go at once to the sultan and tell him that I want his daughter for my wife,' repeated the youth impatiently.

'But--but, do you know what you are saying?' stammered the mother. 'You will learn no trade, and have only the five gold pieces left you by your father, and can you really expect that the sultan would give his daughter to a penniless bald-pate like you?'

'That is my affair; do as I bid you.' And neither day nor night did her son cease tormenting her, till, in despair, she put on her best clothes, and wrapped her veil about her, and went over the hill to the palace.

It was the day that the sultan set apart for hearing the complaints and petitions of his people, so the woman found no difficulty in gaining admission to his presence.

'Do not think me mad, O Excellency,' she began, 'though I know I must seem like it. But I have a son who, since his eyes have rested on the veiled face of the princess, has not left me in peace day or night till I consented to come to the palace, and to ask your Excellency for your daughter's hand. It was in vain I answered that my head might pay the forfeit of my boldness, he would listen to nothing. Therefore am I here; do with me even as you will!'

Now the sultan always loved anything out of the common, and this situation was new indeed. So, instead of ordering the trembling creature to be flogged or cast into prison, as some other sovereigns might have done, he merely said: 'Bid your son come hither.'

The old woman stared in astonishment at such a reply. But when the sultan repeated his words even more gently than before, and did not look in anywise angered, she took courage, and bowing again she hastened homeward.

'Well, how have you sped?' asked her son eagerly as she crossed the threshold.

'You are to go up to the palace without delay, and speak to the sultan himself,' replied the mother. And when he heard the good news, his face lightened up so wonderfully that his mother thought what a pity it was that he had no hair, as then he would be quite handsome.

'Ah, the lightning will not fly more swiftly,' cried he. And in another instant he was out of her sight.

When the sultan beheld the bald head of his daughter's wooer, he no longer felt in the mood for joking, and resolved that he must somehow or other shake himself free of such an unwelcome lover. But as he had summoned the young man to the palace, he could hardly dismiss him without a reason, so he hastily said:

'I hear you wish to marry my daughter? Well and good. But the man who is to be her husband must first collect all the birds in the world, and bring them into the gardens of the palace; for hitherto no birds have made their homes in the trees.'

The young man was filled with despair at the sultan's words. How was he to snare all these birds? and even if he did succeed in catching them it would take years to carry them to the palace! Still, he was too proud to let the sultan think that he had given up the princess without a struggle, so he took a road that led past the palace and walked on, not noticing whither he went.

In this manner a week slipped by, and at length he found himself crossing a desert with great rocks scattered here and there. In the shadow cast by one of these was seated a holy man or dervish, as he was called, who motioned to the youth to sit beside him.

'Something is troubling you, my son,' said the holy man; 'tell me what it is, as I may be able to help you.'

'O, my father,' answered the youth, 'I wish to marry the princess of my country; but the sultan refuses to give her to me unless I can collect all the birds in the world and bring them into his garden. And how can I, or any other man, do that?'

'Do not despair,' replied the dervish, 'it is not so difficult as it sounds. Two days' journey from here, in the path of the setting sun, there stands a cypress tree, larger than any other cypress that grows upon the earth. Sit down where the shadow is darkest, close to the trunk, and keep very still. By-and-by you will hear a mighty rushing of wings, and all the birds in the world will come and nestle in the branches. Be careful not to make a sound till everything is quiet again, and then say "Madschun!" At that the birds will be forced to remain where they are--not one can move from its perch; and you will be able to place them all over your head and arms and body, and in this way you must carry them to the sultan.'

With a glad heart the young man thanked the dervish, and paid such close heed to his directions that, a few days later, a strange figure covered with soft feathers walked into the presence of the sultan. The princess's father was filled with surprise, for never had he seen such a sight before. Oh! how lovely were those little bodies, and bright frightened eyes! Soon a gentle stirring was heard, and what a multitude of wings unfolded themselves: blue wings, yellow wings, red wings, green wings. And when the young man whispered 'Go,' they first flew in circles round the sultan's head, and then disappeared through the open window, to choose homes in the garden.

'I have done your bidding, O Sultan, and now give me the princess,' said the youth. And the sultan answered hurriedly:

'Yes! oh, yes! you have pleased me well! Only one thing remains to turn you into a husband that any girl might desire. That head of yours, you know--it is so very bald! Get it covered with nice thick curly hair, and then I will give you my daughter. You are so clever that I am sure this will give you no trouble at all.'

Silently the young man listened to the sultan's words, and silently he sat in his mother's kitchen for many days to come, till, one morning, the news reached him that the sultan had betrothed his daughter to the son of the wizir, and that the wedding was to be celebrated without delay in the palace. With that he arose in wrath, and made his way quickly and secretly to a side door, used only by the workmen who kept the building in repair, and, unseen by anyone, he made his way into the mosque, and then entered the palace by a gallery which opened straight into the great hall. Here the bride and bridegroom and two or three friends were assembled, waiting for the appearance of the sultan for the contract to be signed.

'Madschun!' whispered the youth from above. And instantly everyone remained rooted to the ground; and some messengers whom the sultan had sent to see that all was ready shared the same fate.

At length, angry and impatient, the sultan went down to behold with his own eyes what had happened, but as nobody could give him any explanation, he bade one of his attendants to fetch a magician, who dwelt near one of the city gates, to remove the spell which had been cast by some evil genius.

'It is your own fault,' said the magician, when he had heard the sultan's story. 'If you had not broken your promise to the young man, your daughter would not have had this ill befall her. Now there is only one remedy, and the bridegroom you have chosen must yield his place to the bald-headed youth.'

Sore though he was in his heart, the sultan knew that the magician was wiser than he, and despatched his most trusted servants to seek out the young man without a moment's delay and bring him to the palace. The youth, who all this time had been hiding behind a pillar, smiled to himself when he heard these words, and, hastening home, he said to his mother: 'If messengers from the sultan should come here and ask for me, be sure you answer that it is a long while since I went away, and that you cannot tell where I may be, but that if they will give you money enough for your journey, as you are very poor, you will do your best to find me.' Then he hid himself in the loft above, so that he could listen to all that passed.

The next minute someone knocked loudly at the door, and the old woman jumped up and opened it.

'Is your bald-headed son here?' asked the man outside. 'If so, let him come with me, as the sultan wishes to speak with him directly.'

'Alas! sir,' replied the woman, putting a corner of her veil to her eyes, 'he left me long since, and since that day no news of him has reached me.'

'Oh! good lady, can you not guess where he may be? The sultan intends to bestow on him the hand of his daughter, and he is certain to give a large reward to the man who brings him back.'

'He never told me whither he was going,' answered the crone, shaking her head. 'But it is a great honour that the sultan does him, and well worth some trouble. There are places where, perhaps, he may be found, but they are known to me only, and I am a poor woman and have no money for the journey.'

'Oh! that will not stand in the way,' cried the man. 'In this purse are a thousand gold pieces; spend them freely. Tell me where I can find him and you shall have as many more.'

'Very well,' said she, 'it is a bargain; and now farewell, for I must make some preparations; but in a few days at furthest you shall hear from me.'

For nearly a week both the old woman and her son were careful not to leave the house till it was dark, lest they should be seen by any of the neighbours, and as they did not even kindle a fire or light a lantern, everyone supposed that the cottage was deserted. At length one fine morning, the young man got up early and dressed himself, and put on his best turban, and after a hasty breakfast took the road to the palace.

The huge negro before the door evidently expected him, for without a word he let him pass, and another attendant who was waiting inside conducted him straight into the presence of the sultan, who welcomed him gladly.

'Ah, my son! where have you hidden yourself all this time?' said he. And the bald-headed man answered:

'Oh, Sultan! Fairly I won your daughter, but you broke your word, and would not give her to me. Then my home grew hateful to me, and I set out to wander through the world! But now that you have repented of your ill-faith, I have come to claim the wife who is mine of right. Therefore bid your wizir prepare the contract.'

So a fresh contract was prepared, and at the wish of the new bridegroom was signed by the sultan and the wizir in the chamber where they met. After this was done, the youth begged the sultan to lead him to the princess, and together they entered the big hall, where everyone was standing exactly as they were when the young man had uttered the fatal word.

'Can you remove the spell?' asked the sultan anxiously.

'I think so,' replied the young man (who, to say the truth, was a little anxious himself), and stepping forward, he cried:

'Let the victims of Madschun be free!'

No sooner were the words uttered than the statues returned to life, and the bride placed her hand joyfully in that of her new bridegroom. As for the old one, he vanished completely, and no one ever knew what became of him.

(Adapted from Turkische Volksmarchen aus Stambul. Dr. Ignaz Kunos. E. J. Brill, Leiden.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

THE BLUE PARROT

In a part of Arabia where groves of palms and sweet-scented flowers give the traveller rest after toilsome journeys under burning skies, there reigned a young king whose name was Lino. He had grown up under the wise rule of his father, who had lately died, and though he was only nineteen, he did not believe, like many young men, that he must change all the laws in order to show how clever he was, but was content with the old ones which had made the people happy and the country prosperous. There was only one fault that his subjects had to find with him, and that was that he did not seem in any hurry to be married, in spite of the prayers that they frequently offered him.

The neighbouring kingdom was governed by the Swan fairy, who had an only daughter, the Princess Hermosa, who was as charming in her way as Lino in his. The Swan fairy always had an ambassador at the young king's court, and on hearing the grumbles of the citizens that Lino showed no signs of taking a wife, the good man resolved that he would try his hand at match-making. 'For,' he said, 'if there is any one living who is worthy of the Princess Hermosa he is to be found here. At any rate, I can but try and bring them together.'

Now, of course, it was not proper to offer the princess in marriage, and the difficulty was to work upon the unconscious king so as to get the proposal to come from him. But the ambassador was well used to the ways of courts, and after several conversations on the art of painting, which Lino loved, he led the talk to portraits, and mentioned carelessly that a particularly fine picture had lately been made of his own princess. 'Though, as for a likeness,' he concluded, 'perhaps it is hardly as good as this small miniature, which was painted a year ago.'

The king took it, and looked at it closely.

'Ah!' he sighed, 'that must be flattered! It cannot be possible that any woman should be such a miracle of beauty.'

'If you could only see her,' answered the ambassador.

The king did not reply, but the ambassador was not at all surprised when, the following morning, he was sent for into the royal presence.

'Since you showed me that picture,' began Lino, almost before the door was shut, 'I have not been able to banish the face of the princess from my thoughts. I have summoned you here to inform you that I am about to send special envoys to the court of the Swan fairy, asking her daughter in marriage.'

'I cannot, as you will understand, speak for my mistress in so important a matter,' replied the ambassador, stroking his beard in order to conceal the satisfaction he felt. 'But I know that she will certainly be highly gratified at your proposal.'

'If that is so,' cried the king, his whole face beaming with joy, 'then, instead of sending envoys, I will go myself, and take you with me. In three days my preparations will be made, and we will set out.'

* * * * *

Unluckily for Lino, he had for his neighbour on the other side a powerful magician named Ismenor, who was king of the Isle of Lions, and the father of a hideous daughter, whom he thought the most beautiful creature that ever existed. Riquette, for such was her name, had also fallen in love with a portrait, but it was of King Lino, and she implored her father to give him to her for a husband. Ismenor, who considered that no man lived who was worthy of his treasure, was about to send his chief minister to King Lino on this mission, when the news reached him that the king had already started for the court of the Swan fairy. Riquette was thrown into transports of grief, and implored her father to prevent the marriage, which Ismenor promised to do; and calling for an ugly and humpbacked little dwarf named Rabot, he performed some spells which transported them quickly to a rocky valley through which the king and his escort were bound to pass. When the tramp of horses was heard, the magician took out an enchanted handkerchief, which rendered invisible any one who touched it. Giving one end to Rabot, and holding the other himself, they walked unseen amongst the horsemen, but not a trace of Lino was to be found. And this was natural enough, because the king, tired out with the excitement and fatigue of the last few days, had bidden the heavy coaches, laden with presents for the princess, to go forwards, while he rested under the palms with a few of his friends. Here Ismenor beheld them, all sound asleep; and casting a spell which prevented their waking till he wished them to do so, he stripped the king of all his clothes and dressed him in those of Rabot, whom he touched with his ring, saying:

'Take the shape of Lino until you have wedded the daughter of the Swan fairy.'

And so great was the magician's power that Rabot positively believed himself to be really the king!

When the groom had mounted Lino's horse, and had ridden out of sight, Ismenor aroused the king, who stared with astonishment at the dirty garments in which he was dressed; but before he had time to look about him, the magician caught him up in a cloud, and carried him off to his daughter.

Meantime Rabot had come up with the others, who never guessed for a moment that he was not their own master.

'I am hungry,' said he, 'give me something to eat at once.'

'May it please your majesty,' answered the steward, 'the tents are not even set up, and it will be at least an hour before your supper is served! We thought----'

'Who taught you to think?' interrupted the false king rudely. 'You are nothing but a fool! Get me some horse's flesh directly--it is the best meat in the world!'

The steward could hardly believe his ears. King Lino, the most polite man under the sun, to speak to his faithful servant in such a manner! And to want horse's flesh too! Why he was so delicate in his appetite that he lived mostly on fruit and cakes. Well, well, there was no knowing what people would come to; and, anyhow, he must obey at once, if he wished to keep his head on his shoulders. Perhaps, after all, it was love which had driven him mad, and, if so, by-and-by he might come right again.

Whatever excuses his old servants might invent for their master, by the time the procession reached the Swan's fairy capital there were no more horses left, and they were forced to walk up to the palace on foot. Hiding their surprise as best they could, they begged the king to follow them, dismounting from their own horses, as he, they supposed, preferred to walk. They soon perceived the Swan fairy and her daughter awaiting them on a low balcony, under which the king stopped.

'Madam,' he said, 'you may be surprised that I have come to ask your daughter's hand in so unceremonious a fashion; but the journey is long, and I was hungry and ate my horse, which is the best meat in the world; and I forced my courtiers to eat theirs also. But for all that I am a great king, and wish to be your son-in-law. And now that is settled, where is Hermosa?'

'Sire,' answered the queen, not a little displeased as well as amazed at the king's manner, which was so different from anything she had been led to expect. 'You possess my daughter's portrait, and it can have made but little impression on you if you don't recognise her at once.'

'I don't remember any portrait,' replied Rabot; 'but perhaps it may be in my pocket after all.' And he searched everywhere, while the ladies-in-waiting looked on with astonishment, but of course found nothing. When he had finished he turned to the princess, who stood there blushing and angry, and said:

'If it is you whom I have come to marry, I think you are very beautiful, and I am sure if I had even seen your portrait I should have remembered it. Let us have the wedding as soon as possible; and, meantime, I should like to go to sleep, for your country is very different from mine, and I can assure you that after walking over stones and sand for days and days one needs a little rest.'

And without waiting for a reply he bade one of the pages conduct him to his room, where he was soon snoring so loud that he could be heard at the other end of the town.

As soon as he was out of their sight the poor princess flung herself into her mother's arms, and burst into tears. For fifteen days she had had King Lino's portrait constantly before her, while the letter from their own ambassador speaking of the young man's grace and charm had never left her pocket. True, the portrait was faithful enough, but how could that fair outside contain so rough and rude a soul? Yet this even she might have forgiven had the king shown any of the signs of love and admiration to which she had been so long accustomed. As for her mother, the poor Swan fairy was so bewildered at the extraordinary manners of her new son-in-law, that she was almost speechless.

Matters were in this state when King Lino's chamberlain begged for a private audience of her majesty, and no sooner were they alone than he told her that he feared that his master had suddenly gone mad, or had fallen under the spell of some magician.

'I had been lost in astonishment before,' said he, 'but now that he has failed to recognise the princess, and no longer possesses her portrait, which he never would part from for a single instant, my amazement knows no bounds. Perhaps, madam, your fairy gifts may be able to discover the reason of this change in one whose courtesy was the talk of the kingdom.' And with a low bow he took his departure.

The queen stood where the chamberlain left her, thinking deeply. Suddenly her face cleared, and going to an old chest which she kept in a secret room, she drew from it a small mirror. In this mirror she could see faithfully reflected whatever she wished, and at this moment she desired above all things to behold King Lino as he really was.

Ah! the chamberlain was right! It was not he who was lying on his bed snoring till the whole palace shook beneath him. No, this was her real son-in-law--the man dressed in dirty clothes, and imprisoned in one of Ismenor's strongest towers, and kissing the portrait of Hermosa, which had escaped the wizard's notice, owing to the young king having worn it, for better concealment, tied amongst his hair. Calling hastily to her daughter, she bade her also look, and Hermosa had the pleasure of gazing on Lino, who was behaving exactly as she could have wished. The mirror was still in her hand when the door of the prison opened, and there entered the hideous Riquette, who, from her upraised eyes, seemed to be begging from Lino some favour which he refused to grant. Of course Hermosa and her mother could not hear their words, but from Riquette's angry face as she left the room, it was not difficult to guess what had happened. But the mirror had more to tell, for it appeared that in fury at her rejection by the king, Riquette had ordered four strong men to scourge him till he fainted, which was done in the sight of Hermosa, who in horror dropped the mirror, and would have fallen, had she not been caught by her mother.

'Control yourself, my child,' said the fairy. 'We have need of all our wits if we are to rescue the king from the power of those wicked people. And first it is necessary to know who the man that has taken his name and his face really is.'

Then, picking up the mirror, she wished that she might behold the false lover; and the glass gave back a vision of a dirty, greasy groom, lying, dressed as he was, on her bed of state.

'So this is the trick Ismenor hoped to play us! Well, we will have our revenge, whatever it costs us to get it. Only we must be very careful not to let him guess that he has not deceived us, for his skill in magic is greater than mine, and I shall have to be very prudent. To begin with, I must leave you, and if the false king asks why, then answer that I have to settle some affairs on the borders of my kingdom. Meanwhile, be sure you treat him most politely, and arrange fetes to amuse him. If he shows any sign of being suspicious, you can even give him to understand that, on your marriage, I intend to give up the crown to your husband. And now farewell!' So saying, the Swan fairy waved her hand, and a cloud came down and concealed her, and nobody imagined that the beautiful white cloud that was blown so rapidly across the sky was the chariot that was carrying the Swan fairy to the tower of Ismenor.

* * * * *

Now the tower was situated in the midst of a forest, so the queen thought that, under cover of the dark trees, it would be quite easy for her to drop to earth unseen. But the tower was so thoroughly enchanted that the more she tried to reach the ground the tighter something tried to hold her back. At length, by putting forth all the power she possessed, she managed to descend to the foot of the tower, and there, weak and faint as she was with her exertions, she lost no time in working her spells, and found that she could only overcome Ismenor by means of a stone from the ring of Gyges. But how was she to get this ring? for the magic book told her that Ismenor guarded it night and day among his most precious treasures. However, get it she must, and in the meantime the first step was to see the royal prisoner himself. So, drawing out her tablets, she wrote as follows:

'The bird which brings you this letter is the Swan fairy, mother of Hermosa, who loves you as much as you love her!' And after this assurance, she related the wicked plot of which he had been the victim. Then, quickly changing herself into a swallow, she began to fly round the tower, till she discovered the window of Lino's prison. It was so high up that bars seemed needless, especially as four soldiers were stationed in the passage outside, therefore the fairy was able to enter, and even to hop on his shoulder, but he was so much occupied with gazing at the princess's portrait that it was some time before she could attract his attention. At last she gently scratched his cheek with the corner of the note, and he looked round with a start. On perceiving the swallow he knew at once that help had come, and tearing open the letter, he wept with joy on seeing the words it contained, and asked a thousand questions as to Hermosa, which the swallow was unable to answer, though, by repeated nods, she signed to him to read further. 'Must I indeed pretend to wish to marry that horrible Riquette?' he cried, when he had finished. 'Can I obtain the stone from the magician?'

Accordingly the next morning, when Riquette paid him her daily visit, he received her much more graciously than usual. The magician's daughter could not contain her delight at this change, and in answer to her expressions of joy, Lino told her that he had had a dream by which he had learned the inconstancy of Hermosa; also that a fairy had appeared and informed him that if he wished to break the bonds which bound him to the faithless princess and transfer his affections to the daughter of Ismenor, he must have in his possession for a day and a night a stone from the ring of Gyges, now in the possession of the magician. This news so enchanted Riquette, that she flung her arms round the king's neck and embraced him tenderly, greatly to his disgust, as he would infinitely have preferred the sticks of the soldiers. However, there was no help for it, and he did his best to seem pleased, till Riquette relieved him by announcing that she must lose no time in asking her father and obtaining from him the precious stone.

His daughter's request came as a great surprise to Ismenor, whose suspicions were instantly excited; but, think as he would, he could not see any means by which the king, so closely guarded, might have held communication with the Swan fairy. Still, he would do nothing hastily, and, hiding his dismay, he told Riquette that his only wish was to make her happy, and that as she wished so much for the stone he would fetch it for her. Then he went into the closet where all his spells were worked, and in a short time he discovered that his enemy the Swan fairy was at that moment inside his palace.

'So that is it!' he said, smiling grimly. 'Well, she shall have a stone by all means, but a stone that will turn everyone who touches it into marble.' And placing a small ruby in a box, he returned to his daughter.

'Here is the talisman which will gain you the love of King Lino,' he said; 'but be sure you give him the box unopened, or else the stone will lose all its virtue.' With a cry of joy Riquette snatched the box from his hands, and ran off to the prison, followed by her father, who, holding tightly the enchanted handkerchief, was able, unseen, to watch the working of the spell. As he expected, at the foot of the tower stood the Swan fairy, who had had the imprudence to appear in her natural shape, waiting for the stone which the prince was to throw to her. Eagerly she caught the box as it fell from the prince's hands, but no sooner had her fingers touched the ruby, than a curious hardening came over her, her limbs stiffened, and her tongue could hardly utter the words 'We are betrayed.'

'Yes, you are betrayed,' cried Ismenor, in a terrible voice; 'and you,' he continued, dragging the king to the window, 'you shall turn into a parrot, and a parrot you will remain until you can persuade Hermosa to crush in your head.'

He had hardly finished before a blue parrot flew out into the forest; and the magician, mounting in his winged chariot, set off for the Isle of Swans, where he changed everybody into statues, exactly in the positions in which he found them, not even excepting Rabot himself. Only Hermosa was spared, and her he ordered to get into his chariot beside him. In a few minutes he reached the Forest of Wonders, when the magician got down, and dragged the unhappy princess out after him.

'I have changed your mother into a stone, and your lover into a parrot,' said he, 'and you are to become a tree, and a tree you will remain until you have crushed the head of the person you love best in the world. But I will leave you your mind and memory, that your tortures may be increased a thousand-fold.'

Great magician as he was, Ismenor could not have invented a more terrible fate had he tried for a hundred years. The hours passed wearily by for the poor princess, who longed for a wood-cutter's axe to put an end to her misery. How were they to be delivered from their doom? And even supposing that King Lino did fly that way, there were thousands of blue parrots in the forest, and how was she to know him, or he her? As to her mother--ah! that was too bad to think about! So, being a woman, she kept on thinking.

Meanwhile the blue parrot flew about the world, making friends wherever he went, till, one day, he entered the castle of an old wizard who had just married a beautiful young wife. Grenadine, for such was her name, led a very dull life, and was delighted to have a playfellow, so she gave him a golden cage to sleep in, and delicious fruits to eat. Only in one way did he disappoint her--he never would talk as other parrots did.

'If you only knew how happy it would make me, I'm sure you would try,' she was fond of saying; but the parrot did not seem to hear her.

One morning, however, she left the room to gather some flowers, and the parrot, finding himself alone, hopped to the table, and, picking up a pencil, wrote some verses on a piece of paper. He had just finished when he was startled by a noise, and letting fall the pencil, he flew out of the window.

Now hardly had he dropped the pencil when the wizard lifted a corner of the curtain which hung over the doorway, and advanced into the room. Seeing a paper on the table, he picked it up, and great was his surprise as he read:

'Fair princess, to win your grace, I will hold discourse with you; Silence, though, were more in place Than chatt'ring like a cockatoo.'

'I half suspected it was enchanted,' murmured the wizard to himself. And he fetched his books and searched them, and found that instead of being a parrot, the bird was really a king who had fallen under the wrath of a magician, and that magician the man whom the wizard hated most in the world. Eagerly he read on, seeking for some means of breaking the enchantment, and at last, to his great joy, he discovered the remedy. Then he hurried to his wife, who was lying on some cushions under the tree on which the parrot had perched, and informed her that her favourite was really the king of a great country, and that, if she would whistle for the bird, they would all go together to a certain spot in the Forest of Marvels, 'where I will restore him to his own shape. Only you must not be afraid or cry out, whatever I do,' added he, 'or everything will be spoilt.' The wizard's wife jumped up in an instant, so delighted was she, and began to whistle the song that the parrot loved; but as he did not wish it to be known that he had been listening to the conversation he waited until she had turned her back, when he flew down the tree and alighted on her shoulder. Then they got into a golden boat, which carried them to a clearing in the forest, where three tall trees stood by themselves.

'I want these trees for my magic fire,' he said to his wife; 'put the parrot on that branch, he will be quite safe, and go yourself to a little distance. If you stay too near you may get your head crushed in their fall.'

At these words the parrot suddenly remembered the prophecy of Ismenor, and held himself ready, his heart beating at the thought that in one of those trees he beheld Hermosa. Meanwhile the magician took a spade, and loosened the earth of the roots of the three trees so that they might fall all together. Directly the parrot observed them totter he spread his wings and flew right under the middle one, which was the most beautiful of the three. There was a crash, then Lino and Hermosa stood facing each other, clasped hand in hand.

After the first few moments, the princess's thoughts turned to her mother, and falling at the feet of the magician, who was smiling with delight at the success of his plan, she implored him to help them once more, and to give the Swan fairy back her proper shape.

'That is not so easy,' said he, 'but I will try what I can do.' And transporting himself to his palace to obtain a little bottle of poisoned water, he waited till nightfall, and started at once for Ismenor's tower. Of course, had Ismenor consulted his books he would have seen what his enemy was doing, he might have protected himself; but he had been eating and drinking too much, and had gone to bed, sleeping heavily. Changing himself into a bat, the magician flew into the room, and hiding himself in the curtains, he poured all the liquid over Ismenor's face, so that he died without a groan. At the same instant the Swan fairy became a woman again, for no magician, however powerful, can work spells which last beyond his own life.

So when the Swan fairy returned to her capital she found all her courtiers waiting at the gate to receive her, and in their midst, beaming with happiness, Hermosa and King Lino. Standing behind them, though a long way off, was Rabot; but his dirty clothes had given place to clean ones, when his earnest desire was granted, and the princess had made him head of her stables.

And here we must bid them all farewell, feeling sure they will have many years of happiness before them after the terrible trials through which they have passed.

(Adapted and shortened from Le Cabinet des Fees.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

GEIRLAUG THE KING'S DAUGHTER

One day a powerful king and his beautiful wife were sitting in the gardens of their capital city, talking earnestly about the future life of their little son, who was sleeping by their side in his beautiful golden cradle. They had been married for many years without children, so when this baby came they thought themselves the happiest couple in the whole world. He was a fine sturdy little boy, who loved to kick and to strike out with his fists; but even if he had been weak and small they would still have thought him the most wonderful creature upon earth, and so absorbed were they in making plans for him, that they never noticed a huge dark shadow creeping up, till a horrible head with gleaming teeth stretched over them, and in an instant their beloved baby was snatched away.

For a while the king and queen remained where they were, speechless with horror. Then the king rose slowly, and holding out his hand to his wife, led her weeping into the palace, and for many days their subjects saw no more of them.

Meanwhile the dragon soared high into the air, holding the cradle between his teeth, and the baby still slept on. He flew so fast that he soon crossed the borders of another kingdom, and again he beheld the king and queen of the country seated in the garden with a little girl lying in a wonderful cradle of white satin and lace. Swooping down from behind as he had done before, he was just about to seize the cradle, when the king jumped up and dealt him such a blow with his golden staff that the dragon not only started back, but in his pain let fall the boy, as he spread his wings and soared into the air away from all danger.

'That was a narrow escape,' said the king, turning to his wife, who sat pale with fright, and clasping her baby tightly in her arms. 'Frightful,' murmured the queen; 'but look, what is that glittering object that is lying out there?' The king walked in the direction of her finger, and to his astonishment beheld another cradle and another baby.

'Ah! the monster must have stolen this as he sought to steal Geirlaug,' cried he. And stooping lower, he read some words that were written on the fine linen that was wound round the boy. 'This is Grethari, son of Grethari the king!' Unfortunately it happened that the two neighbouring monarchs had had a serious quarrel, and for some years had ceased holding communication with each other. So, instead of sending a messenger at once to Grethari to tell him of the safety of his son, the king contented himself with adopting the baby, which was brought up with Geirlaug the princess.

For a while things went well with the children, who were as happy as the day was long, but at last there came a time when the queen could no more run races or play at hide-and-seek with them in the garden as she was so fond of doing, but lay and watched them from a pile of soft cushions. By-and-by she gave up doing even that, and people in the palace spoke with low voices, and even Geirlaug and Grethari trod gently and moved quietly when they drew near her room. At length, one morning, they were sent for by the king himself, who, his eyes red with weeping, told them that the queen was dead.

Great was the sorrow of the two children, for they had loved the queen very dearly, and life seemed dull without her. But the lady-in-waiting who took care of them in the tower which had been built for them while they were still babies, was kind and good, and when the king was busy or away in other parts of his kingdom she made them quite happy, and saw that they were taught everything that a prince and princess ought to know. Thus two or three years passed, when, one day, as the children were anxiously awaiting their father's return from a distant city, there rode post haste into the courtyard of the palace a herald whom the king had sent before him, to say that he was bringing back a new wife.

Now, in itself, there was nothing very strange or dreadful in the fact that the king should marry again, but, as the old lady-in-waiting soon guessed, the queen, in spite of her beauty, was a witch, and as it was easy to see that she was jealous of everyone who might gain power over her husband, it boded ill for Geirlaug and Grethari. The faithful woman could not sleep for thinking about her charges, and her soul sank when, a few months after the marriage, war broke out with a country across the seas, and the king rode away at the head of his troops. Then there happened what she had so long expected. One night, when, unlike her usual habit, she was sleeping soundly--afterwards she felt sure that a drug had been put into her food--the witch came to the tower. Exactly what she did there no one knew, but, when the sun rose, the beds of Grethari and Geirlaug were empty. At dawn the queen summoned some of her guards, and told them that she had been warned in a dream that some evil fate would befall her through a wild beast, and bade them go out and kill every animal within two miles of the palace. But the only beasts they found were two black foals of wondrous beauty, fitted for the king's riding; it seemed a pity to kill them, for what harm could two little foals do anyone? So they let them run away, frisking over the plain, and returned to the palace.

'Did you see nothing, really nothing?' asked the queen, when they again appeared before her.

'Nothing, your majesty,' they replied. But the queen did not believe them, and when they were gone, she gave orders to her steward that at supper the guards should be well plied with strong drink so that their tongues should be loosened, and, further, that he was to give heed to their babble, and report to her, whatever they might let fall.

'Your majesty's commands have been obeyed,' said the steward when, late in the evening, he begged admittance to the royal apartments; 'but, after all, the men have told you the truth. I listened to their talk from beginning to end, and nothing did they see save two black foals.' He might have added more, but the look in the queen's blazing eyes terrified him, and, bowing hastily, he backed quickly out of her presence.

In a week's time the king came home, and right glad were all the courtiers to see him.

'Now, perhaps, she will find some one else to scream at,' whispered they amongst themselves. 'She' was the queen, who had vented her rage on her attendants during these days, though what had happened to make her so angry nobody knew. But whatever might be the meaning of it, things would be sure to improve with the king to rule in the palace instead of his wife. Unfortunately, their joy only lasted a short while; for the very first night after the king's arrival the queen related the evil dream she had dreamt in his absence, and begged him to go out the next morning and kill every living creature he saw within two miles of the city. The king, who always believed everything the queen said, promised to do as she wished. But before he had ridden through the lovely gardens that surrounded the palace, he was attracted by the singing of two little blue birds perched on a scarlet-berried holly, which made him think of everything beautiful that he had ever heard of or imagined. Hour after hour passed by, and still the birds sang, and still the king listened, though of course he never guessed that it was Geirlaug and Grethari whose notes filled him with enchantment. At length darkness fell; the birds' voices were hushed, and the king awoke with a start to find that for that day his promise to the queen could not be kept.

'Well! did you see anything?' she asked eagerly, when the king entered her apartments.

'Ah, my dear, I am almost ashamed to confess to you. But the fact is that before I rode as far as the western gate the singing of two strange little blue birds made me forget all else in the world. And you will hardly believe it--but not until it grew dark did I remember where I was and what I should have been doing. However, to-morrow nothing shall hinder me from fulfilling your desires.'

'There will be no to-morrow,' muttered the queen, as she turned away with a curious glitter in her eyes. But the king did not hear her.

That night the king gave a great supper in the palace in honour of the victory he had gained over the enemy. The three men whom the queen had sent forth to slay the wild beasts held positions of trust in the household, for to them was committed the custody of the queen's person. And on the occasion of a feast their places were always next that of the king, so it was easy for the queen to scatter a slow but fatal poison in their cups without anyone being the wiser. Before dawn the palace was roused by the news that the king was dead, and that the three officers of the guards were dying also. Of course nobody's cries and laments were as loud as those of the queen. But when once the splendid funeral was over, she gave out that she was going to shut herself up in a distant castle till the year of her mourning was over, and after appointing a regent of the kingdom, she set out attended only by a maid who knew all her secrets. Once she had left the palace she quickly began to work her spells, to discover under what form Geirlaug and Grethari lay hidden. Happily, the princess had studied magic under a former governess, so was able to fathom her step-mother's wicked plot, and hastily changed herself into a whale, and her foster-brother into its fin. Then the queen took the shape of a shark and gave chase.

For several hours a fierce battle raged between the whale and the shark, and the sea around was red with blood; first one of the combatants got the better, and then the other, but at length it became plain to the crowd of little fishes gathered round to watch, that the victory would be to the whale. And so it was. But when, after a mighty struggle, the shark floated dead and harmless on the surface of the water, the whale was so exhausted that she had only strength enough to drag her wounded body into a quiet little bay, and for three days she remained there as still and motionless as if she had been dead herself. At the end of the three days her wounds were healed, and she began to think what it was best to do.

'Let us go back to your father's kingdom,' she said to Grethari, when they had both resumed their proper shapes, and were sitting on a high cliff above the sea.

'How clever you are! I never should have thought of that!' answered Grethari, who, in truth, was not clever at all. But Geirlaug took a small box of white powder from her dress, and sprinkled some over him and some over herself, and, quicker than lightning, they found themselves in the palace grounds from which Grethari had been carried off by the dragon so many years before.

'Now take up the band with the golden letters and bind it about your forehead,' said Geirlaug, 'and go boldly up to the castle. And, remember, however great may be your thirst, you must drink nothing till you have first spoken to your father. If you do, ill will befall us both.'

'Why should I be thirsty?' replied Grethari, staring at her in astonishment. 'It will not take me five minutes to reach the castle gate.' Geirlaug held her peace, but her eyes had in them a sad look. 'Good-bye,' she said at last, and she turned and kissed him.

Grethari had spoken truly when he declared that he could easily get to the castle in five minutes. At least, no one would have dreamed that it could possibly take any longer. Yet, to his surprise, the door which stood so widely open that he could see the colour of the hangings within never appeared to grow any nearer, while each moment the sun burned more hotly, and his tongue was parched with thirst.

'I don't understand! What can be the matter with me--and why haven't I reached the castle long ago?' he murmured to himself, as his knees began to knock under him with fatigue, and his head to swim. For a few more paces he staggered on blindly, when, suddenly, the sound of rushing water smote upon his ears; and in a little wood that bordered the path he beheld a stream falling over a rock. At this sight his promise to Geirlaug was forgotten. Fighting his way through the brambles that tore his clothes, he cast himself down beside the fountain, and seizing the golden cup that hung from a tree, he drank a deep draught.

When he rose up the remembrance of Geirlaug and of his past life had vanished, and, instead, something stirred dimly within him at the vision of the white-haired man and woman who stood in the open door with outstretched hands.

'Grethari! Grethari! So you have come home at last,' cried they.

* * * * *

For three hours Geirlaug waited in the spot where Grethari had left her, and then she began to understand what had happened. Her heart was heavy, but she soon made up her mind what to do, and pushing her way out of the wood, she skirted the high wall that enclosed the royal park and gardens, till she reached a small house where the forester lived with his two daughters.

'Do you want a girl to sweep, and to milk the cows?' asked she, when one of the sisters answered her knock.

'Yes, we do, very badly; and as you look strong and clean, we will take you for a servant if you like to come,' replied the young woman.

'But, first, what is your name?'

'Lauphertha,' said Geirlaug quickly, for she did not wish anyone to know who she was; and following her new mistress into the house, she begged to be taught her work without delay. And so clever was she, that, by-and-by, it began to be noised abroad that the strange girl who had come to live in the forester's house had not her equal in the whole kingdom for skill as well as beauty. Thus the years slipped away, during which Geirlaug grew to be a woman. Now and then she caught glimpses of Grethari as he rode out to hunt in the forest, but when she saw him coming she hid herself behind the great trees, for her heart was still sore at his forgetfulness. One day, however, when she was gathering herbs, he came upon her suddenly, before she had time to escape, though as she had stained her face and hands brown, and covered her beautiful hair with a scarlet cap, he did not guess her to be his foster-sister.

'What is your name, pretty maiden?' asked he.

'Lauphertha,' answered the girl with a low curtesy.

'Ah! it is you, then, of whom I have heard so much,' said he; 'you are too beautiful to spend your life serving the forester's daughters. Come with me to the palace, and my mother the queen will make you one of her ladies in waiting.'

'Truly, that would be a great fortune,' replied the maiden. 'And, if you really mean it, I will go with you. But how shall I know that you are not jesting?'

'Give me something to do for you, and I will do it, whatever it is,' cried the young man eagerly. And she cast down her eyes, and answered:

'Go to the stable, and bind the calf that is there so that it shall not break loose in the night and wander away, for the forester and his daughters have treated me well, and I would not leave them with aught of my work still undone.'

So Grethari set out for the stable where the calf stood, and wound the rope about its horns. But when he had made it fast to the wall, he found that a coil of the rope had twisted itself round his wrist, and, pull as he might, he could not get free. All night he wriggled and struggled till he was half dead with fatigue. But when the sun rose the rope suddenly fell away from him, and, very angry with the maiden he dragged himself back to the palace. 'She is a witch,' he muttered crossly to himself, 'and I will have no more to do with her.' And he flung himself on his bed and slept all day.

Not long after this adventure the king and queen sent their beloved son on an embassy to a neighbouring country to seek a bride from amongst the seven princesses. The most beautiful of all was, of course, the one chosen, and the young pair took ship without delay for the kingdom of the prince's parents. The wind was fair and the vessel so swift that, in less time than could have been expected, the harbour nearest the castle was reached. A splendid carriage had been left in readiness close to the beach, but no horses were to be found, for every one had been carried off to take part in a great review which the king was to hold that day in honour of his son's marriage.

'I can't stay here all day,' said the princess, crossly, when Grethari told her of the plight they were in. 'I am perfectly worn out as it is, and you will have to find something to draw the carriage, if it is only a donkey. If you don't, I will sail back straight to my father.'

Poor Grethari was much troubled by the words of the princess. Not that he felt so very much in love with her, for during the voyage she had shown him several times how vain and bad tempered she was; but as a prince and a bridegroom, he could not, of course, bear to think that any slight had been put upon her. So he hastily bade his attendants to go in search of some animal, and bring it at once to the place at which they were waiting.

During the long pause the princess sat in the beautiful golden coach, her blue velvet mantle powdered with silver bees drawn closely round her, so that not even the tip of her nose could be seen. At length a girl appeared driving a young ox in front of her, followed by one of the prince's messengers, who was talking eagerly.

'Will you lend me your ox, fair maiden?' asked Grethari, jumping up and going to meet them. 'You shall fix your own price, and it shall be paid ungrudgingly, for never before was king's son in such a plight.'

'My price is seats for me and my two friends behind you and your bride at the wedding feast,' answered she. And to this Grethari joyfully consented.

Six horses would not have drawn the coach at the speed of this one ox. Trees and fields flew by so fast that the bride became quite giddy, and expected, besides, that they would be upset every moment. But, in spite of her fears, nothing happened, and they drew up in safety at the door of the palace, to the great surprise of the king and queen. The marriage preparations were hurried on, and by the end of the week everything was ready. It was, perhaps, fortunate that the princess was too busy with her clothes and her jewels during this period to pay much heed to Grethari, so that by the time the wedding day came round he had almost forgotten how cross and rude she had been on the journey.

The oldest men and women in the town agreed that nothing so splendid had ever been seen as the bridal procession to the great hall, where the banquet was to be held, before the ceremony was celebrated in the palace. The princess was in high good humour, feeling that all eyes were upon her, and bowed and smiled right and left. Taking the prince's hand, she sailed proudly down the room, where the guests were already assembled, to her place at the head of the table by the side of the bridegroom. As she did so, three strange ladies in shining dresses of blue, green, and red, glided in and seated themselves on a vacant bench immediately behind the young couple. The red lady was Geirlaug, who had brought with her the forester's daughters, and in one hand she held a wand of birch bark, and in the other a closed basket.

Silently they sat as the feast proceeded; hardly anyone noticed their presence, or, if they did, supposed them to be attendants of their future queen. Suddenly, when the merriment was at its height, Geirlaug opened the basket, and out flew a cock and hen. To the astonishment of everyone, the birds circled about in front of the royal pair, the cock plucking the feathers out of the tail of the hen, who tried in vain to escape from him.

'Will you treat me as badly as Grethari treated Geirlaug?' cried the hen at last. And Grethari heard, and started up wildly. In an instant all the past rushed back to him; the princess by his side was forgotten, and he only saw the face of the child with whom he had played long years ago.

'Where is Geirlaug?' he exclaimed, looking round the hall; and his eyes fell upon the strange lady. With a smile she held out a ring which he had given her on her twelfth birthday, when they were still children, without a thought of the future. 'You and none other shall be my wife,' he said, taking her hand, and leading her into the middle of the company.

It is not easy to describe the scene that followed. Of course, nobody understood what had occurred, and the king and queen imagined that their son had suddenly gone mad. As for the princess her rage and fury were beyond belief. The guests left the hall as quickly as they could, so that the royal family might arrange their own affairs, and in the end it was settled that half the kingdom must be given to the despised princess, instead of a husband. She sailed back at once to her country, where she was soon betrothed to a young noble, whom, in reality, she liked much better than Grethari. That evening Grethari was married to Geirlaug, and they lived happily till they died, and made all their people happy also.

(From Neuislandischen Volksmarchen.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

THE STORY OF LITTLE KING LOC

Two or three miles from the coast of France, anyone sailing in a ship on a calm day can see deep, deep down, the trunks of great trees standing up in the water. Many hundreds of years ago these trees formed part of a large forest, full of all sorts of wild animals, and beyond the forest was a fine city, guarded by a castle in which dwelt the Dukes of Clarides. But little by little the sea drew nearer to the town; the foundations of the houses became undermined and fell in, and at length a shining sea flowed over the land. However, all this happened a long time after the story I am going to tell you.

The Dukes of Clarides had always lived in the midst of their people, and protected them both in war and peace.

At the period when this tale begins the Duke Robert was dead, leaving a young and beautiful duchess who ruled in his stead. Of course everyone expected her to marry again, but she refused all suitors who sought her hand, saying that, having only one soul she could have only one husband, and that her baby daughter was quite enough for her.

* * * * *

One day, she was sitting in the tower, which looked out over a rocky heath, covered in summer with purple and yellow flowers, when she beheld a troop of horsemen riding towards the castle. In the midst, seated on a white horse with black and silver trappings, was a lady whom the duchess at once knew to be her friend the Countess of Blanchelande, a young widow like herself, mother of a little boy two years older than Abeille des Clarides. The duchess hailed her arrival with delight, but her joy was soon turned into weeping when the countess sank down beside her on a pile of cushions, and told the reason of her visit.

'As you know,' she said, taking her friend's hand and pressing it between her own, 'whenever a Countess of Blanchelande is about to die she finds a white rose lying on her pillow. Last night I went to bed feeling unusually happy, but this morning when I woke the rose was resting against my cheek. I have no one to help me in the world but you, and I have come to ask if you will take Youri my son, and let him be a brother to Abeille?'

Tears choked the voice of the duchess, but she flung herself on the countess's neck, and pressed her close. Silently the two women took leave of each other, and silently the doomed lady mounted her horse and rode home again. Then, giving her sleeping boy into the care of Francoeur, her steward, she laid herself quietly on her bed, where, the next morning, they found her dead and peaceful.

So Youri and Abeille grew up side by side, and the duchess faithfully kept her promise, and was a mother to them both. As they got bigger she often took them with her on her journeys through her duchy, and taught them to know her people, and to pity and to aid them.

It was on one of these journeys that, after passing through meadows covered with flowers, Youri caught sight of a great glittering expanse lying beneath some distant mountains.

'What is that, godmother?' he asked, waving his hand. 'The shield of a giant, I suppose.'

'No; a silver plate as big as the moon!' said Abeille, twisting herself round on her pony.

'It is neither a silver plate nor a giant's shield,' replied the duchess; 'but a beautiful lake. Still, in spite of its beauty, it is dangerous to go near it, for in its depths dwell some Undines, or water spirits, who lure all passers-by to their deaths.'

Nothing more was said about the lake, but the children did not forget it, and one morning, after they had returned to the castle, Abeille came up to Youri.

'The tower door is open,' whispered she; 'let us go up. Perhaps we shall find some fairies.'

But they did not find any fairies; only, when they reached the roof, the lake looked bluer and more enchanting than ever. Abeille gazed at it for a moment, and then she said:

'Do you see? I mean to go there!'

'But you mustn't,' cried Youri. 'You heard what your mother said. And, besides, it is so far; how could we get there?'

'You ought to know that,' answered Abeille scornfully. 'What is the good of being a man, and learning all sorts of things, if you have to ask me. However, there are plenty of other men in the world, and I shall get one of them to tell me.'

Youri coloured; Abeille had never spoken like this before, and, instead of being two years younger than himself, she suddenly seemed many years older. She stood with her mocking eyes fixed on him, till he grew angry at being outdone by a girl, and taking her hand he said boldly:

'Very well, we will both go to the lake.'

* * * * *

The next afternoon, when the duchess was working at her tapestry surrounded by her maidens, the children went out, as usual, to play in the garden. The moment they found themselves alone, Youri turned to Abeille, and holding out his hand, said:

'Come.'

'Come where?' asked Abeille, opening her eyes very wide.

'To the lake, of course,' answered the boy.

Abeille was silent. It was one thing to pretend you meant to be disobedient some day, a long time off, and quite another to start for such a distant place without anyone knowing that you had left the garden. 'And in satin shoes, too! How stupid boys were to be sure.'

'Stupid or not, I am going to the lake, and you are going with me!' said Youri, who had not forgotten or forgiven the look she had cast on him the day before. 'Unless,' added he, 'you are afraid, and in that case I shall go alone.'

This was too much for Abeille. Bursting into tears, she flung herself on Youri's neck, and declared that wherever he went she would go too. So, peace having been made between them, they set out.

It was a hot day, and the townspeople were indoors waiting till the sun was low in the sky before they set out either to work or play, so the children passed through the streets unperceived, and crossed the river by the bridge into the flowery meadows along the road by which they had ridden with the duchess. By-and-by Abeille began to feel thirsty, but the sun had drunk up all the water, and not a drop was left for her. They walked on a little further, and by good luck found a cherry-tree covered with ripe fruit, and after a rest and a refreshing meal, they were sure that they were strong enough to reach the lake in a few minutes. But soon Abeille began to limp and to say that her foot hurt her, and Youri had to untie the ribbons that fastened her shoe and see what was the matter. A stone had got in, so this was easily set right, and for a while they skipped along the path singing and chattering, till Abeille stopped again. This time her shoe had come off, and turning to pick it up she caught sight of the towers of the castle, looking such a long way off that her heart sank, and she burst into tears.

'It is getting dark, and the wolves will eat us,' sobbed she. But Youri put his arms round her and comforted her.

'Why we are close to the lake now. There is nothing to be afraid of! We shall be home again to supper,' cried he. And Abeille dried her eyes, and trotted on beside him.

Yes, the lake was there, blue and silvery with purple and gold irises growing on its banks, and white water-lilies floated on its bosom. Not a trace was there of a man, or of one of the great beasts so much feared by Abeille, but only the marks of tiny forked feet on the sand. The little girl at once pulled off her torn shoes and stockings and let the water flow over her, while Youri looked about for some nuts or strawberries. But none were to be found.

'I noticed, a little way back, a clump of blackberry bushes,' said he. 'Wait here for me, and I will go and gather some fruit, and after that we will start home again.' And Abeille, leaning her head drowsily against a cushion of soft moss, murmured something in reply, and soon fell asleep. In her dream a crow, bearing the smallest man that ever was seen, appeared hovering for a moment above her, and then vanished. At the same instant Youri returned and placed by her side a large leaf-full of strawberries.

'It is a pity to wake her just yet,' thought he, and wandered off beyond a clump of silvery willows to a spot from which he could get a view of the whole lake. In the moonlight, the light mist that hung over the surface made it look like fairyland. Then gradually the silver veil seemed to break up, and the shapes of fair women with outstretched hands and long green locks floated towards him. Seized with a sudden fright, the boy turned to fly. But it was too late.

Unconscious of the terrible doom that had befallen her foster-brother, Abeille slept on, and did not awake even when a crowd of little men with white beards down to their knees came and stood in a circle round her.

'What shall we do with her?' asked Pic, who seemed older than any of them, though they were all very old.

'Build a cage and put her into it,' answered Rug.

'No! No! What should such a beautiful princess do in a cage?' cried Dig. And Tad, who was the kindest of them all, proposed to carry her home to her parents. But the other gnomes were too pleased with their new toy to listen to this for a moment.

'Look, she is waking,' whispered Pau. And as he spoke Abeille slowly opened her eyes. At first she imagined she was still dreaming; but as the little men did not move, it suddenly dawned upon her that they were real, and starting to her feet, she called loudly:

'Youri! Youri! Where are you?'

At the sound of her voice the gnomes only pressed more closely round her, and, trembling with fear, she hid her face in her hands. The gnomes were at first much puzzled to know what to do; then Tad, climbing on a branch of the willow tree that hung over her, stooped down, and gently stroked her fingers. The child understood that he meant to be kind, and letting her hands fall, gazed at her captors. After an instant's pause she said:

'Little men, it is a great pity that you are so ugly. But, all the same, I will love you if you will only give me something to eat, as I am dying of hunger.'

A rustle was heard among the group as she spoke. Some were very angry at being called ugly, and said she deserved no better fate than to be left where she was. Others laughed, and declared that it did not matter what a mere mortal thought about them; while Tad bade Bog, their messenger, fetch her some milk and honey, and the finest white bread that was made in their ovens under the earth. In less time than Abeille would have taken to tie her shoe he was back again, mounted on his crow. And by the time she had eaten the bread and honey and drunk the milk, Abeille was not frightened any more, and felt quite ready to talk. 'Little men,' she said, looking up with a smile, 'your supper was very good, and I thank you for it. My name is Abeille, and my brother is called Youri. Help me to find him, and tell me which is the path that leads to the castle, for mother must think something dreadful has happened to us!'

'But your feet are so sore that you cannot walk,' answered Dig. 'And we may not cross the bounds into your country. The best we can do is to make a litter of twigs and cover it with moss, and we will bear you into the mountains, and present you to our king.'

Now, many a little girl would have been terrified at the thought of being carried off alone, she did not know where. But Abeille, when she had recovered from her first fright, was pleased at the notion of her strange adventure.

'How much she would have to tell her mother and Youri on her return. Probably they would never go inside a mountain, if they lived to be a hundred.' So she curled herself comfortably on her nest of moss, and waited to see what would happen.

Up, and up, and up they went; and by-and-by Abeille fell asleep again, and did not wake till the sun was shining. Up, and up, and up, for the little men could only walk very slowly, though they could spring over rocks quicker than any mortal. Suddenly the light that streamed through the branches of the litter began to change. It seemed hardly less bright, but it was certainly different; then the litter was put down, and the gnomes crowded round and helped Abeille to step out of it.

Before her stood a little man not half her size, but splendidly dressed and full of dignity. On his head was a crown of such huge diamonds that you wondered how his small body could support it. A royal mantle fell from his shoulders, and in his hand he held a lance.

'King Loc,' said one of the forest gnomes, 'we found this beautiful child asleep by the lake, and have brought her to you. She says that her name is Abeille, and her mother is the Duchess des Clarides.'

'You have done well,' answered the king; 'she shall be one of us.' And standing on tiptoe, so that he could kiss her hand, he told her that they would all take care of her and make her happy, and that anything she wished for she should have at once.

'I want a pair of shoes,' replied Abeille.

'Shoes!' commanded the king, striking the ground with his lance; and immediately a lovely pair of silver shoes embroidered with pearls were slipped on her feet by one of the gnomes.

'They are beautiful shoes,' said Abeille rather doubtfully; 'but do you think they will carry me all the way back to my mother?'

'No, they are not meant for rough roads,' replied the king, 'but for walking about the smooth paths of the mountain, for we have many wonders to show you.'

'Little King Loc,' answered Abeille, 'take away these beautiful slippers and give me a pair of wooden shoes instead, and let me go back to my mother.' But King Loc only shook his head.

'Little King Loc,' said Abeille again--and this time her voice trembled--'let me go back to my mother and Youri, and I will love you with all my heart, nearly as well as I love them.'

'Who is Youri?' asked King Loc.

'Why--Youri--who has lived with us since I was a baby,' replied Abeille; surprised that he did not know what everyone else was aware of, and never guessing that by mentioning the boy she was sealing her own fate. For King Loc had already thought what a good wife she would make him in a few years' time, and he did not want Youri to come between them. So he was silent, and Abeille, seeing he was not pleased, burst into tears.

'Little King Loc,' she cried, taking hold of a corner of his mantle, 'think how unhappy my mother will be. She will fancy that wild beasts have eaten me, or that I have got drowned in the lake.'

'Be comforted,' replied King Loc; 'I will send her a dream, so that she shall know that you are safe.'

At this Abeille's sad face brightened. 'Little King Loc,' she said, smiling, 'how clever you are! But you must send her a dream every night, so that she shall see me--and me a dream, so that I may see her.'

And this King Loc promised to do.

When Abeille grew accustomed to do without her mother and Youri, she made herself happy enough in her new home. Everyone was kind to her, and petted her, and then there were such quantities of new things for her to see. The gnomes were always busy, and knew how to fashion beautiful toys as well or better than the people who lived on the earth; and now and then, wandering with Tad or Dig in the underground passages, Abeille would catch a glimpse of blue sky through a rent in the rocks, and this she loved best of all. In this manner six years passed away.

'His Highness King Loc wishes to see you in his presence chamber,' said Tad, one morning, to Abeille, who was singing to herself on a golden lute; and Abeille, wondering why the king had grown so formal all of a sudden, got up obediently. Directly she appeared, King Loc opened a door in the wall which led into his treasure chamber. Abeille had never been there before, and was amazed at the splendid things heaped up before her. Gold, jewels, brocades, carpets, lay round the walls, and she walked about examining one glittering object after another, while King Loc mounted a throne of gold and ivory at one end of the hall, and watched her. 'Choose whatever you wish,' he said at last. A necklace of most lovely pearls was hanging from the wall, and after hesitating for a moment between that and a circlet of diamonds and sapphires, Abeille stretched up her hand towards it. But before she touched it her eyes lighted on a tiny piece of sky visible through a crack of the rock, and her hand dropped by her side. 'Little King Loc, let me go up to the earth once again,' she said.

Then King Loc made a sign to the treasurer, who opened a coffer full of nothing but precious stones, larger and more dazzling than were worn by any earthly monarch. 'Choose what you will, Abeille,' whispered King Loc.

But Abeille only shook her head.

'A drop of dew in the garden at Clarides is brighter to me than the best of those diamonds,' she answered, 'and the bluest of the stones are not as blue as the eyes of Youri.' And as she spoke a sharp pain ran through the heart of King Loc. For an instant he said nothing, then he lifted his head and looked at her. 'Only those who despise riches should possess them. Take this crown, from henceforth you are the Princess of the Gnomes.'

During thirty days no work was done in those underground regions, for a feast was held in honour of the new princess. At the end of that period, the king appeared before Abeille, clad in his most splendid garments, and solemnly asked her to be his wife.

'Little King Loc,' answered the girl, 'I love you as you are, for your goodness and kindness to me; but never, never can I love you as anything else.'

The king sighed. It was only what he had expected; still, his disappointment was great, though he tried bravely to hide it, and even to smile as he said: 'Then, Abeille, will you promise me one thing? If there should come a day when you find that there is somebody whom you could love, will you tell me?'

And in her turn Abeille promised.

After this, in spite of the fact that everyone was just as kind to her as before, Abeille was no longer the merry child who passed all her days playing with the little gnomes. People who dwell under the earth grow up much faster than those who live on its surface, and, at thirteen, the girl was already a woman. Besides, King Loc's words had set her thinking; she spent many hours by herself, and her face was no longer round and rosy, but thin and pale. It was in vain that the gnomes did their best to entice her into her old games, they had lost their interest, and even her lute lay unnoticed on the ground.

But one morning a change seemed to come over her. Leaving the room hung with beautiful silks, where she usually sat alone, she entered the king's presence, and taking his hand she led him through long corridors till they came to a place where a strip of blue sky was to be seen.

'Little King Loc,' she said, turning her eyes upon him, 'let me behold my mother again, or I shall surely die.' Her voice shook, and her whole body trembled. Even an enemy might have pitied her; but the king, who loved her, answered nothing. All day long Abeille stayed there, watching the light fade, and the sky grow pale. By-and-by the stars came out, but the girl never moved from her place. Suddenly a hand touched her. She looked round with a start, and there was King Loc, covered from head to foot in a dark mantle, holding another over his arm. 'Put on this and follow me,' was all he said. But Abeille somehow knew that she was going to see her mother.

On, and on, and on they went, through passages where Abeille had never been before, and at length she was out in the world again. Oh! how beautiful it all was! How fresh was the air, and how sweet was the smell of the flowers! She felt as if she should die with joy, but at that moment King Loc lifted her off the ground, and, tiny though he was, carried her quite easily across the garden and through an open door into the silent castle.

'Listen, Abeille,' he whispered softly. 'You have guessed where we are going, and you know that every night I send your mother a vision of you, and she talks to it in her dream, and smiles at it. To-night it will be no vision she sees, but you yourself; only remember, that if you touch her or speak to her my power is lost, and never more will she behold either you or your image.'

By this time they had reached the room which Abeille knew so well, and her heart beat violently as the gnome carried her over the threshold. By the light of a lamp hanging over the bed Abeille could see her mother, beautiful still, but with a face that had grown pale and sad. As she gazed the sadness vanished, and a bright smile came in its stead. Her mother's arms were stretched out towards her, and the girl, her eyes filled with tears of joy, was stooping to meet them, when King Loc hastily snatched her up, and bore her back to the realm of the gnomes.

If the king imagined that by granting Abeille's request he would make her happy, he soon found out his mistake, for all day long the girl sat weeping, paving no heed to the efforts of her friends to comfort her.

'Tell me what is making you so unhappy?' said King Loc, at last. And Abeille answered:

'Little King Loc, and all my friends here, you are so good and kind that I know that you are miserable when I am in trouble. I would be happy if I could, but it is stronger than I. I am weeping because I shall never see again Youri de Blanchelande, whom I love with all my heart. It is a worse grief than parting with my mother, for at least I know where she is and what she is doing; while, as for Youri, I cannot tell if he is dead or alive.'

The gnomes were all silent. Kind as they were, they were not mortals, and had never felt either great joys or deep sorrows. Only King Loc dimly guessed at something of both, and he went away to consult an old, old gnome, who lived in the lowest depth of the mountain, and had spectacles of every sort, that enabled him to see all that was happening, not only on the earth, but under the sea.

Nur, for such was his name, tried many of these spectacles before he could discover anything about Youri de Blanchelande.

'There he is!' he cried at last. 'He is sitting in the palace of the Undines, under the great lake; but he does not like his prison, and longs to be back in the world, doing great deeds.'

It was true. In the seven years that had passed since he had left the castle of Clarides to go with Abeille to the blue lake, Youri in his turn had become a man.

The older he grew the more weary he got of the petting and spoiling he received at the hands of the green-haired maidens, till, one day, he flung himself at the feet of the Undine queen, and implored permission to return to his old home.

The queen stooped down and stroked his hair.

'We cannot spare you,' she murmured gently. 'Stay here, and you shall be king, and marry me.'

'But it is Abeille I want to marry,' said the youth boldly. But he might as well have talked to the winds, for at last the queen grew angry, and ordered him to be put in a crystal cage which was built for him round a pointed rock.

It was here that King Loc, aided by the spectacles of Nur, found him after many weeks' journey. As we know, the gnomes walk slowly, and the way was long and difficult. Luckily, before he started, he had taken with him his magic ring, and the moment it touched the wall the crystal cage split from top to bottom.

'Follow that path, and you will find yourself in the world again,' he said to Youri; and without waiting to listen to the young man's thanks, set out on the road he had come.

'Bog,' he cried, to the little man on the crow, who had ridden to meet him. 'Hasten to the palace and inform the Princess Abeille that Youri de Blanchelande, for seven years a captive in the kingdom of the Undines, has now returned to the castle of Clarides.'

* * * * *

The first person whom Youri met as he came out of the mountain was the tailor who had made all his clothes from the time that he came to live at the castle. Of this old friend, who was nearly beside himself with joy at the sight of the little master, lost for so many years, the count begged for news of his foster-mother and Abeille.

'Alas! my lord, where can you have been that you do not know that the Princess Abeille was carried off by the gnomes on the very day that you disappeared yourself? At least, so we guess. Ah! that day has left many a mark on our duchess! Yet she is not without a gleam of hope that her daughter is living yet, for every night the poor mother is visited by a dream which tells her all that the princess is doing.'

The good man went on to tell of all the changes that seven years had brought about in the village, but Youri heard nothing that he said, for his mind was busy with thoughts of Abeille.

At length he roused himself, and ashamed of his delay, he hastened to the chamber of the duchess, who held him in her arms as if she would never let him go. By-and-by, however, when she became calmer, he began to question her about Abeille, and how best to deliver her from the power of the gnomes. The duchess then told him that she had sent out men in all directions to look for the children directly they were found to be missing, and that one of them had noticed a troop of little men far away on the mountains, evidently carrying a litter. He was hastening after them, when, at his feet, he beheld a tiny satin slipper, which he stooped to pick up. But as he did so a dozen of the gnomes had swarmed upon him like flies, and beat him about the head till he dropped the slipper, which they took away with them, leaving the poor man dizzy with pain. When he recovered his senses the group on the mountain had disappeared.

* * * * *

That night, when everyone was asleep, Youri and his old servant Francoeur, stole softly down into the armoury, and dressed themselves in light suits of chain armour, with helmets and short swords, all complete. Then they mounted two horses that Francoeur had tied up in the forest, and set forth for the kingdom of the gnomes. At the end of an hour's hard riding, they came to the cavern which Francoeur had heard from childhood led into the centre of the earth. Here they dismounted, and entered cautiously, expecting to find darkness as thick as what they had left outside. But they had only gone a few steps when they were nearly blinded by a sudden blaze of light, which seemed to proceed from a sort of portcullis door, which barred the way in front of them.

'Who are you?' asked a voice. And the count answered:

'Youri de Blanchelande, who has come to rescue Abeille des Clarides.' And at these words the gate slowly swung open, and closed behind the two strangers.

Youri listened to the clang with a spasm of fear in his heart; then the desperate position he was in gave him courage. There was no retreat for him now, and in front was drawn up a large force of gnomes, whose arrows were falling like hail about him. He raised his shield to ward them off, and as he did so his eyes fell on a little man standing on a rock above the rest, with a crown on his head and a royal mantle on his shoulders. In an instant Youri had flung away his shield and sprung forward, regardless of the arrows that still fell about him.

'Oh, is it you, is it really you, my deliverer? And is it your subjects who hold as a captive Abeille whom I love?'

'I am King Loc,' was the answer. And the figure with the long beard bent his eyes kindly on the eager youth. 'If Abeille has lived with us all these years, for many of them she was quite happy. But the gnomes, of whom you think so little, are a just people, and they will not keep her against her will. Beg the princess to be good enough to come hither,' he added, turning to Rug.

Amidst a dead silence Abeille entered the vast space and looked around her. At first she saw nothing but a vast host of gnomes perched on the walls and crowding on the floor of the big hall. Then her eyes met those of Youri, and with a cry that came from her heart she darted towards him, and threw herself on his breast.

'Abeille,' said the king, when he had watched her for a moment, with a look of pain on his face, 'is this the man that you wish to marry?'

'Yes, Little King Loc, this is he and nobody else! And see how I can laugh now, and how happy I am!' And with that she began to cry.

'Hush, Abeille! there must be no tears to-day,' said Youri, gently stroking her hair. 'Come, dry your eyes, and thank King Loc, who rescued me from the cage in the realm of the Undines.'

As Youri spoke Abeille lifted her head, and a great light came into her face. At last she understood.

'You did that for me?' she whispered. 'Ah, Little King Loc----!'

* * * * *

So, loaded with presents, and followed by regrets, Abeille went home. In a few days the marriage took place; but however happy she was, and however busy she might be, never a month passed by without a visit from Abeille to her friends in the kingdom of the gnomes.

(Adapted and shortened from the story of Abeille, by M. Anatole France.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

'A LONG-BOW STORY'

One day a bunniah,[1] or banker, was walking along a country road when he overtook a farmer going in the same direction. Now the bunniah was very grasping, like most of his class, and was lamenting that he had had no chance of making any money that day; but at the sight of the man in front he brightened up wonderfully.

'That is a piece of luck,' he said to himself. 'Let me see if this farmer is not good for something'; and he hastened his steps.

After they had bid one another good day very politely, the bunniah said to the farmer:

'I was just thinking how dull I felt, when I beheld you, but since we are going the same way, I shall find the road quite short in such agreeable company.'

'With all my heart,' replied the farmer; 'but what shall we talk about? A city man like you will not care to hear about cattle and crops.'

'Oh,' said the bunniah, 'I'll tell you what we will do. We will each tell the other the wildest tale we can imagine, and he who first throws doubt on the other's story shall pay him a hundred rupees.'

To this the farmer agreed, and begged the bunniah to begin, as he was the bigger man of the two; and privately he made up his mind that, however improbable it might be, nothing should induce him to hint that he did not believe in the bunniah's tale. Thus politely pressed the great man started:

'I was going along this road one day, when I met a merchant travelling with a great train of camels laden with merchandise----'

'Very likely,' murmured the farmer; 'I've seen that kind of thing myself.'

'No less than one hundred and one camels,' continued the bunniah, 'all tied together by their nose strings--nose to tail--and stretching along the road for almost half a mile----'

'Well?' said the farmer.

'Well, a kite swooped down on the foremost camel and bore him off, struggling, into the air, and by reason of them all being tied together the other hundred camels had to follow----'

'Amazing, the strength of that kite!' said the farmer. 'But--well--yes, doubtless; yes--well--one hundred and one camels--and what did he do with them?'

'You doubt it?' demanded the bunniah.

'Not a bit!' said the farmer heartily.

'Well,' continued the bunniah, 'it happened that the princess of a neighbouring kingdom was sitting in her private garden, having her hair combed by her maid, and she was looking upward, with her head thrown back, whilst the maid tugged away at the comb, when that wretched kite, with its prey, went soaring overhead; and, as luck would have it, the camels gave an extra kick just then, the kite lost his hold, and the whole hundred and one camels dropped right into the princess's left eye!'

'Poor thing!' said the farmer; 'it's so painful having anything in one's eye.'

'Well,' said the bunniah, who was now warming to his task, 'the princess shook her head, and sprang up, clapping her hand on her eye. "Oh dear!" she cried, "I've got something in my eye, and how it does smart!"'

'It always does,' observed the farmer, 'perfectly true. Well, what did the poor thing do?'

'At the sound of her cries, the maid came running to her assistance. "Let me look," said she; and with that she gave the princess's eyelid a twitch, and out came a camel, which the maid put in her pocket--' ('Ah!' grunted the farmer)--'and then she just twisted up the corner of her headcloth and fished a hundred more of them out of the princess's eye, and popped them all into her pocket with the other.'

Here the bunniah gasped as one who is out of breath, but the farmer looked at him slowly. 'Well?' said he.

'I can't think of anything more now,' replied the bunniah. 'Besides, that is the end; what do you say to it?'

'Wonderful,' replied the farmer, 'and no doubt perfectly true!'

'Well, it is your turn,' said the bunniah. 'I am so anxious to hear your story. I am sure it will be very interesting.'

'Yes, I think it will,' answered the farmer, and he began:

'My father was a very prosperous man. Five cows he had, and three yoke of oxen, and half a dozen buffaloes, and goats in abundance; but of all his possessions the thing he loved best was a mare. A well bred mare she was--oh, a very fine mare!'

'Yes, yes,' interrupted the bunniah, 'get on!'

'I'm getting on,' said the farmer, 'don't you hurry me! Well, one day, as ill-luck would have it, he rode that mare to market with a torn saddle, which galled her so, that when they got home she had a sore on her back as big as the palm of your hand.'

'Yes,' said the bunniah impatiently, 'what next?'

'It was June,' said the farmer, 'and you know how, in June, the air is full of dust-storms with rain at times? Well, the poor beast got dust in that wound, and what's more, with the dust some grains of wheat, and, what with the dust and the heat and the wet, that wheat sprouted and began to grow!'

'Wheat does when it gets a fair chance,' said the bunniah.

'Yes; and the next thing we knew was that there was a crop of wheat on that horse's back as big as anything you ever saw in a hundred-acre field, and we had to hire twenty men to reap it!'

'One generally has to hire extra hands for reaping,' said the bunniah.

'And we got four hundred maunds of wheat off that mare's back!' continued the farmer.

'A good crop!' murmured the bunniah.

'And your father,' said the farmer, 'a poor wretch, with hardly enough to keep body and soul together--(the bunniah snorted, but was silent)--came to my father, and he said, putting his hands together as humble as could be----'

The bunniah here flashed a furious glance at his companion, but bit his lips and held his peace.

'"I haven't tasted food for a week. Oh! great master, let me have the loan of sixteen maunds of wheat from your store, and I will repay you."'

'"Certainly, neighbour," answered my father; "take what you need, and repay it as you can."'

'Well?' demanded the bunniah with fury in his eye.

'Well, he took the wheat away with him,' replied the farmer; 'but he never repaid it, and it's a debt to this day. Sometimes I wonder whether I shall not go to law about it.'

Then the bunniah began running his thumb quickly up and down the fingers of his right hand, and his lips moved in quick calculation.

'What is the matter?' asked the farmer.

'The wheat is the cheaper; I'll pay you for the wheat,' said the bunniah, with the calmness of despair, as he remembered that by his own arrangement he was bound to give the farmer a hundred rupees.

And to this day they say in those parts, when a man owes a debt: 'Give me the money; or, if not that, give me at least the wheat.'

(This is from oral tradition.)

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Grain merchant and banker, and generally a very greedy man.

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

JACKAL OR TIGER?

One hot night, in Hindustan, a king and queen lay awake in the palace in the midst of the city. Every now and then a faint air blew through the lattice, and they hoped they were going to sleep, but they never did. Presently they became more broad awake than ever at the sound of a howl outside the palace.

'Listen to that tiger!' remarked the king.

'Tiger?' replied the queen. 'How should there be a tiger inside the city? It was only a jackal.'

'I tell you it was a tiger,' said the king.

'And I tell you that you were dreaming if you thought it was anything but a jackal,' answered the queen.

'I say it was a tiger,' cried the king; 'don't contradict me.'

'Nonsense!' snapped the queen. 'It was a jackal.' And the dispute waxed so warm that the king said at last:

'Very well, we'll call the guard and ask; and if it was a jackal I'll leave this kingdom to you and go away; and if it was a tiger then you shall go, and I will marry a new wife.'

'As you like,' answered the queen, 'there isn't any doubt which it was.'

So the king called the two soldiers who were on guard outside and put the question to them. But, whilst the dispute was going on, the king and queen had got so excited and talked so loud that the guards had heard nearly all they said, and one man observed to the other:

'Mind you declare that the king is right. It certainly was a jackal, but, if we say so, the king will probably not keep his word about going away, and we shall get into trouble, so we had better take his side.'

To this the other agreed; therefore, when the king asked them what animal they had seen, both the guards said it was certainly a tiger, and that the king was right of course, as he always was. The king made no remark, but sent for a palanquin, and ordered the queen to be placed in it, bidding the four bearers of the palanquin to take her a long way off into the forest and there leave her. In spite of her tears, she was forced to obey, and away the bearers went for three days and three nights until they came to a dense wood. There they set down the palanquin with the queen in it, and started home again.

Now the queen thought to herself that the king could not mean to send her away for good, and that as soon as he had got over his fit of temper he would summon her back; so she stayed quite still for a long time, listening with all her ears for approaching footsteps, but heard none. After a while she grew nervous, for she was all alone, and put her head out of the palanquin and looked about her. Day was just breaking, and birds and insects were beginning to stir; the leaves rustled in a warm breeze; but, although the queen's eyes wandered in all directions, there was no sign of any human being. Then her spirit gave way, and she began to cry.

It so happened that close to the spot where the queen's palanquin had been set down, there dwelt a man who had a tiny farm in the midst of the forest, where he and his wife lived alone far from any neighbours. As it was hot weather the farmer had been sleeping on the flat roof of his house, but was awakened by the sound of weeping. He jumped up and ran downstairs as fast as he could, and into the forest towards the place the sound came from, and there he found the palanquin.

'Oh, poor soul that weeps,' cried the farmer, standing a little way off, 'who are you?' At this salutation from a stranger the queen grew silent, dreading she knew not what.

'Oh, you that weep,' repeated the farmer, 'fear not to speak to me, for you are to me as a daughter. Tell me, who are you?'

His voice was so kind that the queen gathered up her courage and spoke. And when she had told her story, the farmer called his wife, who led her to their house, and gave her food to eat, and a bed to lie on. And in the farm, a few days later, a little prince was born, and by his mother's wish named Ameer Ali.

Years passed without a sign from the king. His wife might have been dead for all he seemed to care, though the queen still lived with the farmer, and the little prince had by this time grown up into a strong, handsome, and healthy youth. Out in the forest they seemed far from the world; very few ever came near them, and the prince was continually begging his mother and the farmer to be allowed to go away and seek adventures and to make his own living. But she and the wise farmer always counselled him to wait, until, at last, when he was eighteen years of age, they had not the heart to forbid him any longer. So he started off one early morning, with a sword by his side, a big brass pot to hold water, a few pieces of silver, and a galail[2] or two-stringed bow in his hand, with which to shoot birds as he travelled.

Many a weary mile he tramped day after day, until, one morning, he saw before him just such a forest as that in which he had been born and bred, and he stepped joyfully into it, like one who goes to meet an old friend. Presently, as he made his way through a thicket, he saw a pigeon which he thought would make a good dinner, so he fired a pellet at it from his galail, but missed the pigeon which fluttered away with a startled clatter. At the same instant he heard a great clamour from beyond the thicket, and, on reaching the spot, he found an ugly old woman streaming wet and crying loudly as she lifted from her head an earthen vessel with a hole in it from which the water was pouring. When she saw the prince with his galail in his hand, she called out:

'Oh, wretched one! why must you choose an old woman like me to play your pranks upon? Where am I to get a fresh pitcher instead of this one that you have broken with your foolish tricks? And how am I to go so far for water twice when one journey wearies me?'

'But, mother,' replied the prince, 'I played no trick upon you! I did but shoot at a pigeon that should have served me for dinner, and as my pellet missed it, it must have broken your pitcher. But, in exchange, you shall have my brass pot, and that will not break easily; and as for getting water, tell me where to find it, and I'll fetch it while you dry your garments in the sun, and carry it whither you will.'

At this the old woman's face brightened. She showed him where to seek the water, and when he returned a few minutes later with his pot filled to the brim, she led the way without a word, and he followed. In a short while they came to a hut in the forest, and as they drew near it Ameer Ali beheld in the doorway the loveliest damsel his eyes had ever looked on. At the sight of a stranger she drew her veil about her and stepped into the hut, and much as he wished to see her again Ameer Ali could think of no excuse by which to bring her back, and so, with a heavy heart, he made his salutation, and bade the old woman farewell. But when he had gone a little way she called after him:

'If ever you are in trouble or danger, come to where you now stand and cry: "Fairy of the Forest! Fairy of the forest, help me now!" And I will listen to you.'

The prince thanked her and continued his journey, but he thought little of the old woman's saying, and much of the lovely damsel. Shortly afterwards he arrived at a city; and, as he was now in great straits, having come to the end of his money, he walked straight to the palace of the king and asked for employment. The king said he had plenty of servants and wanted no more; but the young man pleaded so hard that at last the rajah was sorry for him, and promised that he should enter his bodyguard on the condition that he would undertake any service which was especially difficult or dangerous. This was just what Ameer Ali wanted, and he agreed to do whatever the king might wish.

Soon after this, on a dark and stormy night, when the river roared beneath the palace walls, the sound of a woman weeping and wailing was heard above the storm. The king ordered a servant to go and see what was the matter; but the servant, falling on his knees in terror, begged that he might not be sent on such an errand, particularly on a night so wild, when evil spirits and witches were sure to be abroad. Indeed, so frightened was he, that the king, who was very kind-hearted, bade another to go in his stead, but each one showed the same strange fear. Then Ameer Ali stepped forward:

'This is my duty, your majesty,' he said, 'I will go.'

The king nodded, and off he went. The night was as dark as pitch, and the wind blew furiously and drove the rain in sheets into his face; but he made his way down to the ford under the palace walls and stepped into the flooded water. Inch by inch, and foot by foot he fought his way across, now nearly swept off his feet by some sudden swirl or eddy, now narrowly escaping being caught in the branches of some floating tree that came tossing and swinging down the stream. At length he emerged, panting and dripping wet, on the other side. Close by the bank stood a gallows, and on the gallows hung the body of some evildoer, whilst from the foot of it came the sound of sobbing that the king had heard.

Ameer Ali was so grieved for the one who wept there that he thought nothing of the wildness of the night or of the roaring river. As for ghosts and witches, they had never troubled him, so he walked up towards the gallows where crouched the figure of the woman.

'What ails you?' he said.

Now the woman was not really a woman at all, but a horrid kind of witch who really lived in Witchland, and had no business on earth. If ever a man strayed into Witchland the ogresses used to eat him up, and this old witch thought she would like to catch a man for supper, and that is why she had been sobbing and crying in hopes that someone out of pity might come to her rescue.

So when Ameer Ali questioned her, she replied:

'Ah, kind sir, it is my poor son who hangs upon that gallows; help me to get him down and I will bless you for ever.'

Ameer Ali thought that her voice sounded rather eager than sorrowful, and he suspected that she was not telling the truth, so he determined to be very cautious.

'That will be rather difficult,' he said, 'for the gallows is high, and we have no ladder.'

'Ah, but if you will just stoop down and let me climb upon your shoulders,' answered the old witch, 'I think I could reach him.' And her voice now sounded so cruel that Ameer Ali was sure that she intended some evil. But he only said:

'Very well, we will try.' With that he drew his sword, pretending that he needed it to lean upon, and bent so that the old woman could clamber on to his back, which she did very nimbly. Then, suddenly, he felt a noose slipped over his neck, and the old witch sprang from his shoulders on to the gallows, crying:

'Now, foolish one, I have got you, and will kill you for my supper.'

But Ameer Ali gave a sweep upwards with his sharp sword to cut the rope that she had slipped round his neck, and not only cut the cord but cut also the old woman's foot as it dangled above him; and with a yell of pain and anger she vanished into the darkness.

Ameer Ali then sat down to collect himself a little, and felt upon the ground by his side an anklet that had evidently fallen off the old witch's foot. This he put into his pocket, and as the storm had by this time passed over he made his way back to the palace. When he had finished his story, he took the anklet out of his pocket and handed it to the king, who, like everyone else, was amazed at the glory of the jewels which composed it. Indeed, Ameer Ali himself was astonished, for he had slipped the anklet into his pocket in the dark and had not looked at it since. The king was delighted at its beauty, and having praised and rewarded Ameer Ali, he gave the anklet to his daughter, a proud and spoiled princess.

Now in the women's apartments in the palace there hung two cages, in one of which was a parrot and in the other a starling, and these two birds could talk as well as human beings. They were both pets of the princess who always fed them herself, and the next day, as she was walking grandly about with her treasure tied round her ankle, she heard the starling say to the parrot:

'Oh, Tote' (that was the parrot's name), 'how do you think the princess looks in her new jewel?'

'Think?' snapped the parrot, who was cross because they hadn't given him his bath that morning, 'I think she looks like a washerwoman's daughter, with one shoe on and the other off! Why doesn't she wear two of them, instead of going about with one leg adorned and the other empty?'

When the princess heard this she burst into tears; and sending for her father she declared that he must get her another such an anklet to wear on the other leg, or she would die of shame. So the king sent for Ameer Ali and told him that he must get a second anklet exactly like the first within a month, or he should be hanged, for the princess would certainly die of disappointment.

Poor Ameer Ali was greatly troubled at the king's command, but he thought to himself that he had, at any rate, a month in which to lay his plans. He left the palace at once, and inquired of everyone where the finest jewels were to be got; but though he sought night and day he never found one to compare with the anklet. At last only a week remained, and he was in sore difficulty, when he remembered the Fairy of the forest, and determined to go without loss of time and seek her. Therefore away he went, and after a day's travelling he reached the cottage in the forest, and, standing where he had stood when the old woman called to him, he cried:

'Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!'

Then there appeared in the doorway the beautiful girl he had seen before, whom in all his wanderings he had never forgotten.

'What is the matter?' she asked, in a voice so soft that he listened like one struck dumb, and she had to repeat the question before he could answer. Then he told her his story, and she went within the cottage and came back with two wands, and a pot of boiling water. The two wands she planted in the ground about six feet apart, and then, turning to him, she said:

'I am going to lie down between these two wands. You must then draw your sword and cut off my foot, and, as soon as you have done that, you must seize it and hold it over the cauldron, and every drop of blood that falls from it into the water will become a jewel. Next you must change the wands so that the one that stood at my head is at my feet, and the one at my feet stands at my head, and place the severed foot against the wound and it will heal, and I shall become quite well again as before.'

At first Ameer Ali declared that he would sooner be hanged twenty times over than treat her so roughly; but at length she persuaded him to do her bidding. He nearly fainted himself with horror when he found that, after the cruel blow which lopped her foot off, she lay as one lifeless; but he held the severed foot over the cauldron, and, as drops of blood fell from it, and he saw each turn in the water into shining gems, his heart took courage. Very soon there were plenty of jewels in the cauldron, and he quickly changed the wands, placed the severed foot against the wound, and immediately the two parts became one as before. Then the maiden opened her eyes, sprang to her feet, and drawing her veil about her, ran into the hut, and would not come out or speak to him any more. For a long while he waited, but, as she did not appear, he gathered up the precious stones and returned to the palace. He easily got some one to set the jewels, and found that there were enough to make, not only one, but three rare and beautiful anklets, and these he duly presented to the king on the very day that his month of grace was over.

The king embraced him warmly, and made him rich gifts; and the next day the vain princess put two anklets on each foot, and strutted up and down in them admiring herself in the mirrors that lined her room.

'Oh, Tote,' asked the starling, 'how do you think our princess looks now in these fine jewels?'

'Ugh!' growled the parrot, who was really always cross in the mornings, and never recovered his temper until after lunch, 'she's got all her beauty at one end of her now; if she had a few of those fine gew-gaws round her neck and wrists she would look better; but now, to my mind, she looks more than ever like the washerwoman's daughter dressed up.'

Poor princess! she wept and stormed and raved until she made herself quite ill; and then she declared to her father that, unless she had bracelets and necklace to match the anklets she would die.

Again the king sent for Ameer Ali, and ordered him to get a necklace and bracelets to match those anklets within a month, or be put to a cruel death.

And again Ameer Ali spent nearly the whole month searching for the jewels, but all in vain. At length he made his way to the hut in the forest, and stood and cried:

'Fairy of the forest! Fairy of the forest! Help me! help me!'

Once more the beautiful maiden appeared at his summons and asked what he wanted, and when he had told her she said he must do exactly as he had done the first time, except that now he must cut off both her hands and her head. Her words turned Ameer Ali pale with horror; but she reminded him that no harm had come to her before, and at last he consented to do as she bade him. From her severed hands and head there fell into the cauldron bracelets and chains of rubies and diamonds, emeralds and pearls that surpassed any that ever were seen. Then the head and hands were joined on to the body, and left neither sign nor scar. Full of gratitude, Ameer Ali tried to speak to her, but she ran into the house and would not come back, and he was forced to leave her and go away laden with the jewels.

When, on the day appointed, Ameer Ali produced a necklace and bracelets each more beautiful and priceless than the last, the king's astonishment knew no bounds, and as for his daughter she was nearly mad with joy. The very next morning she put on all her finery, and thought that now, at least, that disagreeable parrot could find no fault with her appearance, and she listened eagerly when she heard the starling say:

'Oh, Tote, how do you think our princess is looking now?'

'Very fine, no doubt,' grumbled the parrot; 'but what is the use of dressing up like that for oneself only? She ought to have a husband--why doesn't she marry the man who got her all these splendid things?'

Then the princess sent for her father and told him that she wished to marry Ameer Ali.

'My dear child,' said her father, 'you really are very difficult to please, and want something new every day. It certainly is time you married someone, and if you choose this man, of course he shall marry you.'

So the king sent for Ameer Ali, and told him that within a month he proposed to do him the honour of marrying him to the princess, and making him heir to the throne.

On hearing this speech Ameer Ali bowed low and answered that he had done and would do the king all the service that lay in his power, save only this one thing. The king, who considered his daughter's hand a prize for any man, flew into a passion, and the princess was more furious still. Ameer Ali was instantly thrown into the most dismal prison that they could find, and ordered to be kept there until the king had time to think in what way he should be put to death.

Meanwhile the king determined that the princess ought in any case to be married without delay, so he sent forth heralds throughout the neighbouring countries, proclaiming that on a certain day any person fitted for a bridegroom and heir to the throne should present himself at the palace.

When the day came, all the court were gathered together, and a great crowd assembled of men, young and old, who thought that they had as good a chance as anyone else to gain both the throne and the princess. As soon as the king was seated, he called upon an usher to summon the first claimant. But, just then, a farmer who stood in front of the crowd cried out that he had a petition to offer. 'Well, hasten then,' said the king; 'I have no time to waste.'

'Your majesty,' said the farmer, 'has now lived and administered justice long in this city, and will know that the tiger who is king of beasts hunts only in the forest, whilst jackals hunt in every place where there is something to be picked up.'

'What is all this? what is all this?' asked the king. 'The man must be mad!'

'No, your majesty,' answered the farmer, 'I would only remind your majesty that there are plenty of jackals gathered to-day to try and claim your daughter and kingdom: every city has sent them, and they wait hungry and eager; but do not, O king, mistake or pretend again to mistake the howl of a jackal for the hunting cry of a tiger.'

The king turned first red and then pale.

'There is,' continued the farmer, 'a royal tiger bred in the forest who has the first and only true claim to your throne.'

'Where? what do you mean?' stammered the king, growing pale as he listened.

'In prison,' replied the farmer; 'if your majesty will clear this court of the jackals I will explain.'

'Clear the court!' commanded the king; and, very unwillingly, the visitors left the palace.

'Now tell me what riddle this is,' said he.

Then the farmer told the king and his ministers how he had rescued the queen and brought up Ameer Ali; and he fetched the old queen herself, whom he had left outside. At the sight of her the king was filled with shame and self-reproach, and wished he could have lived his life over again, and not have married the mother of the proud princess, who caused him endless trouble until her death.

'My day is past,' said he. And he gave up his crown to his son Ameer Ali, who went once more and called to the forest fairy to provide him with a queen to share his throne.

'There is only one person I will marry,' said he. And this time the maiden did not run away, but agreed to be his wife. So the two were married without delay, and lived long and reigned happily.

As for the old woman whose pitcher Ameer Ali had broken, she was the forest maiden's fairy godmother, and when she was no longer needed to look after the girl she gladly returned to fairyland.

The old king has never been heard to contradict his wife any more. If he even looks as if he does not agree with her, she smiles at him and says:

'Is it the tiger, then? or the jackal?' And he has not another word to say.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] A galail is a double-stringed bow from which bullets or pellets of hard dried clay can be fired with considerable force and precision.

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

THE COMB AND THE COLLAR

Once upon a time there was a king of Lombardy who, though he was uglier than any of his subjects, loved beauty in others, so he married a wife who was declared by everyone to be the handsomest of women; and, whispered some, the most ill-natured also. Certainly she could not endure the sight of a pretty person, and her ladies were all the plainest of their sex. Worse than all, she was desperately jealous of the king's son and daughter by his former wife.

Unfortunately, in spite of all her evil qualities, the king was her complete slave, and badly though she treated the boy, the lovely princess was made to suffer ten times as much. Not contented with giving the girl, for a governess, a woman whose temper was as bad as the queen's own, the cruel step-mother did everything she could think of to spoil the girl's beauty, and to force her to appear as ugly as she was herself; but, try as she might, when the hideous clothes and frightful brown paint had been removed, her loveliness shone out as bright as ever.

* * * * *

Now the king of Lombardy was cousin to the Archduke of Placenza, who had lately lost his reason, to the great grief of his son and daughter, Perarthrites and Ferrandina. The doctors having all failed to restore him to health, the prince and princess sent a messenger to consult a famous enchantress, called the Mother of Sheaths, because everyone who visited her brought with him a knife, which she thrust into one of the sheaths with which her cavern was lined. However, they obtained little comfort from the witch, who bade them 'seek their father's wits in the place where he had lost them.' Against the wishes of the chief ministers, Perarthrites and Ferrandina rode off to the mysterious castle where the king had slept when his terrible fate had overtaken him, and, once inside the gates, nothing more was heard of them.

* * * * *

When three weeks had passed and still there was no news, the king's chief minister called a council to talk over the matter, and, at the end, it was decided that a company of distinguished persons should visit the Mother of Sheaths, and that the knives they must take with them should be of pure gold, richly set with precious stones. The witch was so pleased with the beauty of the gifts that she not only listened attentively to their story, but proceeded to a hole in the cavern, from which she drew out a little case containing a comb, and a steel collar, fastened by a gold key.

'Carry this comb and the collar to every court until you find a lady beautiful enough to unlock the collar, and a man good enough to draw the comb from its case. When you have discovered these, you can return whence you came.'

'But I do not see,' said the chamberlain, 'how that will help us to bring back our lost prince and princess.'

'It is all I can do for you,' answered the Mother of Sheaths; and she went into the back of the cavern, where they dared not follow her.

* * * * *

For the next few months the mad king's principal ministers wandered from one court to another, till at last they reached Lombardy, where they found that their story had already travelled before them. As soon as they appeared in the presence-chamber the king received them with open arms, for in his heart he had no doubt that his wife was the peerless beauty destined to unfasten the collar. And, indeed, if paint and hair-dye and magnificent dresses could have ensured her doing so, he would certainly have been right. But, blinded by his love for this wicked woman, he had really no idea that her charms were not her own.

At the appointed hour the queen entered the throne-room, having by her side the young princess, in the most grievous plight imaginable. Her dress was so contrived as to give the idea that she had a hump; her pink-and-white skin was thickly covered with yellow paint, and her black hair all hidden by a close-fitting brown cloth cap. Murmurs of indignation rose on all sides, and the ambassadors, who had frequently heard the princess compared to the lovely Ferrandina, were dumb with astonishment. As for the king, he could hardly raise his eyes from the ground, so ashamed was he; and signing to his son to take his place, he withdrew from the scene.

Mounting the throne, the prince commanded the trial to begin at once, and the collar was handed to the princess's governess, who, being one of the ugliest women that ever was seen, naturally failed to turn the key. Seizing the chance of his being for a short time in power, the prince resolved to punish her cruelties towards his sister, and especially this last one, to which she had prompted the queen, and ordered her to be taken out and executed, which was done, with great good will, by the attendants. He then further commanded the ladies in waiting to attend his sister to her apartments, and bathe her and dress her in the queen's most splendid robes, as she had none of her own; and the queen, though gnashing her teeth with anger, for once dared not interfere. More quickly than could have been expected, the princess returned, looking so beautiful that if anyone had doubted before who would be able to unlock the collar they were instantly convinced. The prince glanced at her, but said nothing, and, signing to one of the ambassadors, he ordered him to make trial of the comb. One by one each man present did his best to remove it from its case, and one by one each was forced to own himself beaten. At length only the prince remained, but as he was the judge he must wait till the last.

After the men had finished, the ladies of the court had the collar presented to them according to rank, but none could even turn the key. Finally it was handed to the queen, who managed to open it a little way. Her heart beat with triumph, but immediately it closed again with a snap, and she sank back, fainting from disappointment.

By this time there were only left the prince and his sister; and no sooner did he touch the case than it opened of itself, while the lock of the collar yielded directly the princess took hold of the key. Cries of delight rose from the courtiers and attendants; but these were interrupted by a whirlwind accompanied by thick darkness, and followed by an earthquake.

When all was calm again, and the sun shining, the prince and princess had disappeared.

Although the king's son and daughter were the only persons who had vanished in the storm, unluckily they had been carried off in opposite directions. The rapid motion through the air deprived the princess of her senses, which she nearly lost a second time, from fright, when she was set down alone in the middle of a thick forest. She ran wildly about, calling to her brother to come to her aid; but her cries only attracted the attention of some hungry wolves, who sprung towards her with their jaws gaping and their red tongues hanging out. Falling on her knees, she covered her face with one hand unconsciously grasping the collar with the other, and awaited her doom. Already she could feel their hot breath on her cheek, and crouched lower and lower, when the eyes of the foremost wolf caught sight of the collar. With a howl that echoed through the forest he bounded away, followed by his companions.

As soon as the princess had recovered from the shock she rose and fled, without knowing whither, until she found herself in a broad road, and beheld, approaching her, a flock of sheep driven by two shepherds. She hastened towards them in order to implore their help, when suddenly the sheep caught sight of her collar and instantly scattered in all directions.

'I must have something about me which frightens all beasts,' she thought, and took great comfort therefrom; and in good spirits she went her way, till she came to the gates of an old castle. She was just about to enter and beg for a night's shelter, when a snow white fox ran across the road, and stopped in front of her.

He was so pretty, and had such bright beseeching eyes, that the princess hastily tucked the collar under her dress, lest he too should flee at the sight of it. Very gently she drew near, hoping he might follow her into the castle, but he only set off in another direction, and, tired though she was, something forced the girl to follow him. Thankful indeed was she when he turned a corner and sat down before the door of a tiny palace, which was built on the bank of a river. When she came up he took the hem of her dress between his teeth and led her into a room where there was a table covered with milk and fruit. After she had eaten and drunk, she lay down upon a pile of cushions, with the fox at her feet, and fell asleep to dream of her lost brother.

If the princess was dreaming of her brother, he was no less thinking of her, on the wild sea-shore, whither the whirlwind had cast him. All was bleak and bare, except a green island which he could only see from the top of a high rock where he passed all his days, gazing on the waving palm trees and glittering waterfalls in the distance.

'Suppose she should be there?' he said to himself; and though there was no reason to expect that the princess should be in that place more than in any other, he could not get the notion out of his head.

A song, sung in the loveliest voice he had ever heard, roused the young man from his musings, and he instantly turned in the direction from which it had come. But though the singer seemed close to him he could see her nowhere, and indeed, no sooner had he reached one spot than the voice sounded in another direction, and he followed it up and down, till he was suddenly stopped by the sight of a large fish's skin, which lay stretched on the sand between the sea and the rocks. The thing was so ugly, that he stepped aside in disgust, and at that instant something leapt into the sea behind his back. This caused him to look round. The fish's skin was no longer there, but in a cave in the rock behind it he discovered a bath of ebony lined with gold, which glittered in the sunlight.

Days passed without any adventures, and the prince had almost made up his mind to leave the shore, and to seek his sister inland, when once more he heard the voice that had so charmed him, and beheld the bloody skin lying on the sand, and the bath, now filled with water, in the grotto. Little sleep had he that night, and before dawn he hid himself behind the rocks, determined not to move from the place till the fish should come back again.

He had not very long to wait, for with the first rays of the sun there appeared, out to sea, a shining white object which was blown by gentle breezes towards the shore. As it came nearer he beheld a maiden, of dazzling loveliness, seated in a shell where blues and pinks and greens all melted into each other. In her hand she held the rope with which the shell was guided.

The prince was so bewildered at her beauty that he forgot that he was in hiding, and, rushing out, sank on his knees on the sands, holding out his hands towards this wonderful vision. But as he did so the comb and its case fell out of his pocket, and at the sight the lady uttered a wild shriek, and, steering her shell round, vanished speedily in the direction of the island. Throwing off his clothes, the prince was preparing to swim after her, when he perceived beside him a snow white fox, looking the same way, and making frantic signs with his paws, till a small boat put out and set sail towards them, to the great joy of the little creature.

When the boat drew up to the beach, the fox waved his paw towards the prince's clothes, which he took to mean that he was to put them on again. This done, they both got in, and had just pushed off, when the prince suddenly recollected that the sight of the comb had frightened away the beautiful lady. In a transport of fury he raised his hand to fling it into the sea, but the fox sprang on him and held on so tightly to his arm that he could not lift it. At that moment a horseman on the shore let fly an arrow at the fox, with so true an aim that the little creature fell heavily into the well of the boat, and closed its eyes, like one who has received his death-blow. The grief of the prince was sore. He instantly leaped to land, but the murderer was already far distant. When the young man turned round again, the boat and the fox were nowhere to be seen.

An approaching storm drove him into the grotto, which was lighted up by a multitude of tapers, each one being in the shape of a knife half out of its sheath. Over the bath was a tent-shaped covering of white, embroidered with sheaths, and from beneath it came a voice:

'Prince, will you trust me whatever happens, knowing that my heart is yours, and as I feel that yours is mine? But, beware, for if you give the smallest sign of fear, when the tent is opened, you will lose me for ever.'

She did well to warn him; and even then he had much ado to keep the colour in his cheeks and his hand from trembling, for a crocodile's head with snapping jaws advanced towards him. With a mighty effort he managed to remain still, and to gaze steadily at the horrible beast, and as he did so, the head bent backwards, and beneath it was seen the lovely countenance of the Lady of the Shell.

'Quick! prince! quick! the time is flying, comb me at once or I shall vanish from your sight.' At her words he took out the comb, but found to his surprise that it needed all his strength to draw it from its sheath. And, strange to say, that in proportion as the comb emerged from its sheath the lady's head was freed from its horrible covering, and her body rose a little more out of the water. When her shoulders and arms were freed, she called to him:

'Enough, so far you have obeyed my orders. Now burn my skin.'

'Ah, that I can never do,' cried he; but the lady cut him short.

'Then we shall both rue it for ever,' she said gravely; 'for I can only be the wife of him who will burn my skin.' And while he still stood hesitating, the curtains of the tent fell back on her, and the tapers fizzled out.

Bitterly repenting his slowness, he wandered towards the forest where a fire was burning, hardly knowing what he did; but on his way he almost fell over the skin, which was lying across his path.

'Ah, fool that I was! This must be the skin she wished me to burn,' said he. And seizing it in both hands he flung it into the fire, where it exploded with a terrific noise. At first he rushed off to some distance, not knowing what might next befall, but after a while found that his steps had led him back to the place of the fire. The skin had gone and left no traces, but among the cinders he beheld something shining, which proved to be the magic collar. Ah! then his sister, for whom he had so greatly longed, must be near at last! And before he could turn his head or pick up the collar, her arms were round his neck, and everything else was forgotten.

'You shall tell your story first,' she said, when at length they could speak. And so he did; but his head was so full of the Lady of the Shell that he forgot to say anything about the fox. And it was well that he had forgotten, for when the princess had poured forth her own adventures, she ended up by speaking of all she owed to the little white fox.

'You cannot even guess the care he took of me in the little palace. But though nothing could exceed his kindness, I saw by his eyes that there was something he wanted me to give him, but I could not tell what. Alas! the day came that I learnt it to my cost. I had hidden the collar in a thick bush, lest the fox should catch sight of it and be scared away as the other animals had been. But, one day, when we were in the garden, the sun happened to shine straight on it, and he sprang towards it with every sign of delight. He was about to seize it between his teeth when it closed with a loud noise. The fox fled away with a piercing scream, and though I have sought him far and wide, I have never seen him since. I was here when you flung the skin into the cinders, and no doubt, in my hurry to escape, the collar must have dropped from me. Ah, dear brother,' she continued with tears in her eyes, 'I can no longer live without my beloved fox; help me, I entreat you, to find him.'

So great was her grief that the prince dared not tell her what sad fate had overtaken the poor little animal, and trusted that time might soothe her. He assured her that he would go with her wherever she desired if she would grant him this one day to spend on the sea-shore; and with this the princess was forced to be content.

The prince was standing on the rock, looking out towards the lovely island, and straining his eyes to see the white sail once more, when frightful shrieks from the wood a little way off caused him to hasten with all his speed in that direction. He soon perceived a knight on horseback with a bow slung to his back, struggling to lift a woman on to his saddle. The knights' surprise at the sight of a man in this desolate spot caused him to drop the woman's arm, and she rushed to take shelter behind her defender, who, to his amazement, then recognised his step-mother.

'How did you come here?' he asked coldly, more than half regretting that he had not left her to her fate; but she read what was in his heart, and fell on her knees before him.

'Oh, forgive me my wickedness,' she cried, 'for indeed I have repented of it long ago, and come to the aid of your father who has been sorely smitten by that mad archduke from whom you have just saved me! There is no time to pursue him,' she added, as the prince started at the sound of the vanishing hoofs; and as they pushed their way along the path she told him all that had happened since they had last met.

'From the moment that the king knew of my cruelty to your sister,' said she, 'he vowed he would never see me again, and left the court in search of you both. I followed him secretly, but not being able to gain any tidings of him, consulted the Mother of Sheaths, who took me to rest in that island where the palm trees are waving. There she showed me a lovely princess who, under a spell, was forced daily to take the form of a crocodile, and when the dreaded moment arrived the skin appeared before her, and, shudder as she might, some unseen power impelled her to wrap herself in it and plunge into the sea. It is to this island I am leading you; but first we must find your sister, for on her presence hangs the life of the white fox--if, indeed, he is not dead already.'

'The white fox!' exclaimed the prince. 'What do you know of him?'

'Not much,' answered the queen; 'but, since I arrived on the island, he was always with us, and charmed us all. Yesterday we missed him, but in the evening a little boat drifted up on the sands, and in it lay the fox, covered with blood. While his wounds were being tended in the palace with all the care imaginable, I set out to consult a wizard, who told me that I must enter the skiff and seek for the prince and princess of Lombardy, and that if, in twenty-four hours, I could bring them into the presence of the fox, his life would be saved. On a rock along the beach I found your father with an arrow through his shoulder, from the bow of his cousin the mad archduke, who was drawing another from his quiver, destined for me, when I fled into the forest!'

'My father so near!' cried the prince. 'We must return and seek him, and also look for my sister.'

* * * * *

They found her in the grotto, with her father's head in her lap, trying vainly to staunch his wounds. Between them they contrived to carry him to the boat, which sailed swiftly towards the island. On the way the prince gently broke to his sister the sad state of the white fox.

'Take me to him!' she said, as soon as the boat touched the island; and in silence the queen went down the path to the palace.

The white fox was lying on a soft mattress in front of a fire, his eyes closed, and a look on his face which told that death was not far distant. But he knew, somehow, that the princess was near him, and opened his eyes and wagged his tail feebly. The princess burst into sobs and tears, till a hand on her shoulder checked her.

'Why do you waste the few moments that are left you in this manner?' asked the governor of the island sternly. 'Place the collar you wear round his neck, and he will be cured at once. But you must act quickly.'

The princess seemed turned to stone as she listened. 'The collar!' she gasped. 'But I have not got it, I lost it in the forest!' And the thousand sheaths with which the walls were hung took up the cry:

'The collar is lost! The collar is lost!'

'What collar are you talking about?' asked the king, who was lying on another bed, with the physicians bending over him. 'Here is one that I picked up among some cinders, before that madman shot me--perhaps it may be the one you want, or, at all events, it may do as well.' And he signed to an attendant to take the collar from the pocket of his velvet jerkin.

The princess leapt forward with joy at the sight of the precious thing, and snatching it from the hand of the man she placed it round the neck of the fox. All present held their breath as they watched what was happening; and what did happen was that his legs grew longer and longer, and his nose grew shorter and shorter. The fox was gone, and in his stead there lay Perarthrites, in a coat of thick white fur.

But though the prince of Lombardy was rejoiced to see his friend and cousin again, his heart still bled for the beautiful lady who had vanished so mysteriously. His face was so troubled that the governor of the island marked it, and asked what was the matter. 'Oh! help me, if you can,' cried the prince. 'The thought of the sufferings that the enchanted nymph may be undergoing tortures me!'

'They are far worse than you can imagine,' gravely replied the governor; 'but if you still possess your comb, you may yet relieve her of them. Ah! that is well,' he continued, as the prince quickly drew the comb from its case. 'Now follow me.'

Not only the prince, but every one else followed; and the governor led them down a long gallery to a heavy iron door, which flew open at its own accord. But what a sight met the prince's eyes! The lady whom he had last beheld in peerless beauty was sitting in a chair wrapped in flames, which were twisting like hair about her head. Her face was swollen and red; her mouth was open as if gasping for breath. Only her arms and neck were as lovely as ever in their whiteness.

'This is your doing,' said the governor to the prince; 'you brought her to this when you burnt the crocodile's skin. Now try if, by combing, you can soothe her agony.'

At the first touch of the comb the flames became suddenly extinguished; at the second, the look of pain vanished from the face, and it shrank into its usual size; at the third, she rose from the chair, lovelier than she ever was before, and flung herself into the arms of her brother Perarthrites.

* * * * *

After this there was nothing more to be done but to marry the two couples as fast as possible. And when the wedding was over, Perarthrites and his bride returned to Placenza, and Ferrandina and her husband to Lombardy, and they all lived happily till they died.

(From Count Anthony Hamilton's Fairy Tales.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

THE THANKSGIVING OF THE WAZIR

Once upon a time there lived in Hindustan two kings whose countries bordered upon each other; but, as they were rivals in wealth and power, and one was a Hindu rajah and the other a Mohammedan badshah, they were not good friends at all. In order, however, to escape continual quarrels, the rajah and the badshah had drawn up an agreement, stamped and signed, declaring that if any of their subjects, from the least to the greatest, crossed the boundary between the two kingdoms, he might be seized and punished.

One morning the badshah and his chief wazir, or prime minister, were just about to begin their morning's work over the affairs of the kingdom, and the badshah had taken up a pen and was cutting it to his liking with a sharp knife, when the knife slipped and cut off the tip of his finger.

'Oh-he, wazir!' cried the king, 'I've cut the tip of my finger off!'

'That is good hearing!' said the wazir in answer.

'Insolent one,' exclaimed the king. 'Do you take pleasure in the misfortunes of others, and in mine also? Take him away, my guards, and put him in the court prison until I have time to punish him as he deserves!'

Instantly the officers in attendance seized upon the luckless wazir, and dragged him out of the king's presence towards the narrow doorway, through which unhappy criminals were wont to be led to prison or execution. As the door opened to receive him, the wazir muttered something into his great white beard which the soldiers could not hear.

'What said the rascal?' shouted the angry king.

He says, 'he thanks your majesty,' replied one of the gaolers. And at his words, the king stared at the closing door, in anger and amazement.

'He must be mad,' he cried, 'for he is grateful, not only for the misfortunes of others, but for his own; surely something has turned his head!'

Now the king was very fond of his old wazir, and although the court physician came and bound up his injured finger with cool and healing ointment, and soothed the pain, he could not soothe the soreness of the king's heart, nor could any of all his ministers and courtiers, who found his majesty very cross all the day long.

Early next morning the king ordered his horse and declared that he would go hunting. Instantly all was bustle and preparation in stable and hall, and by the time he was ready a score of ministers and huntsmen stood ready to mount and accompany him; but to their astonishment the king would have none of them. Indeed, he glared at them so fiercely that they were glad to leave him. So away and away he wandered, over field and through forest, so moody and thoughtful that many a fat buck and gaudy pheasant escaped without notice, and so careless was he whither he was going that he strayed without perceiving it over into the rajah's territory, and only discovered the fact when, suddenly, men stepped from all sides out of a thicket, and there was nothing left but surrender. Then the poor badshah was seized and bound and taken to the rajah's prison, thinking most of the time of his wazir, who was suffering a similar fate, and wishing that, like the wazir, he could feel that there was something to give thanks for.

That night the rajah held a special council to consider what should be done to his rival who had thus given himself into his hands. All the Brahmans were sent for--fat priests who understood all about everything, and what days were lucky and what unlucky--and, whilst all the rest of the rajah's councillors were offering him different advice until he was nearly crazy with anger and indecision, the chief Brahman was squatting in a corner figuring out sums and signs to himself with an admiring group of lesser priests around him. At last he arose, and advanced towards the throne.

'Well,' said the rajah anxiously, 'what have you to advise?'

'A very unlucky day!' exclaimed the chief Brahman. 'Oh, a very unlucky day! The god Devi is full of wrath, and commands that to-morrow you must chop off this badshah's head and offer it in to him in sacrifice.'

'Ah, well,' said the rajah, 'let it be done. I leave it to you to carry out the sentence.' And he bowed to the priests and left the room.

Before dawn great preparations were being made for a grand festival in honour of the great idol Devi. Hundreds of banners waved, hundreds of drummers drummed, hundreds of singers chanted chants, hundreds of priests, well washed and anointed, performed their sacred rites, whilst the rajah sat, nervous and ill at ease, amongst hundreds of courtiers and servants, wishing it were all well over. At last the time came for the sacrifice to be offered, and the poor badshah was led out bound, to have his head chopped off.

The chief Brahman came along with a smile on his face, and a big sword in his hand, when, suddenly, he noticed that the badshah's finger was tied up in a bit of rag. Instantly he dropped the sword, and, with his eyes starting out of his head with excitement, pounced upon the rag and tore it off, and there he saw that the tip of his victim's finger was missing. At this he got very red and angry indeed, and he led the badshah up to where the rajah sat wondering.

'Behold! O rajah,' he said, 'this sacrifice is useless, the tip of his finger is gone! A sacrifice is no sacrifice unless it is complete.' And he began to weep with rage and mortification.

But of instead of wailing likewise, the rajah gave a sigh of relief, and answered: 'Well, that settles the matter. If it had been anyone else I should not have minded; but, somehow--a king and all--well, it doesn't seem quite right to sacrifice a king.' And with that he jumped up and with his jewelled dagger cut the badshah's cords, and marched with him out of the temple back to the palace.

After having bathed and refreshed his guest, the rajah loaded him with gifts, and himself accompanied him with a large escort as far as the frontier between their kingdoms, where, amidst salutes and great rejoicings, they tore up the old agreement and drew up another in which each king promised welcome and safe conduct to any of the other's people, from the least to the greatest, who came over the border on any errand whatever. And so they embraced, and each went his own way.

When the badshah got home that very evening he sent for his imprisoned wazir.

'Well, O wazir!' he said, when the old man had been brought before him, 'what think you has been happening to me?'

'How can a man in prison know what is happening outside it?' answered the wazir.

Then the badshah told him all his adventures. And when he had reached the end he added:

'I have made up my mind, as a token of gratitude for my escape, to pardon you freely, if you will tell me why you gave thanks when I cut off the tip of my finger.'

'Sire,' replied the old wazir, 'am I not right in thinking that it was a very lucky thing for you that you did cut off the tip of your finger, for otherwise you would certainly have lost your head. And to lose a scrap of one's finger is surely the least of the two evils.'

'Very true,' answered the king, touching his head as he spoke, as if to make quite certain that it was still there, 'but yet--why did you likewise give thanks when I put you into prison?'

'I gave thanks,' said the wazir, 'because it is good always to give thanks. And had I known that my being in prison was to prevent the god Devi claiming me instead of your majesty, as a perfect offering, I should have given greater thanks still.'

(Punjabi story.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

SAMBA THE COWARD

In the great country far away south, through which flows the river Nile, there lived a king who had an only child called Samba.

Now, from the time that Samba could walk he showed signs of being afraid of everything, and as he grew bigger he became more and more frightened. At first his father's friends made light of it, and said to each other:

'It is strange to see a boy of our race running into a hut at the trumpeting of an elephant, and trembling with fear if a lion cub half his size comes near him; but, after all, he is only a baby, and when he is older he will be as brave as the rest.'

'Yes, he is only a baby,' answered the king who overheard them, 'it will be all right by-and-by.' But, somehow, he sighed as he said it, and the men looked at him and made no reply.

The years passed away, and Samba had become a tall and strong youth. He was good-natured and pleasant, and was liked by all, and if during his father's hunting parties he was seldom to be seen in any place of danger, he was too great a favourite for much to be said.

'When the king holds the feast and declares him to be his heir, he will cease to be a child,' murmured the rest of the people, as they had done before; and on the day of the ceremony their hearts beat gladly, and they cried to each other:

'It is Samba, Samba, whose chin is above the heads of other men, who will defend us against the tribes of the robbers!'

* * * * *

Not many weeks after, the dwellers in the village awoke to find that during the night their herds had been driven away, and their herdsmen carried off into slavery by their enemies. Now was the time for Samba to show the brave spirit that had come to him with his manhood, and to ride forth at the head of the warriors of his race. But Samba could nowhere be found, and a party of the avengers went on their way without him.

It was many days later before he came back, with his head held high, and a tale of a lion which he had tracked to its lair and killed, at the risk of his own life. A little while earlier and his people would have welcomed his story, and believed it all, but now it was too late.

'Samba the Coward,' cried a voice from the crowd; and the name stuck to him, even the very children shouted it at him, and his father did not spare him. At length he could bear it no longer, and made up his mind to leave his own land for another where peace had reigned since the memory of man. So, early next morning, he slipped out to the king's stables, and choosing the quietest horse he could find, he rode away northwards.

Never as long as he lived did Samba forget the terrors of that journey. He could hardly sleep at night for dread of the wild beasts that might be lurking behind every rock or bush, while, by day, the distant roar of a lion would cause him to start so violently, that he almost fell from his horse. A dozen times he was on the point of turning back, and it was not the terror of the mocking words and scornful laughs that kept him from doing so, but the terror lest he should be forced to take part in their wars. Therefore he held on, and deeply thankful he felt when the walls of a city, larger than he had ever dreamed of, rose before him.

Drawing himself up to his full height, he rode proudly through the gate and past the palace, where, as was her custom, the princess was sitting on the terrace roof, watching the bustle in the street below.

'That is a gallant figure,' thought she, as Samba, mounted on his big black horse, steered his way skilfully among the crowds; and, beckoning to a slave, she ordered him to go and meet the stranger, and ask him who he was and whence he came.

'Oh, princess, he is the son of a king, and heir to a country which lies near the Great River,' answered the slave, when he had returned from questioning Samba. And the princess on hearing this news summoned her father, and told him that if she was not allowed to wed the stranger she would die unmarried.

Like many other fathers, the king could refuse his daughter nothing, and besides, she had rejected so many suitors already that he was quite alarmed lest no man should be good enough for her. Therefore, after a talk with Samba, who charmed him by his good humour and pleasant ways, he gave his consent, and three days later the wedding feast was celebrated with the utmost splendour.

The princess was very proud of her tall handsome husband, and for some time she was quite content that he should pass the days with her under the palm trees, telling her the stories that she loved, or amusing her with tales of the manners and customs of his country, which were so different to those of her own. But, by-and-by, this was not enough; she wanted other people to be proud of him too, and one day she said:

'I really almost wish that those Moorish thieves from the north would come on one of their robbing expeditions. I should love so to see you ride out at the head of our men, to chase them home again. Ah, how happy I should be when the city rang with your noble deeds!'

She looked lovingly at him as she spoke; but, to her surprise, his face grew dark, and he answered hastily:

'Never speak to me again of the Moors or of war. It was to escape from them that I fled from my own land, and at the first word of invasion I should leave you for ever.'

'How funny you are,' cried she, breaking into a laugh. 'The idea of anyone as big as you being afraid of a Moor! But still, you mustn't say those things to anyone except me, or they might think you were in earnest.'

* * * * *

Not very long after this, when the people of the city were holding a great feast outside the walls of the town, a body of Moors, who had been in hiding for days, drove off all the sheep and goats which were peacefully feeding on the slopes of a hill. Directly the loss was discovered, which was not for some hours, the king gave orders that the war drum should be beaten, and the warriors assembled in the great square before the palace, trembling with fury at the insult which had been put upon them. Loud were the cries for instant vengeance, and for Samba, son-in-law of the king, to lead them to battle. But shout as they might, Samba never came.

And where was he? No further than in a cool, dark cellar of the palace, crouching among huge earthenware pots of grain. With a rush of pain at her heart, there his wife found him, and she tried with all her strength to kindle in him a sense of shame, but in vain. Even the thought of the future danger he might run from the contempt of his subjects was as nothing when compared with the risks of the present.

'Take off your tunic of mail,' said the princess at last; and her voice was so stern and cold that none would have known it. 'Give it to me, and hand me besides your helmet, your sword and your spear.' And with many fearful glances to right and to left, Samba stripped off the armour inlaid with gold, the property of the king's son-in-law. Silently his wife took, one by one, the pieces from him, and fastened them on her with firm hands, never even glancing at the tall form of her husband who had slunk back to his corner. When she had fastened the last buckle, and lowered her vizor, she went out, and mounting Samba's horse, gave the signal to the warriors to follow.

Now, although the princess was much shorter than her husband, she was a tall woman, and the horse which she rode was likewise higher than the rest, so that when the men caught sight of the gold-inlaid suit of chain armour, they did not doubt that Samba was taking his rightful place, and cheered him loudly. The princess bowed in answer to their greeting, but kept her vizor down; and touching her horse with the spur, she galloped at the head of her troops to charge the enemy. The Moors, who had not expected to be so quickly pursued, had scarcely time to form themselves into battle array, and were speedily put to flight. Then the little troop of horsemen returned to the city, where all sung the praises of Samba their leader.

The instant they reached the palace the princess flung her reins to a groom, and disappeared up a side staircase, by which she could, unseen, enter her own rooms. Here she found Samba lying idly on a heap of mats; but he raised his head uneasily as the door opened and looked at his wife, not feeling sure how she might act towards him. However, he need not have been afraid of harsh words: she merely unbuttoned her armour as fast as possible, and bade him put it on with all speed. Samba obeyed, not daring to ask any questions; and when he had finished the princess told him to follow her, and led him on to the flat roof of the house, below which a crowd had gathered, cheering lustily.

'Samba, the king's son-in-law! Samba, the bravest of the brave! Where is he? Let him show himself!' And when Samba did show himself the shouts and applause became louder than ever. 'See how modest he is! He leaves the glory to others!' cried they. And Samba only smiled and waved his hand, and said nothing.

Out of all the mass of people assembled there to do honour to Samba, one alone there was who did not shout and praise with the rest. This was the princess's youngest brother, whose sharp eyes had noted certain things during the fight which recalled his sister much more than they did her husband. Under promise of secrecy, he told his suspicions to the other princes, but only got laughed at, and was bidden to carry his dreams elsewhere.

'Well, well,' answered the boy, 'we shall see who is right; but the next time we give battle to the Moors I will take care to place a private mark on our commander.'

In spite of their defeat, not many days after the Moors sent a fresh body of troops to steal some cattle, and again Samba's wife dressed herself in her husband's armour, and rode out at the head of the avenging column. This time the combat was fiercer than before, and in the thick of it her youngest brother drew near, and gave his sister a slight wound on the leg. At the moment she paid no heed to the pain, which, indeed, she scarcely felt; but when the enemy had been put to flight and the little band returned to the palace, faintness suddenly overtook her, and she could hardly stagger up the staircase to her own apartments.

'I am wounded,' she cried, sinking down on the mats where he had been lying, 'but do not be anxious; it is really nothing. You have only got to wound yourself slightly in the same spot and no one will guess that it was I and not you who were fighting.'

'What!' cried Samba, his eyes nearly starting from his head in surprise and terror. 'Can you possibly imagine that I should agree to anything so useless and painful? Why, I might as well have gone to fight myself!'

'Ah, I ought to have known better, indeed,' answered the princess, in a voice that seemed to come from a long way off; but, quick as thought, the moment Samba turned his back she pierced one of his bare legs with a spear.

He gave a loud scream and staggered backwards, from astonishment, much more than from pain. But before he could speak his wife had left the room and had gone to seek the medicine man of the palace.

'My husband has been wounded,' said she, when she had found him, 'come and tend him with speed, for he is faint from loss of blood.' And she took care that more than one person heard her words, so that all that day the people pressed up to the gate of the palace, asking for news of their brave champion.

'You see,' observed the king's eldest sons, who had visited the room where Samba lay groaning, 'you see, O wise young brother, that we were right and you were wrong about Samba, and that he really did go into the battle.' But the boy answered nothing, and only shook his head doubtfully.

It was only two days later that the Moors appeared for the third time, and though the herds had been tethered in a new and safer place, they were promptly carried off as before. 'For,' said the Moors to each other, 'the tribe will never think of our coming back so soon when they have beaten us so badly.'

When the drum sounded to assemble all the fighting men, the princess rose and sought her husband.

'Samba,' cried she, 'my wound is worse than I thought. I can scarcely walk, and could not mount my horse without help. For to-day, then, I cannot do your work, so you must go instead of me.'

'What nonsense,' exclaimed Samba, 'I never heard of such a thing. Why, I might be wounded, or even killed! You have three brothers. The king can choose one of them.'

'They are all too young,' replied his wife; 'the men would not obey them. But if, indeed, you will not go, at least you can help me harness my horse.' And to this Samba, who was always ready to do anything he was asked when there was no danger about it, agreed readily.

So the horse was quickly harnessed, and when it was done the princess said:

'Now ride the horse to the place of meeting outside the gates, and I will join you by a shorter way, and will change places with you.' Samba, who loved riding in times of peace, mounted as she had told him, and when he was safe in the saddle, his wife dealt the horse a sharp cut with her whip, and he dashed off through the town and through the ranks of the warriors who were waiting for him. Instantly the whole place was in motion. Samba tried to check his steed, but he might as well have sought to stop the wind, and it seemed no more than a few minutes before they were grappling hand to hand with the Moors.

Then a miracle happened. Samba the coward, the skulker, the terrified, no sooner found himself pressed hard, unable to escape, than something sprang into life within him, and he fought with all his might. And when a man of his size and strength begins to fight he generally fights well.

That day the victory was really owing to Samba, and the shouts of the people were louder than ever. When he returned, bearing with him the sword of the Moorish chief, the old king pressed him in his arms and said:

'Oh, my son, how can I ever show you how grateful I am for this splendid service?'

But Samba, who was good and loyal when fear did not possess him, answered straightly:

'My father, it is to your daughter and not to me to whom thanks are due, for it is she who has turned the coward that I was into a brave man.'

(Contes Soudainais. Par C. Monteil.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

KUPTI AND IMANI

Once there was a king who had two daughters; and their names were Kupti and Imani. He loved them both very much, and spent hours in talking to them, and one day he said to Kupti, the elder:

'Are you satisfied to leave your life and fortune in my hands?'

'Verily yes,' answered the princess, surprised at the question. 'In whose hands should I leave them, if not in yours?'

But when he asked his younger daughter Imani the same question, she replied:

'No, indeed! If I had the chance I would make my own fortune.'

At this answer the king was very displeased, and said:

'You are too young to know the meaning of your words. But, be it so; I will give you the chance of gratifying your wish.'

Then he sent for an old lame fakir who lived in a tumbledown hut on the outskirts of the city, and when he had presented himself, the king said:

'No doubt, as you are very old and nearly crippled, you would be glad of some young person to live with you and serve you; so I will send you my younger daughter. She wants to earn her living, and she can do so with you.'

Of course the old fakir had not a word to say, or, if he had, he was really too astonished and troubled to say it; but the young princess went off with him smiling, and tripped along quite gaily, whilst he hobbled home with her in perplexed silence.

Directly they got to the hut the fakir began to think what he could arrange for the princess's comfort; but after all he was a fakir, and his house was bare except for one bedstead, two old cooking pots and an earthen jar for water, and one cannot get much comfort out of those things. However, the princess soon ended his perplexity by asking:

'Have you any money?'

'I have a penny somewhere,' replied the fakir.

'Very well,' rejoined the princess, 'give me the penny and go out and borrow me a spinning-wheel and a loom.'

After much seeking the fakir found the penny and started on his errand, whilst the princess went off shopping. First she bought a farthing's worth of oil, and then she bought three farthings' worth of flax. When she got back with her purchases she set the old man on the bedstead and rubbed his crippled leg with the oil for an hour. Then she sat down to the spinning-wheel and spun and spun all night long whilst the old man slept, until, in the morning, she had spun the finest thread that ever was seen. Next she went to the loom and wove and wove until by the evening she had woven a beautiful silver cloth.

'Now,' said she to the fakir, 'go into the market-place and sell my cloth whilst I rest.'

'And what am I to ask for it?' said the old man.

'Two gold pieces,' replied the princess.

So the fakir hobbled away, and stood in the market-place to sell the cloth. Presently the elder princess drove by, and when she saw the cloth she stopped and asked the price.

'Two gold pieces,' said the fakir. And the princess gladly paid them, after which the old fakir hobbled home with the money. As she had done before so Imani did again day after day. Always she spent a penny upon oil and flax, always she tended the old man's lame limb, and spun and wove the most beautiful cloths and sold them at high prices. Gradually the city became famous for her beautiful stuffs, the old fakir's lame leg became straighter and stronger, and the hole under the floor of the hut where they kept their money became fuller and fuller of gold pieces. At last, one day, the princess said:

'I really think we have got enough to live in greater comfort.' And she sent for builders, and they built a beautiful house for her and the old fakir, and in all the city there was none finer except the king's palace. Presently this reached the ears of the king, and when he inquired whose it was they told him that it belonged to his daughter.

'Well,' exclaimed the king, 'she said that she would make her own fortune, and somehow or other she seems to have done it!'

A little while after this, business took the king to another country, and before he went he asked his elder daughter what she would like him to bring her back as a gift.

'A necklace of rubies,' answered she. And then the king thought he would like to ask Imani too; so he sent a messenger to find out what sort of a present she wanted. The man happened to arrive just as she was trying to disentangle a knot in her loom, and bowing low before her, he said:

'The king sends me to inquire what you wish him to bring you as a present from the country of Dur?' But Imani, who was only considering how she could best untie the knot without breaking the thread, replied:

'Patience!' meaning that the messenger should wait till she was able to attend to him. But the messenger went off with this as an answer, and told the king that the only thing the princess Imani wanted was 'patience.'

'Oh!' said the king, 'I don't know whether that's a thing to be bought at Dur; I never had it myself, but if it is to be got I will buy it for her.'

Next day the king departed on his journey, and when his business at Dur was completed he bought for Kupti a beautiful ruby necklace. Then he said to a servant:

'The princess Imani wants some patience. I did not know there was such a thing, but you must go to the market and inquire, and if any is to be sold, get it and bring it to me.'

The servant saluted and left the king's presence. He walked about the market for some time crying: 'Has anyone patience to sell? patience to sell?' And some of the people mocked, and some (who had no patience) told him to go away and not be a fool; and some said: 'The fellow's mad! As though one could buy or sell patience!'

At length it came to the ears of the king of Dur that there was a madman in the market trying to buy patience. And the king laughed and said:

'I should like to see that fellow, bring him here!'

And immediately his attendants went to seek the man, and brought him to the king, who asked:

'What is this you want?'

And the man replied: 'Sire! I am bidden to ask for patience.'

'Oh,' said the king, 'you must have a strange master! What does he want with it?'

'My master wants it as a present for his daughter Imani,' replied the servant.

'Well,' said the king, 'I know of some patience which the young lady might have if she cares for it; but it is not to be bought.'

Now the king's name was Subbar Khan, and Subbar means 'patience'; but the messenger did not know that, or understand that he was making a joke. However, he declared that the princess Imani was not only young and beautiful, but also the cleverest, most industrious, and kindest-hearted of princesses; and he would have gone on explaining her virtues had not the king laughingly put up his hand and stopped him saying:

'Well, well, wait a minute, and I will see what can be done.'

With that he got up and went to his own apartments and took out a little casket. Into the casket he put a fan, and shutting it up carefully he brought it to the messenger and said:

'Here is a casket. It has no lock nor key, and yet will open only to the touch of the person who needs its contents--and whoever opens it will obtain patience; but I can't tell whether it will be quite the kind of patience that is wanted.' And the servant bowed low, and took the casket; but when he asked what was to be paid, the king would take nothing. So he went away and gave the casket and an account of his adventures to his master.

As soon as their father got back to his country Kupti and Imani each got the presents he had brought for them. Imani was very surprised when the casket was brought to her by the hand of a messenger.

'But,' she said, 'what is this? I never asked for anything! Indeed I had no time, for the messenger ran away before I had unravelled my tangle.'

But the servant declared that the casket was for her, so she took it with some curiosity, and brought it to the old fakir. The old man tried to open it, but in vain--so closely did the lid fit that it seemed to be quite immovable, and yet there was no lock, nor bolt, nor spring, nor anything apparently by which the casket was kept shut. When he was tired of trying he handed the casket to the princess, who hardly touched it before it opened quite easily, and there lay within a beautiful fan. With a cry of surprise and pleasure Imani took out the fan, and began to fan herself.

Hardly had she finished three strokes of the fan before there suddenly appeared from nowhere in particular, king Subbar Khan of Dur! The princess gasped and rubbed her eyes, and the old fakir sat and gazed in such astonishment that for some minutes he could not speak. At length he said:

'Who may you be, fair sir, if you please?'

'My name,' said the king, 'is Subbar Khan of Dur. This lady,' bowing to the princess, 'has summoned me, and here I am!'

'I?'--stammered the princess--'I have summoned you? I never saw or heard of you in my life before, so how could that be?'

Then the king told them how he had heard of a man in his own city of Dur trying to buy patience, and how he had given him the fan in the casket.

'Both are magical,' he added; 'when anyone uses the fan, in three strokes of it I am with them; if they fold it and tap it on the table, in three taps I am at home again. The casket will not open to all, but you see it was this fair lady who asked for patience, and, as that is my name, here I am, very much at her service.'

Now the princess Imani, being of a high spirit, was anxious to fold up the fan, and give the three taps which would send the king home again; but the old fakir was very pleased with his guest, and so in one way and another they spent quite a pleasant evening together before Subbar Khan took his leave.

After that he was often summoned; and as both the fakir and he were very fond of chess and were good players, they used to sit up half the night playing, and at last a little room in the house began to be called the king's room, and whenever he stayed late he used to sleep there and go home again in the morning.

By-and-by it came to the ears of the princess Kupti that there was a rich and handsome young man visiting at her sister's house, and she was very jealous. So she went one day to pay Imani a visit, and pretended to be very affectionate, and interested in the house, and in the way in which Imani and the old fakir lived, and of their mysterious and royal visitor. As the sisters went from place to place, Kupti was shown Subbar Khan's room; and presently, making some excuse, she slipped in there by herself and swiftly spread under the sheet which lay upon the bed a quantity of very finely powdered and splintered glass which was poisoned, and which she had brought with her concealed in her clothes. Shortly afterwards she took leave of her sister, declaring that she could never forgive herself for not having come near her all this time, and that she would now begin to make amends for her neglect.

That very evening Subbar Khan came and sat up late with the old fakir playing chess as usual. Very tired, he at length bade him and the princess good-night and, as soon as he lay down on the bed, thousands of tiny, tiny splinters of poisoned glass ran into him. He could not think what was the matter, and started this way and that until he was pricked all over, and he felt as though he were burning from head to foot. But he never said a word, only he sat up all night in agony of body and in worse agony of mind to think that he should have been poisoned, as he guessed he was, in Imani's own house. In the morning, although he was nearly fainting, he still said nothing, and by means of the magic fan was duly transported home again. Then he sent for all the physicians and doctors in his kingdom, but none could make out what his illness was; and so he lingered on for weeks and weeks trying every remedy that anyone could devise, and passing sleepless nights and days of pain and fever and misery, until at last he was at the point of death. Meanwhile the princess Imani and the old fakir were much troubled because, although they waved the magic fan again and again, no Subbar Khan appeared, and they feared that he had tired of them, or that some evil fate had overtaken him. At last the princess was in such a miserable state of doubt and uncertainty that she determined to go herself to the kingdom of Dur and see what was the matter. Disguising herself in man's clothes as a young fakir, she set out upon her journey alone and on foot, as a fakir should travel. One evening she found herself in a forest, and lay down under a great tree to pass the night. But she could not sleep for thinking of Subbar Khan, and wondering what had happened to him. Presently she heard two great monkeys talking to one another in the tree above her head.

'Good evening, brother,' said one, 'whence come you--and what is the news?'

'I come from Dur,' said the other, 'and the news is that the king is dying.'

'Oh,' said the first, 'I'm sorry to hear that, for he is a master hand at slaying leopards and creatures that ought not to be allowed to live. What is the matter with him?'

'No man knows,' replied the second monkey, 'but the birds, who see all and carry all messages, say that he is dying of poisoned glass that Kupti the king's daughter spread upon his bed.'

'Ah!' said the first monkey, 'that is sad news; but if they only knew it, the berries of the very tree we sit in, steeped in hot water, will cure such a disease as that in three days at most.'

'True!' said the other, 'it's a pity that we can't tell some man of a medicine so simple, and so save a good man's life. But men are so silly; they go and shut themselves up in stuffy houses in stuffy cities instead of living in nice airy trees, and so they miss knowing all the best things.'

Now when Imani heard that Subbar Khan was dying she began to weep silently; but as she listened she dried her tears and sat up; and as soon as daylight dawned over the forest she began to gather the berries from the tree until she had filled her cloth with a load of them. Then she walked on as fast as she could, and in two days reached the city of Dur. The first thing she did was to pass through the market crying:

'Medicine for sale! Are any ill that need my medicine?' And presently one man said to his neighbour:

'See, there is a young fakir with medicine for sale, perhaps he could do something for the king.'

'Pooh!' replied the other, 'where so many grey-beards have failed, how should a lad like that be of any use?'

'Still,' said the first, 'he might try.' And he went up and spoke to Imani, and together they set out for the palace and announced that another doctor was come to try and cure the king.

After some delay Imani was admitted to the sick room, and, whilst she was so well disguised that the king did not recognize her, he was so wasted by illness that she hardly knew him. But she began at once, full of hope, by asking for some apartments all to herself and a pot in which to boil water. As soon as the water was heated she steeped some of her berries in it and gave the mixture to the king's attendants and told them to wash his body with it. The first washing did so much good that the king slept quietly all the night. Again the second day she did the same, and this time the king declared he was hungry, and called for food. After the third day he was quite well, only very weak from his long illness. On the fourth day he got up and sat upon his throne, and then sent messengers to fetch the physician who had cured him. When Imani appeared everyone marvelled that so young a man should be so clever a doctor; and the king wanted to give him immense presents of money and of all kinds of precious things. At first Imani would take nothing, but at last she said that, if she must be rewarded, she would ask for the king's signet ring and his handkerchief. So, as she would take nothing more, the king gave her his signet ring and his handkerchief, and she departed and travelled back to her own country as fast as she could.

A little while after her return, when she had related to the fakir all her adventures, they sent for Subbar Khan by means of the magic fan; and when he appeared they asked him why he had stayed away for so long. Then he told them all about his illness, and how he had been cured, and when he had finished the princess rose up and, opening a cabinet, brought out the ring and handkerchief, and said, laughing:

'Are these the rewards you gave to your doctor?'

At that the king looked, and he recognised her, and understood in a moment all that had happened; and he jumped up and put the magic fan in his pocket, and declared that no one should send him away to his own country any more unless Imani would come with him and be his wife. And so it was settled, and the old fakir and Imani went to the city of Dur, where Imani was married to the king and lived happily ever after.

(Punjabi story.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF LITTLE MAIA

Once upon a time there lived a woman who had a pretty cottage and garden right in the middle of a forest. All through the summer she was quite happy tending her flowers and listening to the birds singing in the trees, but in the winter, when snow lay on the ground and wolves came howling about the door, she felt very lonely and frightened. 'If I only had a child to speak to, however small, what a comfort it would be!' she said to herself. And the heavier the snow fell the oftener she repeated the words. And at last a day arrived when she could bear the silence and solitude no longer, and set off to walk to the nearest village to beg someone to sell her or lend her a child.

The snow was very deep, and reached above her ankles, and it took her almost an hour to go a few hundred yards.

'It will be dark at this rate before I get to the first house,' thought she, and stopped to look about her. Suddenly a little woman in a high-crowned hat stepped from behind a tree in front of her.

'This is a bad day for walking! Are you going far?' inquired the little woman.

'Well, I want to go to the village; but I don't see how I am ever to get there,' answered the other.

'And may I ask what important business takes you there?' asked the little woman, who was really a witch.

'My house is so dreary, with no one to speak to; I cannot stay in it alone, and I am seeking for a child--I don't mind how small she is--who will keep me company.'

'Oh, if that is all, you need go no further,' replied the witch, putting her hand in her pocket. 'Look, here is a barley corn, as a favour you shall have it for twelve shillings, and if you plant it in a flower-pot, and give it plenty of water, in a few days you will see something wonderful.'

This promise raised the woman's spirits. She gladly paid down the price, and as soon as she returned home she dug a hole in a flower-pot and put in the seed.

For three days she waited, hardly taking her eyes from the flower-pot in its warm corner, and on the third morning she saw that, while she was asleep, a tall red tulip had shot up, sheathed in green leaves.

'What a beautiful blossom,' cried the woman, stooping to kiss it, when, as she did so, the red petals burst asunder, and in the midst of them was a lovely little girl only an inch high. This tiny little creature was seated on a mattress of violets, and covered with a quilt of rose leaves, and she opened her eyes and smiled at the woman as if she had known her all her life.

'Oh! you darling; I shall never be lonely any more!' she exclaimed in rapture; and the baby nodded her head as much as to say:

'No, of course you won't!'

The woman lost no time in seeking for a roomy walnut-shell, which she lined thickly with white satin, and on it she placed the mattress, with the child, whom she called Maia, upon it. This was her bed, and stood on a chair close to where her foster-mother was sleeping; but in the morning she was lifted out, and placed on a leaf in the middle of a large bowl of water, and given two white horse-hairs to row herself about with. She was the happiest baby that ever was seen, and passed the whole day singing to herself, in a language of her own, that nobody else could understand.

* * * * *

For some weeks the two lived together and never grew tired of each other's society, and then a terrible misfortune happened. One night, when the foster-mother lay sound asleep after a hard day's work, a big, ugly, wet frog hopped in through the open window and stood staring at Maia under her quilt of rose leaves.

'Dear me! that is quite a pretty little girl,' thought the frog to herself; 'she would make a nice wife for my son.' And picking up the walnut cradle in her mouth, she hopped with it to the edge of a stream which ran through the garden.

'Come and see what I have brought you,' called the old frog, when she reached her home in the mud.

'Croak! croak! croak!' uttered the son, gazing with pleasure at the sleeping child.

'Hush; don't make such a noise or you will wake her!' whispered the mother. 'I mean her to be a wife for you, and while we are preparing for the wedding we will set her on that water-lily leaf in the middle of the brook, so that she may not be able to run away from us.'

It was on this green floating prison that Maia awoke, frightened and puzzled, with the first rays of the sun. She stood up straight on the leaf, looking about her for a way of escape, and, finding none, she sat down again and began to weep bitterly. At length her sobs were heard by the old frog, who was busy in her house at the bottom of the marsh, twisting rushes into a soft carpet for Maia's feet, and twining reeds and grapes over the doorway, to make it look pretty for the bride.

'Ah! the poor child feels lost and unhappy,' she thought pitifully, for her heart was kind. 'Well, I have just done, and then my son and I will go to fetch her. When she sees how handsome he is she will be all smiles again.' And in a few minutes they both appeared beside the leaf.

'This is your future husband. Did you ever see anyone like him?' asked the proud mother, pushing him forward. But, after one glance, Maia only cried the more; and the little fishes who lived in the stream came swimming round to see what was the matter.

'It is absurd that such a pretty creature should be forced to take a husband whom she does not want,' said they to each other. 'And such an ugly one too! However, we can easily prevent it.' And by turns they gnawed the stem of the lily-leaf close to the root, till at length it was free, and taking it in their mouths they bore Maia far away, till the little stream grew into a great river.

Oh, how Maia enjoyed that voyage, when once she became quite certain that the frogs could no longer reach her. Past many towns she went, and the people on the banks all turned to look at her, and exclaimed:

'What a lovely little girl! Where can she have come from?' 'What a lovely little girl!' twittered the birds in the bushes. And a blue butterfly fell in love with her, and would not leave her; so she took off her sash, which just matched him, and tied it round his body, so that with this new kind of horse she travelled much faster than before.

Unluckily, a great cockchafer, who was buzzing over the river, happened to catch sight of her, and caught her up in his claws. The poor butterfly was terribly frightened at the sight of him, and he struggled hard to free himself, so that the sash bow gave way, and he flew off into the sunshine. But Maia wasn't so fortunate, and though the cockchafer collected honey from the flowers for her dinner, and told her several times how pretty she was, she could not feel at ease with him. The cockchafer noticed this, and summoned his sisters to play with her; but they only stared rudely, and said:

'Where did you pick up that strange object? She is very ugly to be sure, but one ought to pity her for she has only two legs.'

'Yes, and no feelers,' added another; 'and she is so thin! Well, our brother has certainly very odd taste!'

'Indeed he has!' echoed the others. And they repeated it so loud and so often that, in the end, he believed it too, and snatching her up from the tree where he had placed her, set her down upon a daisy which grew near the ground.

Here Maia stayed for the whole summer, and really was not at all unhappy. She ventured to walk about by herself, and wove herself a bed of some blades of grass, and placed it under a clover leaf for shelter. The red cups that grew in the moss held as much dew as she wanted, and the cockchafer had taught her how to get honey. But summer does not last for ever, and by-and-by the flowers withered, and instead of dew there was snow and ice. Maia did not know what to do, for her clothes were worn to rags, and though she tried to roll herself up in a dry leaf it broke under her fingers. It soon was plain to her that if she did not get some other shelter she would die of hunger and cold.

So, gathering up all her courage, she left the forest and crossed the road into what had been, in the summer, a beautiful field of waving corn, but was now only a mass of hard stalks. She wandered on, seeing nothing but the sky above her head, till she suddenly found herself close to an opening which seemed to lead underground.

'It will be warm, at any rate,' thought Maia, 'and perhaps the person who lives there will give me something to eat. At any rate, I can't be worse off than I am now.' And she walked boldly down the passage. By-and-by she came to a door which stood ajar, and, peeping in, discovered a whole room full of corn. This gave her heart, and she went on more swiftly, till she reached a kitchen where an old field mouse was baking a cake.

'You poor little animal,' cried the mouse, who had never seen anything like her before, 'you look starved to death! Come and sit here and get warm, and share my dinner with me.'

Maia almost wept with joy at the old mouse's kind words. She needed no second bidding, but ate more than she had ever done in her life, though it was not a breakfast for a humming-bird! When she had quite finished she put out her hand and smiled, and the old mouse said to her:

'Can you tell stories? If so you may stay with me till the sun gets hot again, and you shall help me with my house. But it is dull here in the winter unless you have somebody clever enough to amuse you.'

Yes, Maia had learned a great many stories from her foster-mother, and, besides, there were all her own adventures, and her escapes from death. She knew also how a room should be swept, and never failed to get up early in the morning and have everything clean and tidy for the old mouse.

So the winter passed away pleasantly, and Maia began to talk of the spring, and of the time when she would have to go out into the world again and seek her fortune.

'Oh, you need not begin to think of that for a while yet,' answered the field-mouse. 'Up on the earth they have a proverb:

When the day lengthens Then the cold strengthens;

it has been quite warm up to now, and the snow may fall any time. Never a winter goes by without it, and then you will be very thankful you are here, and not outside! But I dare say it is quiet for a young thing like you,' she added, 'and I have invited my neighbour the mole to come and pay us a visit. He has been asleep all these months, but I hear he is waking up again. You would be a lucky girl if he took into his head to marry you, only, unfortunately, he is blind, and cannot see how pretty you are.' And for this blindness Maia felt truly glad, as she did not want a mole for a husband.

However, by-and-by he paid his promised visit, and Maia did not like him at all. He might be as rich and learned as possible, but he hated the sun, and the trees, and the flowers, and all that Maia loved best. To be sure, being blind, he had never seen them, and, like many other people, he thought that anything he did not know was not worth knowing. But Maia's tales amused him, though he would not for the world have let her see it, and he admired her voice when she sang:

Mary, Mary, quite contrary, How does your garden grow?

Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree-top;

though he told her that it was all nonsense, and that trees and gardens were mere foolishness. When she was his wife he would teach her things better worth learning.

'Meanwhile,' he said, with a grand air, 'I have burrowed a passage from this house to my own, in which you can walk; but I warn you not to be frightened at a great dead creature that has fallen through a hole in the roof, and is lying on one side.' 'What sort of creature is it?' asked Maia eagerly.

'Oh, I really can't tell you,' answered the mole, indifferently; 'it is covered with something soft, and it has two thin legs, and a long sharp thing sticking out of its head.'

'It is a bird,' cried Maia joyfully, 'and I love birds! It must have died of cold,' she added, dropping her voice. 'Oh! good Mr. Mole, do take me to see it!'

'Come then, as I am going home,' replied the mole. And calling to the old field-mouse to accompany them, they all set out.

'Here it is,' said the mole at last; 'dear me, how thankful I am Fate did not make me a bird. They can't say anything but "twit, twit," and die with the first breath of cold.'

'Ah, yes, poor useless creature,' answered the field-mouse. But while they were talking, Maia crept round to the other side and stroked the feathers of the little swallow, and kissed his eyes.

All that night she lay awake, thinking of the swallow lying dead in the passage. At length she could bear it no longer, and stole away to the place where the hay was kept, and wove a thick carpet. Next she went to the field-mouse's store of cotton which she picked in the summer from some of the marsh flowers, and carrying them both down the passage, she tucked the cotton underneath the bird and spread the hay quilt over him.

'Perhaps you were one of the swallows who sang to me in the summer,' said she. 'I wish I could have brought you to life again; but now, good-bye!' And she laid her face, wet with tears, on the breast of the bird. Surely she felt a faint movement against her cheek? Yes, there it was again! Suppose the bird was not dead after all, but only senseless with cold and hunger! And at this thought Maia hastened back to the house, and brought some grains of corn, and a drop of water in a leaf. This she held close to the swallow's beak, which he opened unconsciously, and when he had sipped the water she gave him the grains one by one.

'Make no noise, so that no one may guess you are not dead,' she said. 'To-night I will bring you some more food, and I will tell the mole that he must stuff up the hole again, as it makes the passage too cold for me to walk in. And now farewell.' And off she went, back to the field-mouse, who was sound asleep.

* * * * *

After some days of Maia's careful nursing, the swallow felt strong enough to talk, and he told Maia how he came to be in the place where she found him. Before he was big enough to fly very high he had torn his wing in a rosebush, so that he could not keep up with his family and friends when they took their departure to warmer lands. In their swift course they never noticed that their little brother was not with them, and at last he dropped on the ground from sheer fatigue, and must have rolled down the hole into the passage.

It was very lucky for the swallow that both the mole and the field-mouse thought he was dead, and did not trouble about him, so that when the spring really came, and the sun was hot, and blue hyacinths grew in the woods and primroses in the hedges, he was as tall and strong as any of his companions.

'You have saved my life, dear little Maia,' said he; 'but now the time has come for me to leave you--unless,' he added, 'you will let me carry you on my back far away from this gloomy prison.'

Maia's eyes sparkled at the thought, but she shook her head bravely.

'Yes, you must go; but I must stay behind,' she answered. 'The field-mouse has been good to me, and I cannot desert her like that. Do you think you can open the hole for yourself?' she asked anxiously. 'If so, you had better begin now, for this evening we are to have supper with the mole, and it would never do for my foster-mother to find you working at it.' 'That is true,' answered the swallow. And flying up to the roof,--which, after all, was not very high above them--he set to work with his bill, and soon let a flood of sunshine into the dark place.

'Won't you come with me, Maia?' said he. And though her heart longed for the trees and the flowers, she answered as before:

'No, I cannot.'

That one glimpse of the sun was all Maia had for some time, for the corn sprung up so thickly over the hole and about the house, that there might almost as well have been no sun at all. However, though she missed her bird friend every moment, she had no leisure to be idle, for the field-mouse had told her that very soon she was to be married to the mole, and kept her spinning wool and cotton for her outfit. And as she had never in her life made a dress, four clever spiders were persuaded to spend the days underground, turning the wool and cotton into tiny garments. Maia liked the clothes, but hated the thought of the blind mole, only she did not know how to escape him. In the evenings, when the spiders were going to their homes for the night, she would walk with them to the door and wait till a puff of wind blew the corn ears apart, and she could see the sky.

'If the swallow would only come now,' she said to herself, 'I would go with him to the end of the world.' But he never came!

'Your outfit is all finished,' said the field-mouse one day when the berries were red and the leaves yellow, 'and the mole and I have decided that your wedding shall be in four weeks' time.'

'Oh, not so soon! not so soon!' cried Maia, bursting into tears; which made the field-mouse very angry, and declare that Maia had no more sense than other girls, and did not know what was good for her. Then the mole arrived, and carried her on his back to see the new house he had dug for her, which was so very far under ground that Maia's tiny legs could never bring her up even as high as the field-mouse's dwelling, from which she might see the sunlight. Her heart grew heavier and heavier as the days went by, and in the last evening of all she crept out into the field among the stubble, to watch the sun set before she bade it good-bye for ever.

'Farewell, farewell,' she said 'and farewell to my little swallow. Ah! if he only knew, he would come to help me.'

'Twit! twit,' cried a voice just above her; and the swallow fluttered to the ground beside her. 'You look sad; are you really going to let that ugly mole marry you?'

'I shall soon die, that is one comfort,' she answered weeping. But the swallow only said:

'Tut! tut! get on my back, as I told you before, and I will take you to a land where the sun always shines, and you will soon forget that such a creature as a mole ever existed.'

'Yes, I will come,' said Maia.

Then the swallow tore off one of the corn stalks with his strong beak, and bade her tie it safely to his wing. And they started off, flying, flying south for many a day.

Oh! how happy Maia was to see the beautiful earth again! A hundred times she longed for the swallow to stop, but he always told her that the best was yet to be; and they flew on and on, only halting for short rests, till they reached a place covered with tall white marble pillars, some standing high, wreathed in vines, out of which endless swallows' heads were peeping; others lying stretched among the flowers, white, yellow, and blue.

'I live up there,' said the swallow, pointing to the tallest of the pillars. 'But such a house would never do for you, as you would only fall out of it and kill yourself. So choose one of those flowers below, and you shall have it for your own, and sleep all night curled up in its leaves.'

'I will have that one,' answered Maia, pointing to a white flower shaped like a star, with a tiny crinkled wreath of red and yellow in its centre, and a long stem that swayed in the wind; 'that one is the prettiest of all, and it smells so sweet.' Then the swallow flew down towards it; but as they drew near they saw a tiny little manikin with a crown on his head, and wings on his shoulders, balancing himself on one of the leaves. 'Ah, that is the king of the flower-spirits,' whispered the swallow. And the king stretched out his hands to Maia, and helped her to jump from the swallow's back.

'I have waited for you for a long while,' said he, 'and now you have come at last to be my queen.'

And Maia smiled, and stood beside him as all the fairies that dwelt in the flowers ran to fetch presents for her; and the best of them all was a pair of lovely gauzy blue wings to help fly about like one of themselves.

So instead of marrying the mole, Little Maia was crowned a queen, and the fairies danced round her in a ring, while the swallow sang the wedding song.

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND

In a village in Hindustan there once lived a merchant who, although he rose early, worked hard, and rested late, remained very poor; and ill-luck so dogged him that he determined at last to go to some distant country and there to try his fortune. Twelve years passed by; his luck had turned, and now he had gathered great wealth, so that having plenty to keep him in comfort for the rest of his days, he thought once more of his native village, where he desired to spend the remainder of his life among his own people. In order to carry his riches with him in safety over the many weary miles that lay between him and his home, he bought some magnificent jewels, which he locked up in a little box and wore concealed upon his person; and, so as not to draw the attention of the thieves who infested the highways and made their living by robbing travellers, he started off in the poor clothes of a man who has nothing to lose.

Thus prepared, he travelled quickly, and within a few days' journey from his own village came to a city where he determined to buy better garments and--now that he was no longer afraid of thieves--to look more like the rich man he had become. In his new raiment he approached the city, and near the great gate he found a bazaar where, amongst many shops filled with costly silks, and carpets, and goods of all countries, was one finer than all the rest. There, amidst his goods, spread out to the best advantage, sat the owner smoking a long silver pipe, and thither the merchant bent his steps, and saluting the owner politely, sat down also and began to make some purchases. Now, the proprietor of the shop, Beeka Mull by name, was a very shrewd man, and as he and the merchant conversed, he soon felt sure that his customer was richer than he seemed, and was trying to conceal the fact. Certain purchases having been made, he invited the new-comer to refresh himself and in a short time they were chatting pleasantly together. In the course of the conversation Beeka Mull asked the merchant whither he was travelling, and hearing the name of the village, he observed:

'Ah, you had better be careful on that road--it's a very bad place for thieves.'

The merchant turned pale at these words. It would be such a bitter thing, he thought, just at the end of his journey to be robbed of all the fortune he had heaped up with such care. But this bland and prosperous Beeka Mull must surely know best, so presently he said:

'Lala-ji,[3] could you oblige me by locking up for me a small box for a short while? When once I get to my village I could bring back half-a-dozen sturdy men of my own kinsfolk and claim it again.'

The Lala shook his head. 'I could not do it,' replied he. 'I am sorry; but such things are not my business. I should be afraid to undertake it.'

'But,' pleaded the merchant, 'I know no one in this city, and you must surely have some place where you keep your own precious things. Do this, I pray you, as a great favour.'

Still Beeka Mull politely but firmly refused; but the merchant, feeling that he had now betrayed the fact that he was richer than he seemed, and being loth to make more people aware of it by inquiring elsewhere, continued to press him, until at last he consented. The merchant produced the little box of jewels, and Beeka Mull locked it up for him in a strong chest with other precious stones; and so, with many promises and compliments, they parted.

In a place like an Eastern bazaar, where the shops lie with wide open fronts, and with their goods displayed not only within but without on terraces and verandahs raised a few feet above the public roadway, such a long talk as that between Beeka Mull and the merchant could not but attract some attention from the other shop-keepers in the narrow street. If the merchant had but known it, nearly every shop-owner in that district was a thief, and the cleverest and biggest of all was Beeka Mull. But he did not know it, only he could not help feeling a little uneasy at having thus parted with all his wealth to a stranger. And so, as he wandered down the street, making a purchase here and there, he managed in one way and another to ask some questions about the honesty of Beeka Mull, and each rascal whom he spoke to, knowing that there was some good reason in the question, and hoping to get in return some share of the spoils, replied in praise of Beeka Mull as a model of all the virtues.

In this way the merchant's fears were stilled, and, with a comparatively light heart, he travelled on to his village; and within a week or so returned to the city with half-a-dozen sturdy young nephews and friends whom he had enlisted to help him carry home his precious box.

At the great market-place in the centre of the city the merchant left his friends, saying that he would go and get the box of jewels and rejoin them, to which they consented, and away he went. Arrived at the shop of Beeka Mull, he went up and saluted him.

'Good-day, Lala-ji,' said he. But the Lala pretended not to see him. So he repeated the salutation. 'What do you want?' snapped Beeka Mull; 'you've said your "good-day" twice, why don't you tell me your business?'

'Don't you remember me?' asked the merchant.

'Remember you?' growled the other; 'no, why should I? I have plenty to do to remember good customers without trying to remember every beggar who comes whining for charity.'

When he heard this the merchant began to tremble.

'Lala-ji!' he cried, 'surely you remember me and the little box I gave you to take care of? And you promised--yes, indeed, you promised very kindly--that I might return to claim it, and----'

'You scoundrel,' roared Beeka Mull, 'get out of my shop! Be off with you, you impudent scamp! Every one knows that I never keep treasures for anyone; I have trouble enough to do to keep my own! Come, off with you!' With that he began to push the merchant out of the shop; and, when the poor man resisted, two of the bystanders came to Beeka Mull's help, and flung the merchant out into the road, like a bale of goods dropped from a camel. Slowly he picked himself up out of the dust, bruised, battered, and bleeding, but feeling nothing of the pain in his body, nothing but a dreadful numbing sensation that, after all, he was ruined and lost! Slowly he dragged himself a little further from where the fat and furious Beeka Mull still stood amongst his disordered silks and carpets, and coming to a friendly wall he crouched and leant against it, and putting his head into his hands gave himself up to an agony of misery and despair.

There he sat motionless, like one turned to stone, whilst darkness fell around him; and when, about eleven o'clock that night, a certain gay young fellow named Kooshy Ram passed by with a friend, he saw the merchant sitting hunched against the wall, and remarked: 'A thief, no doubt.' 'You are wrong,' returned the other, 'thieves don't sit in full view of people like that, even at night.' And so the two passed on, and thought no more of him. About five o'clock next morning Kooshy Ram was returning home again, when, to his astonishment, he saw the miserable merchant still sitting as he had seen him sit hours before. Surely something must be the matter with a man who sat all night in the open street, and Kooshy Ram resolved to see what it was; so he went up and shook the merchant gently by the shoulder. 'Who are you?' asked he--'and what are you doing here--are you ill?'

'Ill?' said the merchant in a hollow voice, 'yes; ill with a sickness for which there is no medicine.'

'Oh, nonsense!' cried Kooshy Ram. 'Come along with me, I know a medicine that will cure you, I think.' So the young man seized the merchant by the arm, and hoisting him to his feet, dragged him to his own lodging; where he first of all gave him a large glass of wine, and then, after he had refreshed him with food, bade him tell his adventures.

* * * * *

Meanwhile the merchant's companions in the market-place, being dull-witted persons, thought that as he did not return he must have gone home by himself; and as soon as they were tired of waiting they went back to their village and left him to look after his own affairs. He would therefore have fared badly had it not been for his rescuer, Kooshy Ram, who, whilst still a boy, had been left a great deal of money with no one to advise him how to spend it. He was high-spirited, kind-hearted, and shrewd into the bargain; but he threw away his money like water, and generally upon the nearest thing or person in his way, and that, alas! most often was himself! Now, however, he had taken it into his head to befriend this miserable merchant, and he meant to do it; and on his side the merchant felt confidence revive, and without further ado told all that had happened.

Kooshy Ram laughed heartily at the idea of any stranger entrusting his wealth to Beeka Mull.

'Why, he is the greatest rascal in the city,' he cried, 'unless you believe what some of them say of me! Well, there is nothing to be done for the present, but just to stay here quietly, and I think that at the end of a short time I shall find a medicine which will heal your sickness.' At this the merchant again took courage, and a little ease crept into his heart as he gratefully accepted his new friend's invitation.

A few days later Kooshy Ram sent for some friends to see him, and talked with them long, and, although the merchant did not hear the conversation, he did hear shouts of laughter as though at some good joke; but the laughter echoed dully in his own heart, for the more he considered the more he despaired of ever recovering his fortune from the grasp of Beeka Mull.

One day, soon after this, Kooshy Ram came to him and said:

'You remember the wall where I found you that night, near Beeka Mull's shop?'

'Yes, indeed I do,' answered the merchant.

'Well,' continued Kooshy Ram, 'this afternoon you must go and stand in that same spot and watch; and when someone gives you a signal, you must go up to Beeka Mull and salute him and say, "Oh, Lala-ji, will you kindly let me have back that box of mine which you have on trust?"'

'What's the use of that?' asked the merchant. 'He won't do it any more now than he would when I asked him before.'

'Never mind!' replied Kooshy Ram, 'do exactly what I tell you, and repeat exactly what I say, word for word, and I will answer for the rest.'

So, that afternoon, the merchant at a certain time went and stood by the wall as he was told. He noticed that Beeka Mull saw him, but neither took any heed of the other. Presently up the bazaar came a gorgeous palanquin like those in which ladies of rank are carried about. It was borne by four bearers well dressed in rich liveries, and its curtains and trappings were truly magnificent. In attendance was a grave-looking personage whom the merchant recognized as one of the friends who visited Kooshy Ram; and behind him came a servant with a box covered with a cloth upon his head.

The palanquin was borne along at a smart pace and was set down at Beeka Mull's shop. The fat shop-keeper was on his feet at once, and bowed deeply as the gentleman in attendance advanced.

'May I inquire,' he said, 'who this is in the palanquin that deigns to favour my humble shop with a visit? And what may I do for her?'

The gentleman, after whispering at the curtain of the palanquin, explained that this was a relative of his who was travelling, but as her husband could go no further with her, she desired to leave with Beeka Mull a box of jewels for safe custody. Lala bowed again to the ground. 'It was not,' he said, 'quite in his way of business; but of course, if he could please the lady, he would be most happy, and would guard the box with his life.' Then the servant carrying the box was called up; the box was unlocked, and a mass of jewellery laid open to the gaze of the enraptured Lala, whose mouth watered as he turned over the rich gems.

All this the merchant had watched from the distance, and now he saw--could he be mistaken?--no, he distinctly saw a hand beckoning through the curtain on that side of the palanquin away from the shop. 'The signal! Was this the signal?' thought he. The hand beckoned again, impatiently it seemed to him. So forward he went, very quietly, and saluting Beeka Mull, who was sitting turning over the contents of this amazing box of jewels which fortune and some fools were putting into his care, he said:

'Oh, Lala-ji, will you kindly let me have back that box of mine which you have on trust?'

The Lala looked up as though he had been stung; but quickly the thought flashed through his mind that if this man began making a fuss again he would lose the confidence of these new and richer customers; so he controlled himself, and answered:

'Dear me, of course, yes! I had forgotten all about it.' And he went off and brought the little box and put it into the merchant's trembling hands. Quickly the latter pulled out the key, which hung by a string round his neck, and opened the box; and when he saw that his treasures were all there he rushed into the road, and, with the box under his arm, began dancing like a madman, with great shouts and screams of laughter. Just then a messenger came running up and, saluting the gentleman attending the palanquin, he said:

'The lady's husband has returned, and is prepared to travel with her, so that there is no necessity to deposit the jewels.' Whereat the gentleman quickly closed and relocked the box, and handed it back to the waiting servant. Then from the palanquin came a yell of laughter, and out jumped--not a lady--but Kooshy Ram, who immediately ran and joined the merchant in the middle of the road and danced as madly as he. Beeka Mull stood and stared stupidly at them; then, with a shrill cackle of laughter, he flung off his turban, bounced out into the road with the other two, and fell to dancing and snapping his fingers until he was out of breath.

'Lala-ji,' said the gentleman who had played the part of the relative attendant on the palanquin, 'why do you dance? The merchant dances because he has recovered his fortune; Kooshy Ram dances because he is a madman and has tricked you; but why do you dance?'

'I dance,' panted Beeka Ram, glaring at him with a bloodshot eye, 'I dance because I knew thirteen different ways of deceiving people by pretending confidence in them. I didn't know there were any more, and now here's a fourteenth! That's why I dance!'

(Punjabi Story, Major Campbell, Feroshepore.)

FOOTNOTE:

[3] 'Lala' is a complimentary title: 'ji' a polite affix; the expression is somewhat equivalent to 'Dear Sir.'

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

THE GREEN KNIGHT

There lived once a king and queen who had an only daughter, a charming and beautiful girl, dearer to them than anything else in the world. When the princess was twelve years old the queen fell sick, and nothing that could be done for her was of any use. All the doctors in the kingdom did their best to cure her, but in spite of their efforts she grew worse and worse. As she was about to die, she sent for the king and said to him:

'Promise me that whatever our daughter asks, you will do, no matter whether you wish to or not.'

The king at first hesitated, but as she added:

'Unless you promise this I cannot die in peace,' he at length did as she desired, and gave the promise, after which she became quite happy and died.

It happened that near the king's palace lived a noble lady, whose little girl was of about the same age as the princess, and the two children were always together. After the queen's death the princess begged that this lady should come to live with her in the palace. The king was not quite pleased with this arrangement, for he distrusted the lady; but the princess wished so much for it that he did not like to refuse.

'I am lonely, father,' she said, 'and all the beautiful presents you give me cannot make up to me for the loss of my mother. If this lady comes to live here I shall almost feel as if the queen had come back to me.'

So a magnificent suite of rooms was prepared and set aside for the new-comers, and the little princess was wild with joy at the thought of having her friends so near her. The lady and her daughter arrived, and for a long time all went well. They were very kind to the motherless princess, and she almost began to forget how dull she had been before they came. Then, one day, as she and the other girl were playing together in the gardens of the palace, the lady came to them, dressed for a journey, and kissed the princess tenderly, saying:

'Farewell, my child; my daughter and I must leave you and go far away.'

The poor princess began to cry bitterly. 'Oh! you must not leave me!' she sobbed. 'What shall I do without you? Please, oh! please stay.'

The lady shook her head.

'It almost breaks my heart to go, dear child,' she said, 'but, alas! it must be.'

'Is there nothing that can keep you here?' asked the princess.

'Only one thing,' answered the lady, 'and as that is impossible, we will not speak of it.'

'Nothing is impossible,' persisted the princess. 'Tell me what it is, and it shall be done.'

So at last her friend told her.

'If the king, your father, would make me his queen I would stay,' she said; 'but that he would never do.'

'Oh, yes! that is easy enough!' cried the princess, delighted to think that, after all, they need not be parted. And she ran off to find her father, and beg him to marry the lady at once. He had done everything she asked, and she was quite certain he would do it.

'What is it, my daughter?' he asked, when he saw her. 'You have been crying--are you not happy?'

'Father,' she said, 'I have come to ask you to marry the countess'--(for that was the lady's real title)--'if you do not she will leave us, and then I shall be as lonely as before. You have never refused me what I have asked before, do not refuse me now.'

The king turned quite pale when he heard this. He did not like the countess, and so, of course, he did not wish to marry her; besides, he still loved his dead wife.

'No, that I cannot do, my child,' he said at last.

At these words the princess began to cry once more, and the tears ran down her cheeks so fast, and she sobbed so bitterly, that her father felt quite miserable too. He remembered the promise he had given always to do what his daughter asked him and in the end he gave way, and promised to marry the countess. The princess at once was all smiles, and ran away to tell the good news.

Soon after, the wedding was celebrated with great festivities, and the countess became queen; but, in spite of all the joy and merriment that filled the palace, the king looked pale and sad, for he was certain that ill would come of the marriage. Sure enough, in a very short time the queen's manner towards the princess began to change. She was jealous of her because she, instead of her own daughter, was heir to the throne, and very soon she could no longer hide her thoughts. Instead of speaking kindly and lovingly as before, her words became rough and cruel, and once or twice she even slapped the princess's face.

The king was very unhappy at seeing his dearly loved daughter suffer, and at last she became so wretched that he could no longer bear it. Calling her to him one day he said:

'My daughter, you are no longer merry as you should be, and I fear that it is the fault of your step-mother. It will be better for you to live with her no longer; therefore I have built you a castle on the island in the lake, and that is to be your home in future. There you can do just as you like, and your step-mother will never enter it.'

The princess was delighted to hear this, and still more pleased when she saw the castle, which was full of beautiful things, and had a great number of windows looking out on the lovely blue water. There was a boat in which she might row herself about, and a garden where she could walk whenever she wished without fear of meeting the unkind queen; and the king promised to visit her every day.

For a long time she dwelt in peace, and grew more and more beautiful every day. Everyone who saw her said 'The princess is the loveliest lady in the land.' And this was told to the queen, who hated her step-daughter still more because her own daughter was ugly and stupid.

One day it was announced that a great meeting of knights and nobles was to be held in a neighbouring kingdom distant about two days' journey. There were to be all kinds of festivities, and a tournament was to be fought and a banquet held, in honour of the coming of age of the prince of the country.

The princess's father was amongst those invited, but before he set out he went to take leave of his daughter. Although she had such a beautiful home, and was no longer scolded by the queen, the poor princess was dreadfully lonely, and she told her father that it would be better if she were dead. He did his best to comfort her and promised that he would soon return. Was there anything he could do to help her?

'Yes,' she said. 'You may greet the Green Knight from me.'

Now the king wondered a little at these words, for he had never heard of the Green Knight; but there was no time to ask questions, therefore he gave the promise, and rode off on his journey. When he came to the palace where the festivities were to take place, the first thing he did was to ask:

'Can anyone tell me where I may find the Green Knight?'

No, they were very sorry; but none had ever heard of such a person either--certainly he was not to be found there. At this the king grew troubled, and not even the banquet or the tournament could make him feel happier. He inquired of everyone he saw, 'Do you know the Green Knight?' but the only answer he got was:

'No, your majesty, we have never heard of him.'

At length he began to believe that the princess was mistaken, and that there was no such person; and he started on his homeward journey sorrowfully enough, for this was the first time for many months that the princess had asked him to do anything for her and he could not do it. He thought so much about it that he did not notice the direction his horse was taking, and presently he found himself in the midst of a dense forest where he had never been before. He rode on and on, looking for the path, but as the sun began to set he realised that he was lost. At last, to his delight, he saw a man driving some pigs, and riding up to him, he said:

'I have lost my way. Can you tell me where I am?'

'You are in the Green Knight's forest,' answered the man, 'and these are his pigs.'

At that the king's heart grew light. 'Where does the Green Knight live?' he asked.

'It is a very long way from here,' said the swineherd; 'but I will show you the path.' So he went a little farther with the king and put him on the right road, and the king bade him farewell.

Presently he came to a second forest, and there he met another swineherd driving pigs.

'Whose beasts are those, my man?' he asked.

'They are the Green Knight's,' said the man.

'And where does he live?' inquired the king.

'Oh, not far from here,' was the reply.

Then the king rode on, and about midday he reached a beautiful castle standing in the midst of the loveliest garden you can possibly imagine, where fountains played in marble basins, and peacocks walked on the smooth lawns. On the edge of a marble basin sat a young and handsome man, who was dressed from head to foot in a suit of green armour, and was feeding the goldfish which swam in the clear water.

'This must be the Green Knight,' thought the king; and going up to the young man he said courteously:

'I have come, sir, to give you my daughter's greeting. But I have wandered far, and lost my way in your forest.'

The knight looked at him for a moment as though puzzled.

'I have never met either you or your daughter,' he said at last; 'but you are very welcome all the same.' And he waved his hand towards the castle. However, the king took no notice, and told him that his daughter had sent a message to the Green Knight, and as he was the only Green Knight in the kingdom this message must be for him.

'You must pass the night with me here,' said the knight; and as the sun was already set, the king was thankful to accept the invitation. They sat down in the castle hall to a magnificent banquet, and although he had travelled much and visited many monarchs in their palaces, the king had never fared better than at the table of the Green Knight, whilst his host himself was so clever and agreeable, that he was delighted, and thought 'what a charming son-in-law this knight would make!'

Next morning, when he was about to set forth on his journey home, the Green Knight put into his hand a jewelled casket, saying:

'Will your highness graciously condescend to carry this gift to the princess, your daughter? It contains my portrait, that when I come she may know me; for I feel certain that she is the lady I have seen night after night in a dream, and I must win her for my bride.'

The king gave the knight his blessing, and promised to take the gift to his daughter. With that he set off, and ere long reached his own country.

The princess was awaiting him anxiously when he arrived, and ran to his arms in her joy at seeing her dear father again.

'And did you see the Green Knight?' she asked.

'Yes,' answered the king, drawing out the casket the knight had sent, 'and he begged me to give you this that you may know him when he arrives and not mistake him for somebody else.'

When the princess saw the portrait she was delighted, and exclaimed: 'It is indeed the man whom I have seen in my dreams! Now I shall be happy, for he and no other shall be my husband.'

Very soon after the Green Knight arrived, and he looked so handsome in his green armour, with a long green plume in his helmet, that the princess fell still more in love with him than before, and when he saw her, and recognised her as the lady whom he had so often dreamt of, he immediately asked her to be his bride. The princess looked down and smiled as she answered him:

'We must keep the secret from my step-mother until the wedding-day,' said she, 'for otherwise she will find a way to do us some evil.'

'As you please,' replied the prince; 'but I must visit you daily, for I can live no longer without you! I will come early in the morning and not leave until it is dark; thus the queen will not see me row across the lake.'

For a long time, the Green Knight visited the princess every day, and spent many hours wandering with her through the beautiful gardens where they knew the queen could not see them. But secrets, as you know, are dangerous things, and at last, one morning, a girl who was in service at the palace happened to be walking by the lake early in the morning and beheld a wonderfully handsome young man, in a beautiful suit of green satin, come down to the edge of the lake. Not guessing that he was watched, he got into a little boat that lay moored to the bank, rowed himself over to the island where the princess's castle stood. The girl went home wondering who the knight could be; and as she was brushing the queen's hair, she said to her:

'Does your majesty know that the princess has a suitor?'

'Nonsense!' replied the queen crossly. But she was dreadfully vexed at the mere idea, as her own daughter was still unmarried, and was likely to remain so, because she was so ill-tempered and stupid that no one wanted her.

'It is true,' persisted the girl. 'He is dressed all in green, and is very handsome. I saw him myself, though he did not see me, and he got into a boat and rowed over to the island, and the princess was waiting for him at the castle door.'

'I must find out what this means,' thought the queen. But she bade her maid of honour cease chattering and mind her own business.

Early next morning the queen got up and went down to the shore of the lake, where she hid herself behind a tree. Sure enough there came a handsome knight dressed in green, just as the maid of honour had said, and he got into a boat and rowed over to the island where the princess awaited him. The angry queen remained by the lake all day, but it was not until the evening that the knight returned, and leaping on shore, he tied the boat to its moorings and went away through the forest.

* * * * *

'I have caught my step-daughter nicely,' thought the queen. 'But she shall not be married before my own sweet girl. I must find a way to put a stop to this.'

Accordingly she took a poisoned nail and stuck it in the handle of the oar in such a way that the knight would be sure to scratch his hand when he picked up the oar. Then she went home laughing, very much pleased with her cleverness.

The next day the Green Knight went to visit the princess as usual; but directly he took up the oars to row over to the island he felt a sharp scratch on his hand.

'Oof!' he said, dropping the oars from pain, 'what can have scratched so?' But, look as he might, only a tiny mark was to be seen.

'Well, it's strange how a nail could have come here since yesterday,' he thought. 'Still, it is not very serious, though it hurts a good deal.' And, indeed, it seemed such a little thing that he did not mention it to the princess. However, when he reached home in the evening, he felt so ill he was obliged to go to bed, with no one to attend on him except his old nurse. But of this, of course, the princess knew nothing; and the poor girl, fearing lest some evil should have befallen him, or some other maiden more beautiful than she should have stolen his heart from her, grew almost sick with waiting. Lonely, indeed, she was, for her father, who would have helped her, was travelling in a foreign country, and she knew not how to obtain news of her lover.

* * * * *

In this manner time passed away, and one day, as she sat by the open window crying and feeling very sad, a little bird came and perched on the branch of a tree that stood just underneath. It began to sing, and so beautifully that the princess was obliged to stop crying and listen to it, and very soon she found out that the bird was trying to attract her attention.

'Tu-whit, tu-whit! your lover is sick!' it sang.

'Alas!' cried the princess. 'What can I do?'

'Tu-whit, tu-whit! you must go to your father's palace!'

'And what shall I do there?' she asked.

'Tu-whit! there you will find a snake with nine young ones.'

'Ugh!' answered the princess with a shiver, for she did not like snakes. But the little bird paid no heed.

'Put them in a basket and go to the Green Knight's palace,' said she.

'And what am I to do with them when I get there?' she cried, blushing all over, though there was no one to see her but the bird.

'Dress yourself as a kitchen-maid and ask for a place. Tu-whit! Then you must make soup out of the snakes. Give it three times to the knight and he will be cured. Tu-whit!'

'But what has made him ill?' asked the princess. The bird, however, had flown away, and there was nothing for it but to go to her father's palace and look for the snakes. When she came there she found the mother snake with the nine little snakes all curled up so that you could hardly tell their heads from their tails. The princess did not like having to touch them, but when the old snake had wriggled out of the nest to bask a little in the sun, she picked up the young ones and put them in a basket as the bird had told her, and ran off to find the Green Knight's castle. All day she walked along, sometimes stopping to pick the wild berries, or to gather a nosegay; but though she rested now and then, she would not lie down to sleep before she reached the castle. At last she came in sight of it, and just then she met a girl driving a flock of geese.

'Good-day!' said the princess; 'can you tell me if this is the castle of the Green Knight?'

'Yes, that it is,' answered the goose girl, 'for I am driving his geese. But the Green Knight is very ill, and they say that unless he can be cured within three days he will surely die.'

At this news the princess grew as white as death. The ground seemed to spin round, and she closed her hand tight on a bush that was standing beside her. By-and-by, with a great effort, she recovered herself and said to the goose girl:

'Would you like to have a fine silk dress to wear?'

The goose girl's eyes glistened.

'Yes, that I would!' answered she.

'Then take off your dress and give it to me, and I will give you mine,' said the princess.

The girl could scarcely believe her ears, but the princess was already unfastening her beautiful silk dress, and taking off her silk stockings and pretty red shoes; and the goose girl lost no time in slipping out of her rough linen skirt and tunic. Then the princess put on the other's rags and let down her hair, and went to the kitchen to ask for a place.

'Do you want a kitchen-maid?' she said.

'Yes, we do,' answered the cook, who was too busy to ask the new-comer many questions.

The following day, after a good night's rest, the princess set about her new duties. The other servants were speaking of their master, and saying to each other how ill he was, and that unless he could be cured within three days he would surely die.

The princess thought of the snakes, and the bird's advice, and lifting her head from the pots and pans she was scouring, she said: 'I know how to make a soup that has such a wonderful power that whoever tastes it is sure to be cured, whatever his illness may be. As the doctors cannot cure your master shall I try?'

At first they all laughed at her.

'What! a scullion cure the knight when the best physicians in the kingdom have failed?'

But at last, just because all the physicians had failed, they decided that it would do no harm to try; and she ran off joyfully to fetch her basket of snakes and make them into broth. When this was ready she carried some to the knight's room and entered it boldly, pushing aside all the learned doctors who stood beside his bed. The poor knight was too ill to know her, besides, she was so ragged and dirty that he would not have been likely to do so had he been well; but when he had taken the soup he was so much better that he was able to sit up.

The next day he had some more, and then he was able to dress himself.

'That is certainly wonderful soup!' said the cook.

The third day, after he had eaten his soup, the knight was quite well again.

'Who are you?' he asked the girl; 'was it you who made this soup that has cured me?'

'Yes,' answered the princess.

'Choose, then, whatever you wish as a reward,' said the knight, 'and you shall have it.'

'I would be your bride!' said the princess.

The knight frowned in surprise at such boldness, and shook his head.

'That is the one thing I cannot grant,' he said, 'for I am pledged to marry the most beautiful princess in the world. Choose again.'

Then the princess ran away and washed herself and mended her rags, and when she returned the Green Knight recognised her at once.

You can think what a joyful meeting that was!

* * * * *

Soon after, they were married with great splendour. All the knights and princes in the kingdom were summoned to the wedding, and the princess wore a dress that shone like the sun, so that no one had ever beheld a more gorgeous sight. The princess's father, of course, was present, but the wicked queen and her daughter were driven out of the country, and as nobody has seen them since, very likely they were eaten by wild beasts in the forest. But the bride and bridegroom were so happy that they forgot all about them, and they lived with the old king till he died, when they succeeded him.

(From "Eventyr fra Jylland," samlede og optegnede af Evald Tang Kristensen. Translated from the Danish by Mrs. Skovgaard-Pedersen.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

THE FIVE WISE WORDS OF THE GURU[4]

Once there lived a handsome young man named Ram Singh, who, though a favourite with everyone, was unhappy because he had a scold for a step-mother. All day long she went on talking, until the youth was driven so distracted that he determined to go away somewhere and seek his fortune. No sooner had he decided to leave his home than he made his plans, and the very next morning he started off with a few clothes in a wallet, and a little money in his pocket.

But there was one person in the village to whom he wished to say good-bye, and that was a wise old guru, or teacher, who had taught him much. So he turned his face first of all towards his master's hut, and before the sun was well up was knocking at his door. The old man received his pupil affectionately; but he was wise in reading faces, and saw at once that the youth was in trouble.

'My son,' said he, 'what is the matter?'

'Nothing, father,' replied the young man, 'but I have determined to go into the world and seek my fortune.'

'Be advised,' returned the guru, 'and remain in your father's house; it is better to have half a loaf at home than to seek a whole one in distant countries.'

But Ram Singh was in no mood to heed such advice, and very soon the old man ceased to press him.

'Well,' said he at last, 'if your mind is made up I suppose you must have your way. But listen carefully, and remember five parting counsels which I will give you; and if you keep these no evil shall befall you. First--always obey without question the orders of him whose service you enter; second--never speak harshly or unkindly to anyone; third--never lie; fourth--never try to appear the equal of those above you in station; and fifth--wherever you go, if you meet those who read or teach from the holy books, stay and listen, if but for a few minutes, that you may be strengthened in the path of duty.'

Then Ram Singh started out upon his journey, promising to bear in mind the old man's words.

After some days he came to a great city. He had spent all the money which he had at starting, and therefore resolved to look for work however humble it might be. Catching sight of a prosperous-looking merchant standing in front of a shop full of grain of all kinds, Ram Singh went up to him and asked whether he could give him anything to do. The merchant gazed at him so long that the young man began to lose heart, but at length he answered:

'Yes, of course; there is a place waiting for you.'

'What do you mean?' asked Ram Singh.

'Why,' replied the other, 'yesterday our rajah's chief wazir dismissed his body servant and is wanting another. Now you are just the sort of person that he needs, for you are young and tall, and handsome; I advise you to apply there.'

Thanking the merchant for this advice, the young man set out at once for the wazir's house, and soon managed, thanks to his good looks and appearance, to be engaged as the great man's servant.

One day, soon after this, the rajah of the place started on a journey and the chief wazir accompanied him. With them was an army of servants and attendants, soldiers, muleteers, camel-drivers, merchants with grain and stores for man and beast, singers to make entertainment by the way and musicians to accompany them, besides elephants, camels, horses, mules, ponies, donkeys, goats, and carts and wagons of every kind and description, so that it seemed more like a large town on the march than anything else.

Thus they travelled for several days, till they entered a country that was like a sea of sand, where the swirling dust floated in clouds, and men and beasts were half choked by it. Towards the close of that day they came to a village, and when the headmen hurried out to salute the rajah and to pay him their respects, they began, with very long and serious faces, to explain that, whilst they and all that they had were of course at the disposal of the rajah, the coming of so large a company had nevertheless put them into a dreadful difficulty because they had never a well nor spring of water in their country; and they had no water to give drink to such an army of men and beasts!

Great fear fell upon the host at the words of the headmen, but the rajah merely told the wazir that he must get water somehow, and that settled the matter so far as he was concerned. The wazir sent off in haste for all the oldest men in the place, and began to question them as to whether there were no wells near by.

They all looked helplessly at each other, and said nothing; but at length one old grey-beard replied:

'Truly, Sir Wazir, there is, within a mile or two of this village, a well which some former king made hundreds of years ago. It is, they say, great and inexhaustible, covered in by heavy stone-work and with a flight of steps leading down to the water in the very bowels of the earth; but no man ever goes near it because it is haunted by evil spirits, and it is known that whoso disappears down the well shall never be seen again.'

The wazir stroked his beard and considered a moment. Then he turned to Ram Singh who stood behind his chair.

'There is a proverb,' said he, 'that no man can be trusted until he has been tried. Go you and get the rajah and his people water from this well.'

Then there flashed into Ram Singh's mind the first counsel of the old guru--'Always obey without question the orders of him whose service you enter.' So he replied at once that he was ready, and left to prepare for his adventure. Two great brazen vessels he fastened to a mule, two lesser ones he bound upon his shoulders, and thus provided he set out, with the old villager for his guide. In a short time they came to a spot where some big trees towered above the barren country, whilst under their shadow lay the dome of an ancient building. This the guide pointed out as the well, but excused himself from going further as he was an old man and tired, and it was already nearly sunset, so that he must be returning home. So Ram Singh bade him farewell, and went on alone with the mule.

Arrived at the trees, Ram Singh tied up his beast, lifted the vessels from his shoulder, and having found the opening of the well, descended by a flight of steps which led down into the darkness. The steps were broad white slabs of alabaster which gleamed in the shadows as he went lower and lower. All was very silent. Even the sound of his bare feet upon the pavements seemed to wake an echo in that lonely place, and when one of the vessels which he carried slipped and fell upon the steps it clanged so loudly that he jumped at the noise. Still he went on, until at last he reached a wide pool of sweet water, and there he washed his jars with care before he filled them, and began to remount the steps with the lighter vessels, as the big ones were so heavy he could only take up one at a time. Suddenly, something moved above him, and looking up he saw a great giant standing on the stairway! In one hand he held clasped to his heart a dreadful looking mass of bones, in the other was a lamp which cast long shadows about the walls, and made him seem even more terrible than he really was.

'What think you, O mortal,' said the giant, 'of my fair and lovely wife?' And he held the light towards the bones in his arms and looked lovingly at them.

Now I must tell you that this poor giant had had a very beautiful wife, whom he had loved dearly; but, when she died, her husband refused to believe in her death, and always carried her about long after she had become nothing but bones. Ram Singh of course did not know of this, but there came to his mind the second wise saying of the guru, which forbade him to speak harshly or inconsiderately to others; so he replied:

'Truly, sir, I am sure you could find nowhere such another.'

'Ah, what eyes you have!' cried the delighted giant, 'you at least can see! I do not know how often I have slain those who insulted her by saying she was but dried bones! You are a fine young man, and I will help you.'

So saying, he laid down the bones with great tenderness, and snatching up the huge brass vessels, carried them up again, and replaced them with such ease that it was all done by the time that Ram Singh had reached the open air with the smaller ones.

'Now,' said the giant, 'you have pleased me, and you may ask of me one favour, and whatever you wish I will do it for you. Perhaps you would like me to show you where lies buried the treasure of dead kings?' he added eagerly.

But Ram Singh shook his head at the mention of buried wealth.

'The favour that I would ask,' said he, 'is that you will leave off haunting this well, so that men may go in and out and obtain water.'

Perhaps the giant expected some favour more difficult to grant, for his face brightened, and he promised to depart at once; and as Ram Singh went off through the gathering darkness with his precious burden of water, he beheld the giant striding away with the bones of his dead wife in his arms.

Great was the wonder and rejoicing in the camp when Ram Singh returned with the water. He never said anything, however, about his adventure with the giant, but merely told the rajah that there was nothing to prevent the well being used; and used it was, and nobody ever saw any more of the giant.

The rajah was so pleased with the bearing of Ram Singh that he ordered the wazir to give the young man to him in exchange for one of his own servants. So Ram Singh became the rajah's attendant; and as the days went by the king became more and more delighted with the youth because, mindful of the old guru's third counsel, he was always honest and spoke the truth. He grew in favour rapidly, until at last the rajah made him his treasurer, and thus he reached a high place in the court and had wealth and power in his hands. Unluckily the rajah had a brother who was a very bad man; and this brother thought that if he could win the young treasurer over to himself he might by this means manage to steal little by little any of the king's treasure which he needed. Then, with plenty of money, he could bribe the soldiers and some of the rajah's counsellors, head a rebellion, dethrone and kill his brother, and reign himself instead. He was too wary, of course, to tell Ram Singh of all these wicked plans; but he began by flattering him whenever he saw him, and at last offered him his daughter in marriage. But Ram Singh remembered the fourth counsel of the old guru--never to try to appear the equal of those above him in station--therefore he respectfully declined the great honour of marrying a princess. Of course the prince, baffled at the very beginning of his enterprise, was furious, and determined to work Ram Singh's ruin, and entering the rajah's presence he told him a story about Ram Singh having spoken insulting words of his sovereign and of his daughter. What it was all about nobody knew, and, as it was not true, the wicked prince did not know either; but the rajah grew very angry and red in the face as he listened, and declared that until the treasurer's head was cut off neither he nor the princess nor his brother would eat or drink.

'But,' added he, 'I do not wish any one to know that this was done by my desire, and anyone who mentions the subject will be severely punished.' And with this the prince was forced to be content.

Then the rajah sent for an officer of his guard, and told him to take some soldiers and ride at once to a tower which was situated just outside the town, and if anyone should come to inquire when the building was going to be finished, or should ask any other questions about it, the officer must chop his head off, and bring it to him. As for the body, that could be buried on the spot. The old officer thought these instructions rather odd, but it was no business of his, so he saluted, and went off to do his master's bidding.

Early in the morning the rajah, who had not slept all night, sent for Ram Singh, and bade him go to the new hunting-tower, and ask the people there how it was getting on and when it was going to be finished, and to hurry back with the answer! Away went Ram Singh upon his errand, but, on the road, as he was passing a little temple on the outskirts of the city, he heard someone inside reading aloud; and, remembering the guru's fifth counsel, he just stepped inside and sat down to listen for a minute. He did not mean to stay longer, but became so deeply interested in the wisdom of the teacher, that he sat, and sat, and sat, while the sun rose higher and higher.

In the meantime, the wicked prince, who dared not disobey the rajah's command, was feeling very hungry; and as for the princess, she was quietly crying in a corner waiting for the news of Ram Singh's death, so that she might eat her breakfast.

Hours passed, and stare as he might from the window no messenger could be seen.

At last the prince could bear it no longer, and hastily disguising himself so that no one should recognise him, he jumped on a horse and galloped out to the hunting-tower, where the rajah had told him that the execution was to take place. But, when he got there, there was no execution going on. There were only some men engaged in building, and a number of soldiers idly watching them. He forgot that he had disguised himself and that no one would know him, so, riding up, he cried out:

'Now then, you men, why are you idling about here instead of finishing what you came to do? When is it to be done?'

At his words the soldiers looked at the commanding officer, who was standing a little apart from the rest. Unperceived by the prince he made a slight sign, a sword flashed in the sun, and off flew a head on the ground beneath!

As part of the prince's disguise had been a thick beard, the men did not recognise the dead man as the rajah's brother; but they wrapped the head in a cloth, and buried the body as their commander bade them. When this was ended, the officer took the cloth, and rode off in the direction of the palace.

Meanwhile the rajah came home from his council, and to his great surprise found neither head nor brother awaiting him; as time passed on, he became uneasy, and thought that he had better go himself and see what the matter was. So ordering his horse he rode off alone.

It happened that, just as the rajah came near to the temple where Ram Singh still sat, the young treasurer, hearing the sound of a horse's hoofs, looked over his shoulder and saw that the rider was the rajah himself! Feeling much ashamed of himself for having forgotten his errand, he jumped up and hurried out to meet his master, who reined up his horse, and seemed very surprised (as indeed he was) to see him. At that moment there arrived the officer of the guard carrying his parcel. He saluted the rajah gravely, and, dismounting, laid the bundle in the road and began to undo the wrappings, whilst the rajah watched him with wonder and interest. When the last string was undone, and the head of his brother was displayed to his view, the rajah sprang from his horse and caught the soldier by the arm. As soon as he could speak he questioned the man as to what had occurred, and little by little a dark suspicion darted through him. Then, briefly telling the soldier that he had done well, the rajah drew Ram Singh to one side, and in a few minutes learned from him how, in attending to the guru's counsel, he had delayed to do the king's message.

In the end the rajah found from some papers the proofs of his dead brother's treachery; and Ram Singh established his innocence and integrity. He continued to serve the rajah for many years with unswerving fidelity; and married a maiden of his own rank in life, with whom he lived happily; dying at last honoured and loved by all men. Sons were born to him; and, in time, to them also he taught the five wise sayings of the old guru.

(A Punjabi story.)

FOOTNOTE:

[4] A Hindu religious teacher or saint; in this case a Sikh.

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

THE GOLDEN-HEADED FISH

Once upon a time there lived in Egypt a king who lost his sight from a bad illness. Of course he was very unhappy, and became more so as months passed, and all the best doctors in the land were unable to cure him. The poor man grew so thin from misery that everyone thought he was going to die, and the prince, his only son, thought so too.

Great was therefore the rejoicing through Egypt when a traveller arrived in a boat down the river Nile, and after questioning the people as to the reason of their downcast looks, declared that he was court physician to the king of a far country, and would, if allowed, examine the eyes of the blind man. He was at once admitted into the royal presence, and after a few minutes of careful study announced that the case, though very serious, was not quite hopeless.

'Somewhere in the Great Sea,' he said, 'there exists a Golden-headed Fish. If you can manage to catch this creature, bring it to me, and I will prepare an ointment from its blood which will restore your sight. For a hundred days I will wait here, but if at the end of that time the fish should still be uncaught I must return to my own master.'

The next morning the young prince set forth in quest of the fish, taking with him a hundred men, each man carrying a net. Quite a little fleet of boats was awaiting them and in these they sailed to the middle of the Great Sea. During three months they laboured diligently from sunrise to sunset, but though they caught large multitudes of fishes, not one of them had a golden head.

'It is quite useless now,' said the prince on the very last night. 'Even if we find it this evening, the hundred days will be over in an hour, and long before we could reach the Egyptian capital the doctor will be on his way home. Still, I will go out again, and cast the net once more myself.' And so he did, and at the very moment that the hundred days were up, he drew in the net with the Golden-headed Fish entangled in its meshes.

'Success has come, but, as happens often, it is too late,' murmured the young man, who had studied in the schools of philosophy; 'but, all the same, put the fish in that vessel full of water, and we will take it back to show my father that we have done what we could.' But when he drew near the fish it looked up at him with such piteous eyes that he could not make up his mind to condemn it to death. For he knew well that, though the doctors of his own country were ignorant of the secret of the ointment, they would do all in their power to extract something from the fish's blood. So he picked up the prize of so much labour, and threw it back into the sea, and then began his journey back to the palace. When at last he reached it he found the king in a high fever, caused by his disappointment, and he refused to believe the story told him by his son.

'Your head shall pay for it! Your head shall pay for it!' cried he; and bade the courtiers instantly summon the executioner to the palace.

But of course somebody ran at once to the queen, and told her of the king's order, and she put common clothes on the prince, and filled his pockets with gold, and hurried him on board a ship which was sailing that night for a distant island.

'Your father will repent some day, and then he will be thankful to know you are alive,' said she. 'But one last counsel will I give you, and that is, take no man into your service who desires to be paid every month.'

The young prince thought this advice rather odd. If the servant had to be paid anyhow, he did not understand what difference it could make whether it was by the year or by the month. However, he had many times proved that his mother was wiser than he, so he promised obedience.

* * * * *

After a voyage of several weeks, he arrived at the island of which his mother had spoken. It was full of hills and woods and flowers, and beautiful white houses stood everywhere in gardens.

'What a charming spot to live in,' thought the prince. And he lost no time in buying one of the prettiest of the dwellings.

Then servants came pressing to offer their services; but as they all declared that they must have payment at the end of every month, the young man, who remembered his mother's words, declined to have anything to say to them. At length, one morning, an Arab appeared and begged that the prince would engage him.

'And what wages do you ask?' inquired the prince, when he had questioned the new-comer and found him suitable.

'I do not want money,' answered the Arab; 'at the end of a year you can see what my services are worth to you, and can pay me in any way you like.' And the young man was pleased, and took the Arab for his servant.

Now, although no one would have guessed it from the look of the side of the island where the prince had landed, the other part was a complete desert, owing to the ravages of a horrible monster which came up from the sea, and devoured all the corn and cattle. The governor had sent bands of soldiers to lie in wait for the creature in order to kill it; but, somehow, no one ever happened to be awake at the moment that the ravages were committed. It was in vain that the sleepy soldiers were always punished severely--the same thing invariably occurred next time; and at last heralds were sent throughout the island to offer a great reward to the man who could slay the monster.

As soon as the Arab heard the news, he went straight to the governor's palace.

'If my master can succeed in killing the monster, what reward will you give him?' asked he.

'My daughter and anything besides that he chooses,' answered the governor. But the Arab shook his head.

'Give him your daughter and keep your wealth,' said he; 'but, henceforward, let her share in your gains, whatever they are.'

'It is well,' replied the governor; and ordered a deed to be prepared, which was signed by both of them.

That night the Arab stole down to the shore to watch, but, before he set out, he rubbed himself all over with some oil which made his skin smart so badly that there was no chance of his going to sleep as the soldiers had done. Then he hid himself behind a large rock and waited. By-and-by a swell seemed to rise on the water, and, a few minutes later, a hideous monster--part bird, part beast, and part serpent--stepped noiselessly on to the rocks. It walked stealthily up towards the fields, but the Arab was ready for it, and, as it passed, plunged his dagger into the soft part behind the ear. The creature staggered and gave a loud cry, and then rolled over dead, with its feet in the sea.

The Arab watched for a little while, in order to make sure that there was no life left in his enemy, but as the huge body remained quite still, he quitted his hiding-place, and cut off the ears of his foe. These he carried to his master, bidding him show them to the governor, and declare that he himself, and no other, had killed the monster.

'But it was you, and not I, who slew him,' objected the prince.

'Never mind; do as I bid you. I have a reason for it,' answered the Arab. And though the young man did not like taking credit for what he had never done, at length he gave in.

The governor was so delighted at the news that he begged the prince to take his daughter to wife that very day; but the prince refused, saying that all he desired was a ship which would carry him to see the world. Of course this was granted him at once, and when he and his faithful Arab embarked they found, heaped up in the vessel, stores of diamonds and precious stones, which the grateful governor had secretly placed there.

So they sailed, and they sailed, and they sailed; and at length they reached the shores of a great kingdom. Leaving the prince on board, the Arab went into the town to find out what sort of a place it was. After some hours he returned, saying that he heard that the king's daughter was the most beautiful princess in the world, and that the prince would do well to ask for her hand.

Nothing loth, the prince listened to this advice, and taking some of the finest necklaces in his hand, he mounted a splendid horse which the Arab had bought for him, and rode up to the palace, closely followed by his faithful attendant.

The strange king happened to be in a good humour, and they were readily admitted to his presence. Laying down his offerings on the steps of the throne, he prayed the king to grant him his daughter in marriage.

The monarch listened to him in silence; but answered, after a pause:

'Young man, I will give you my daughter to wife, if that is your wish; but first I must tell you that she has already gone through the marriage ceremony with a hundred and ninety young men, and not one of them lived for twelve hours after. So think, while there is yet time.'

The prince did think, and was so frightened that he very nearly went back to his ship without any more words. But just as he was about to withdraw his proposal the Arab whispered:

'Fear nothing, but take her.'

'The luck must change some time,' he said, at last; 'and who would not risk his head for the hand of such a peerless princess?'

'As you will,' replied the king. 'Then I will give orders that the marriage shall be celebrated to-night.'

And so it was done; and after the ceremony the bride and bridegroom retired to their own apartments to sup by themselves, for such was the custom of the country. The moon shone bright, and the prince walked to the window to look out upon the river and upon the distant hills, when his gaze suddenly fell on a silken shroud neatly laid out on a couch, with his name embroidered in gold thread across the front; for this also was the pleasure of the king.

Horrified at the spectacle, he turned his head away, and this time his glance rested on a group of men, digging busily beneath the window. It was a strange hour for any one to be at work, and what was the hole for? It was a curious shape, so long and narrow, almost like---- Ah! yes, that was what it was! It was his grave that they were digging!

The shock of the discovery rendered him speechless, yet he stood fascinated and unable to move. At this moment a small black snake darted from the mouth of the princess, who was seated at the table, and wriggled quickly towards him. But the Arab was watching for something of the sort to happen, and seizing the serpent with some pincers that he held in one hand, he cut off its head with a sharp dagger.

The king could hardly believe his eyes when, early the next morning, his new son-in-law craved an audience of his Majesty.

'What, you?' he cried, as the young man entered.

'Yes, I. Why not?' asked the bridegroom, who thought it best to pretend not to know anything that had occurred. 'You remember, I told you that the luck must turn at last, and so it has. But I came to ask whether you would be so kind as to bid the gardeners fill up a great hole right underneath my window, which spoils the view.'

'Oh! certainly, yes; of course it shall be done!' stammered the king. 'Is there anything else?'

'No, nothing, thank you,' replied the prince, as he bowed and withdrew.

Now, from the moment that the Arab cut off the snake's head, the spell, or whatever it was, seemed to have been taken off the princess, and she lived very happily with her husband. The days passed swiftly in hunting in the forests, or sailing on the broad river that flowed past the palace, and when night fell she would sing to her harp, or the prince would tell her tales of his own country.

One evening a man in a strange garb, with a face burnt brown by the sun, arrived at court. He asked to see the bridegroom, and falling on his face announced that he was a messenger sent by the queen of Egypt, proclaiming him king in succession to his father, who was dead.

'Her Majesty begs you will set out without delay, and your bride also, as the affairs of the kingdom are somewhat in disorder,' ended the messenger.

Then the young man hastened to seek an audience of his father-in-law, who was delighted to find that his daughter's husband was not merely the governor of a province, as he had supposed, but the king of a powerful country. He at once ordered a splendid ship to be made ready, and in a week's time rode down to the harbour, to bid farewell to the young couple.

In spite of her grief for the dead king, the queen was overjoyed to welcome her son home, and commanded the palace to be hung with splendid stuffs to do honour to the bride. The people expected great things from their new sovereign, for they had suffered much from the harsh rule of the old one, and crowds presented themselves every morning with petitions in their hands, which they hoped to persuade the king to grant. Truly, he had enough to keep him busy; but he was very happy for all that, till, one night, the Arab came to him, and begged permission to return to his own land.

Filled with dismay the young man said: 'Leave me! Do you really wish to leave me?' Sadly the Arab bowed his head.

'No, my master; never could I wish to leave you! But I have received a summons, and I dare not disobey it.'

The king was silent, trying to choke down the grief he felt at the thought of losing his faithful servant.

'Well, I must not try to keep you,' he faltered out at last. 'That would be a poor return for all that you have done for me! Everything I have is yours; take what you will, for without you I should long ago have been dead!'

'And without you, I should long ago have been dead,' answered the Arab. 'I am the Golden-headed Fish.'

(Adapted from Contes Armeniens. Par Frederic Macler, Paris. Ernest Leroux, Editeur.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

DORANI

Once upon a time there lived in a city of Hindustan a seller of scents and essences, who had a very beautiful daughter named Dorani. This maiden had a friend who was a fairy, and the two were high in favour with Indra, the king of fairyland, because they were able to sing so sweetly and dance so deftly that no one in the kingdom could equal them for grace and beauty. Dorani had the most lovely hair in the world, for it was like spun gold, and the smell of it was like the smell of fresh roses. But her locks were so long and thick that the weight of it was often unbearable, and one day she cut off a shining tress, and wrapping it in a large leaf, threw it in the river which ran just below her window. Now it happened that the king's son was out hunting, and had gone down to the river to drink, when there floated towards him a folded leaf, from which came a perfume of roses. The prince, with idle curiosity, took a step into the water and caught the leaf as it was sailing by. He opened it, and within he found a lock of hair like spun gold, and from which came a faint, exquisite odour.

When the prince reached home that day he looked so sad and was so quiet that his father wondered if any ill had befallen him, and asked what was the matter. Then the youth took from his breast the tress of hair which he had found in the river, and holding it up to the light, replied:

'See, my father, was ever hair like this? Unless I may win and marry the maiden that owns that lock I must die!'

So the king immediately sent heralds throughout all his dominions to search for the damsel with hair like spun gold; and at last he learned that she was the daughter of the scent-seller. The object of the herald's mission was quickly noised abroad, and Dorani heard of it with the rest; and, one day, she said to her father:

'If the hair is mine, and the king requires me to marry his son, I must do so; but, remember, you must tell him that if, after the wedding, I stay all day at the palace, every night will be spent in my old home.'

The old man listened to her with amazement, but answered nothing, as he knew she was wiser than he. Of course the hair was Dorani's, and heralds soon returned and informed the king, their master, who summoned the scent-seller, and told him that he wished for his daughter to be given in marriage to the prince. The father bowed his head three times to the ground, and replied:

'Your highness is our lord, and all that you bid us we will do. The maiden asks this only--that if, after the wedding, she stays all day at the palace, she may go back each night to her father's house.'

The king thought this a very strange request; but said to himself it was, after all, his son's affair, and the girl would surely soon get tired of going to and fro. So he made no difficulty, and everything was speedily arranged and the wedding was celebrated with great rejoicings.

At first, the condition attaching to his wedding with the lovely Dorani troubled the prince very little, for he thought that he would at least see his bride all day. But, to his dismay, he found that she would do nothing but sit the whole time upon a stool with her head bowed forward upon her knees, and he could never persuade her to say a single word. Each evening she was carried in a palanquin to her father's house, and each morning she was brought back soon after daybreak; and yet never a sound passed her lips, nor did she show by any sign that she saw, or heard, or heeded her husband.

One evening the prince, very unhappy and troubled, was wandering in an old and beautiful garden near the palace. The gardener was a very aged man, who had served the prince's great grandfather; and when he saw the prince he came and bowed himself to him, and said:

'Child! child! why do you look so sad--is aught the matter?' Then the prince replied, 'I am sad, old friend, because I have married a wife as lovely as the stars, but she will not speak to me, and I know not what to do. Night after night she leaves me for her father's house, and day after day she sits in mine as though turned to stone, and utters no word, whatever I may do or say.'

The old man stood thinking for a moment, and then he hobbled off to his own cottage. A little later he came back to the prince with five or six small packets, which he placed in his hands and said:

'To-morrow, when your bride leaves the palace, sprinkle the powder from one of these packets upon your body, and while seeing clearly, you will become yourself invisible. More I cannot do for you, but may all go well!'

And the prince thanked him, and put the packets carefully away in his turban.

The next night, when Dorani left for her father's house in her palanquin, the prince took out a packet of the magic powder and sprinkled it over himself, and then hurried after her. He soon found that, as the old man had promised, he was invisible to everyone, although he felt as usual, and could see all that passed. He speedily overtook the palanquin and walked beside it to the scent-seller's dwelling. There it was set down, and, when his bride, closely veiled, left it and entered the house, he, too, entered unperceived.

At the first door Dorani removed one veil; then she entered another doorway at the end of a passage where she removed another veil; next she mounted the stairs, and at the door of the women's quarters removed a third veil. After this she proceeded to her own room where were set two large basins, one of attar of roses and one of water; in these she washed herself, and afterwards called for food. A servant brought her a bowl of curds, which she ate hastily, and then arrayed herself in a robe of silver, and wound about her strings of pearls, while a wreath of roses crowned her hair. When fully dressed, she seated herself upon a four-legged stool over which was a canopy with silken curtains, these she drew around her, and then called out:

'Fly, stool, to the palace of rajah Indra.'

Instantly the stool rose in the air, and the invisible prince, who had watched all these proceedings with great wonder, seized it by one leg as it flew away, and found himself being borne through the air at a rapid rate.

In a short while they arrived at the house of the fairy who, as I told you before, was the favourite friend of Dorani. The fairy stood waiting on the threshold, as beautifully dressed as Dorani herself was, and when the stool stopped at her door she cried in astonishment:

'Why, the stool is flying all crooked to-day! What is the reason of that, I wonder? I suspect that you have been talking to your husband, and so it will not fly straight.'

But Dorani declared that she had not spoken one word to him, and she couldn't think why the stool flew as if weighed down at one side. The fairy still looked doubtful, but made no answer, and took her seat beside Dorani, the prince again holding tightly one leg. Then the stool flew on through the air until it came to the palace of Indra the rajah.

All through the night the women sang and danced before the rajah Indra, whilst a magic lute played of itself the most bewitching music; till the prince, who sat watching it all, was quite entranced. Just before dawn the rajah gave the signal to cease; and again the two women seated themselves on the stool, and, with the prince clinging to the leg, it flew back to earth, and bore Dorani and her husband safely to the scent-seller's shop. Here the prince hurried away by himself past Dorani's palanquin with its sleepy bearers, straight on to the palace; and, as he passed the threshold of his own rooms he became visible again. Then he lay down upon a couch and waited for Dorani's arrival.

As soon as she arrived she took a seat and remained as silent as usual, with her head bowed on her knees. For a while not a sound was heard, but presently the prince said:

'I dreamed a curious dream last night, and as it was all about you I am going to tell it you, although you heed nothing.'

The girl, indeed, took no notice of his words, but in spite of that he proceeded to relate every single thing that had happened the evening before, leaving out no detail of all that he had seen or heard. And when he praised her singing--and his voice shook a little--Dorani just looked at him; but she said naught, though, in her own mind, she was filled with wonder. 'What a dream!' she thought. 'Could it have been a dream? How could he have learnt in a dream all she had done or said?' Still she kept silent; only she looked that once at the prince, and then remained all day as before, with her head bowed upon her knees.

When night came the prince again made himself invisible and followed her. The same things happened again as had happened before, but Dorani sang better than ever. In the morning the prince a second time told Dorani all that she had done, pretending that he had dreamt of it. Directly he had finished Dorani gazed at him, and said:

'Is it true that you dreamt this, or were you really there?'

'I was there,' answered the prince.

'But why do you follow me?' asked the girl.

'Because,' replied the prince, 'I love you, and to be with you is happiness.'

This time Dorani's eyelids quivered; but she said no more, and was silent the rest of the day. However, in the evening, just as she was stepping into her palanquin, she said to the prince:

'If you love me, prove it by not following me to-night.'

And so the prince did as she wished, and stayed at home.

That evening the magic stool flew so unsteadily that they could hardly keep their seats, and at last the fairy exclaimed:

'There is only one reason that it should jerk like this! You have been talking to your husband!'

And Dorani replied: 'Yes, I have spoken; oh, yes, I have spoken!' But no more would she say.

That night Dorani sang so marvellously that at the end the rajah Indra rose up and vowed that she might ask what she would and he would give it to her. At first she was silent; but, when he pressed her, she answered:

'Give me the magic lute.'

The rajah, when he heard this, was displeased with himself for having made so rash a promise, because this lute he valued above all his possessions. But as he had promised, so he must perform, and with an ill grace he handed it to her.

'You must never come here again,' said he, 'for, once having asked so much, how will you in future be content with smaller gifts?'

Dorani bowed her head silently as she took the lute, and passed with the fairy out of the great gate, where the stool awaited them. More unsteadily than before, it flew back to earth.

When Dorani got to the palace that morning she asked the prince whether he had dreamt again. He laughed with happiness, for this time she had spoken to him of her own free will; and he replied:

'No; but I begin to dream now--not of what has happened in the past, but of what may happen in the future.'

That day Dorani sat very quietly, but she answered the prince when he spoke to her; and when evening fell, and with it the time for her departure, she still sat on. Then the prince came close to her and said softly:

'Are you not going to your house, Dorani?'

At that she rose and threw herself weeping into his arms, whispering gently:

'Never again, my lord, never again would I leave thee!'

So the prince won his beautiful bride; and though they neither of them dealt any further with fairies and their magic, they learnt more daily of the magic of Love, which one may still learn, although fairy magic has fled away.

(Punjabi Story, Major Campbell, Feroshepore.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

THE SATIN SURGEON

Once upon a time there was a very rich and powerful king who, in spite of having been married several times, had only two daughters.

The elder was extremely plain--she squinted and was hunchbacked; but at the same time she was very clever and amusing, so, though at heart both spiteful and untruthful, she was her father's favourite.

The younger princess, on the other hand, was both lovely and sweet-tempered, and those who knew her well could hardly say whether her charming face or pleasant manners was the more attractive.

The neighbouring country was governed by a young emperor, who, though not much over twenty years of age, had shown great courage in battle, and, had he wished it, might very likely have conquered the whole world. Luckily he preferred peace to war, and occupied his time with trying to rule his own kingdom well and wisely. His people were very anxious that he should marry, and as the two princesses were the only ladies to be heard of of suitable age and rank, the emperor sent envoys to their father's court to ask for the hand of one of them in marriage. But, as he was resolved only to marry a woman whom he could love and be happy with, he determined to see the lady himself before making up his mind. For this purpose he set out in disguise not long after the departure of his ambassadors, and arrived at the palace very soon after they did; but as he had foolishly kept his plan secret, he found, when he reached the court, that they had already made proposals for the elder princess.

Now the emperor might just as well have gone openly, for his presence soon became known; and when the king heard of it he prepared to receive him royally, though of course he had to pretend that he had no idea who he was. So it was settled that the ambassadors should present their master under the name of one of the princes, and in this manner he was received by the king.

At night there was a grand ball at which the young emperor was able to see the two princesses and to make their acquaintance. The ugly face and figure and spiteful remarks of the elder displeased him so greatly that he felt he could not marry her even if she owned ten kingdoms, whilst the sweet face and gentle manners of the younger sister charmed him so much that he would gladly have shared his throne with her had she been only a simple shepherdess.

He found it very difficult to conceal his thoughts and to pay the elder princess the amount of attention due to her, though he did his best to be polite; while all he saw or heard during the next few days only increased his love for her younger sister, and at last he confessed that his dearest wish was to make her his wife, if she and her father would grant his desire.

He had commanded his ambassadors to put off their farewell audience for a little time, hoping that the king might perceive the state of his feelings; but when it could be deferred no longer, he bade them propose in his name for the younger princess.

On hearing this news, so different from what he had been led to expect, the king who--as we have said before--was devoted to his elder daughter and entirely under her influence, could hardly contain his displeasure. Directly the audience was over he sent for the princess and told her of the insolent proposal the emperor had made for her sister. The princess was even more furious than her father, and after consulting together they decided to send the younger daughter to some distant place out of reach of the young emperor; but where this should be they did not quite know. However, at length, after they had both racked their brains to find a suitable prison, they fixed on a lonely castle called the Desert Tower, where they thought she would be quite safe.

Meantime, it was thought best to let the court gaieties go on as usual, and orders were given for all sorts of splendid entertainments; and on the day that was fixed for carrying off the princess, the whole court was invited to a great hunt in the forest.

The emperor and the young princess were counting the hours till this morning, which promised to be so delightful, should dawn. The king and his guest arrived together at the meeting-place, but what was the surprise and distress of the young man at not seeing the object of his love amongst the ladies present. He waited anxiously, looking up and down, not hearing anything that the king said to him; and when the hunt began and she still was absent, he declined to follow, and spent the whole day seeking her, but in vain.

On his return, one of his attendants told him that some hours before he had met the princess's carriage, escorted by a troop of soldiers who were riding on each side, so that no one could get speech of her. He had followed them at a distance, and saw them stop at the Desert Tower, and on its return he noticed that the carriage was empty. The emperor was deeply grieved by this news. He left the court at once, and ordered his ambassadors to declare war the very next day, unless the king promised to set free the princess. And more than this, no sooner had he reached his own country than he raised a large army, with which he seized the frontier towns, before his enemy had had time to collect any troops. But, ere he quitted the court, he took care to write a letter to his beloved princess, imploring her to have patience and trust to him; and this he gave into the hands of his favourite equerry, who would he knew lay down his life in his service.

With many precautions the equerry managed to examine the surroundings of the tower, and at last discovered, not only where the princess lodged, but that a little window in her room looked out on a desolate plot full of brambles.

Now the unhappy princess was much annoyed that she was not even allowed to take the air at this little window, which was the only one in her room. Her keeper was her elder sister's former nurse, a woman whose eyes never slept. Not for an instant could she be induced to stir from the side of the princess, and she watched her slightest movement.

One day, however, the spy was for once busy in her room writing an account of the princess to her elder sister, and the poor prisoner seized the opportunity to lean out of the window. As she looked about her she noticed a man hidden amongst the bushes, who stepped forward as soon as he caught sight of her, and showed her a letter, which he took from his jerkin. She at once recognised him as one of the emperor's attendants, and let down a long string, to which he tied the letter. You can fancy how quickly she drew it up again, and luckily she had just time to read it before her gaoler had finished her report and entered the room.

The princess's delight was great, and next day she managed to write an answer on a sheet of her note book, and to throw it down to the equerry, who hastened to carry it back to his master. The emperor was so happy at having news of his dear princess, that he resolved, at all risks, to visit the Desert Tower himself, if only to see her for a moment. He ordered his equerry to ask leave to visit her, and the princess replied that she should indeed rejoice to see him, but that she feared that her gaoler's watchfulness would make his journey useless, unless he came during the short time when the old woman was writing alone in her own room.

Naturally, the bare idea of difficulties only made the emperor more eager than ever. He was ready to run any risks, but, by the advice of the equerry, he decided to try cunning rather than force. In his next letter he enclosed a sleeping powder, which the princess managed to mix with her gaoler's supper, so that when the emperor reached the tower in the evening the princess appeared fearlessly at her window on hearing his signal. They had a long and delightful conversation, and parted in the fond hope that their meeting had not been observed. But in this they were sadly mistaken. The watchful eyes of the old nurse were proof against any sleeping draught--she had seen and heard all; and lost no time in writing to report everything to her mistress.

The news made the spiteful little hunchback furious, and she resolved to be cruelly revenged for the contempt with which the emperor had treated her. She ordered her nurse to pretend not to notice what might be passing, and meantime she had a trap made so that if the emperor pushed his way through the brambles at the foot of the tower, it would not only catch him, as if he were a mouse, but would let loose a number of poisoned arrows, which would pierce him all over. When it was ready, the trap was hidden amongst the brambles without being observed by the princess.

That same evening the emperor hurried to the tower with all the impatience of love. As he came near he heard the princess break into a long, joyous peal of laughter. He advanced quickly to give the usual signal, when suddenly his foot trod on something, he knew not what. A sharp, stinging pain ran through him, and he turned white and faint, but, luckily, the trap had only opened a little way, and only a few of the arrows flew out. For a moment he staggered, and then fell to the ground covered with blood.

Had he been alone he would have died very shortly, but his faithful squire was close at hand, and carried his master off to the wood where the rest of his escort were waiting for him. His wounds were bound up, and some poles were cut to make a rough litter, and, almost unconscious, the emperor was borne away out of his enemy's country to his own palace.

All this time the princess was feeling very anxious. She had been whiling away the hours before this meeting by playing with a little pet monkey, which had been making such funny faces that, in spite of her troubles, she had burst into the hearty laugh overheard by the emperor. But by-and-by she grew restless, waiting for the signal which never came, and, had she dared, would certainly have rebelled when her gaoler, whom she believed to be fast asleep, ordered her to go to bed at once.

A fortnight passed, which was spent in great anxiety by the poor girl, who grew thin and weak with the uncertainty. At the end of this period, when the nurse went to her room one morning as usual in order to write her daily report, she carelessly left the key in the door. This was perceived by the princess, who turned it upon her so quickly and quietly that she never found out she was locked in till she had finished writing, and got up to seek her charge.

Finding herself free, the princess flew to the window, and to her horror saw the arrows lying about amongst the bloodstained brambles. Distracted with terror she slipped down the stairs and out of the tower, and ran for some time along a path, when with great good luck she met the husband of her own nurse, who had only just learned of her imprisonment, and was on his way to try and find out whether he could serve her. The princess begged him to get her some men's clothes while she awaited him in a little wood close by. The good man was overjoyed to be of use, and started at once for the nearest town, where he soon discovered a shop where the court lackeys were accustomed to sell their masters' cast-off clothes. The princess dressed herself at once in the disguise he had brought, which was of rich material and covered with precious stones; and, putting her own garments into a bag, which her servant hung over his shoulders, they both set out on their journey.

This lasted longer than either of them expected. They walked by day as far as the princess could manage, and by night they slept in the open air. One evening they camped in a lovely valley watered by a rippling stream, and towards morning the princess was awakened by a charming voice singing one of the songs of her own childhood. Anxious to find out where the sound came from, she walked to a thicket of myrtles, where she saw a little boy with a quiver at his back and an ivory bow in his hand, singing softly to himself as he smoothed the feathers of his shafts.

'Are you surprised at seeing my eyes open?' he asked, with a smile. 'Ah! I am not always blind. And sometimes it is well to know what sort of a heart needs piercing. It was I who sent out my darts the day that you and the emperor met, so, as I have caused the wound, I am in duty bound to find the cure!'

Then he gave her a little bottle full of a wonderful salve with which to dress the emperor's wounds when she found him.

'In two days you can reach his palace,' he said. 'Do not waste time, for sometimes time is life.'

The princess thanked the boy with tears in her eyes, and hastened to awake her guide so that they might start, and set off at once on their way.

As the boy had foretold, in two days the tower and walls of the city came in sight, and her heart beat wildly at the thought that she would soon be face to face with the emperor, but on inquiring after his health she learned, to her horror, that he was sinking fast. For a moment her grief was so great that she nearly betrayed herself. Then, calling all her courage to her aid, she announced that she was a doctor, and that if they would leave him in her charge for a few days she would promise to cure him.

Now, in order to make a good appearance at court the new doctor resolved to have an entire suit made of pale blue satin. She bought the richest, most splendid stuff to be had in the shops, and summoned a tailor to make it for her, engaging to pay him double if he would finish the work in two hours. Next she went to the market, where she bought a fine mule, bidding her servant see that its harness was adorned with trappings of blue satin also.

Whilst all was being made ready the princess asked the woman in whose house she lived whether she knew any of the emperor's attendants, and found to her satisfaction that her cousin was his majesty's chief valet. The doctor then bade the woman inform everyone she met that on hearing of the emperor's illness a celebrated surgeon had hastened to attend him, and had undertaken to cure him entirely; declaring himself prepared to be burnt alive in case of failure.

The good woman, who loved nothing better than a bit of gossip, hurried to the palace with her news. Her story did not lose in telling. The court physicians were very scornful about the new-comer, but the emperor's attendants remarked that as, in spite of their remedies, his majesty was dying before their eyes, there could be no harm in consulting this stranger.

So the lord chamberlain begged the young doctor to come and prescribe for the royal patient without delay; and the doctor sent a message at once, that he would do himself the honour to present himself at the palace, and he lost no time in mounting his mule and setting out. As the people and soldiers saw him ride past they cried out:

'Here comes the Satin Surgeon! Look at the Satin Surgeon! Long live the Satin Surgeon!' And, on arriving, he was announced by this name, and at once taken to the sick room of the dying man.

The emperor was lying with his eyes closed, and his face as white as the pillow itself; but directly he heard the new-comer's voice, he looked up and smiled, and signed that he wished the new doctor to remain near him. Making a low bow, the Satin Surgeon assured the emperor that he felt certain of curing his malady, but insisted that everyone should leave the room except the emperor's favourite equerry. He then dressed the wounds with the magic salve which the boy had given him, and it so relieved the emperor's pain that he slept soundly all that night.

When morning broke, the courtiers and doctors hurried to the emperor's chamber, and were much surprised to find him free of pain. But they were promptly ordered out of the room by the Satin Surgeon, who renewed the dressings with such good results that next morning the emperor was nearly well, and able to leave his bed. As he grew stronger, his thoughts dwelt more and more on the cause of all his sufferings, and his spirits grew worse as his health grew better. The face and voice of his new doctor reminded him of the princess who had, he imagined, betrayed him, and caused him such dreadful torture; and, unable to bear the thought, his eyes filled with tears.

The doctor noticed his sad countenance and did all he could to enliven his patient with cheerful talk and amusing stories, till at last he won the emperor's confidence and heard all the story of his love for a lady who had treated him cruelly, but whom, in spite of everything, he could not help loving. The Satin Surgeon listened with sympathy, and tried to persuade the emperor that possibly the princess was not so much to blame as might appear; but, eager though the sick man was to believe this, it took a long while to persuade him of it. At length a day came when the emperor was nearly well, and for the last time the doctor dressed the wounds with the precious salve. Then, both patient and surgeon, being wearied out with something they could not explain, fell asleep and slept for hours.

Early next morning, the princess, having decided to resume her own clothes which she had brought with her in a bag, dressed herself with great care and put on all her jewels so as to make herself look as lovely as possible. She had just finished when the emperor awoke, feeling so strong and well that he thought he must be dreaming, nor could he believe himself to be awake when he saw the princess draw aside his curtains.

For some minutes they gazed at each other, unable to speak, and then they only uttered little gasps of joy and thankfulness. By-and-by the princess told him the whole story of her adventures since their last interview at the Desert Tower; and the emperor, weak as he was, threw himself at her feet with vows of love and gratitude, without ever giving a thought to the fact that the household and court physicians were awaiting their summons in the ante-room.

The emperor, anxious to prove how much he owed to the Satin Surgeon, opened his door himself, and great was everyone's surprise and joy at seeing him in such perfect health. Like good courtiers, they hastened in to praise and compliment the Satin Surgeon, but what was their astonishment on finding that he had disappeared, leaving in his place the loveliest princess in the whole world.

'Whilst thanking the surgeon for his miraculous cure, you might at the same time do homage to your empress,' observed the emperor. He wished to have the marriage celebrated the same day, but the princess declared that she must wait to get her father's permission first.

Messengers were therefore instantly despatched to the neighbouring capital, and soon returned with the king's consent, for he had lately discovered all the mischief caused by his elder daughter.

The spiteful princess was so furious at the failure of her plans that she took to her bed, and died in a fit of rage and jealousy. No one grieved for her, and the king, being tired of the fatigues of Government, gave up his crown to his younger daughter; so the two kingdoms henceforth became one.

(From the Cabinet des Fees.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

THE BILLY GOAT AND THE KING

Once there lived a certain king who understood the language of all birds and beasts and insects. This knowledge had of course been given him by a fairy godmother; but it was rather a troublesome present, for he knew that if he were ever to reveal anything he had thus learned he would turn into a stone. How he managed to avoid doing so long before this story opens I cannot say, but he had safely grown up to manhood, and married a wife, and was as happy as monarchs generally are.

This king, I must tell you, was a Hindu; and when a Hindu eats his food he has a nice little place on the ground freshly plastered with mud, and he sits in the middle of it with very few clothes on--which is quite a different way from ours.

Well, one day the king was eating his dinner in just such a nice, clean, mud-plastered spot, and his wife was sitting opposite to wait upon him and keep him company. As he ate he dropped some grains of rice upon the ground, and a little ant, who was running about seeking a living, seized upon one of the grains and bore it off towards his hole. Just outside the king's circle this ant met another ant, and the king heard the second one say:

'Oh, dear friend, do give me that grain of rice, and get another one for yourself. You see my boots are so dirty that, if I were to go upon the king's eating place, I should defile it, and I can't do that, it would be so very rude.'

But the owner of the grain of rice only replied:

'If you want rice go and get it. No one will notice your dirty boots; and you don't suppose that I am going to carry rice for all our kindred?'

Then the king laughed.

The queen looked at herself up and down, but she could not see or feel anything in her appearance to make the king laugh, so she said:

'What are you laughing at?'

'Did I laugh?' replied the king.

'Of course you did,' retorted the queen; 'and if you think that I am ridiculous I wish you would say so, instead of behaving in that stupid way! What are you laughing at?'

'I'm not laughing at anything,' answered the king.

'Very well, but you did laugh, and I want to know why.'

'Well, I'm afraid I can't tell you,' said the king.

'You must tell me,' replied the queen impatiently. 'If you laugh when there's nothing to laugh at you must be ill or mad. What is the matter?'

Still the king refused to say, and still the queen declared that she must and would know. For days the quarrel went on, and the queen gave her husband no rest, until at last the poor man was almost out of his wits, and thought that, as life had become for him hardly worth living while this went on, he might as well tell her the secret and take the consequences.

'But,' thought he, 'if I am to become a stone, I am not going to lie, if I can help it, on some dusty highway, to be kicked here and there by man and beast, flung at dogs, be used as the plaything of naughty children, and become generally restless and miserable. I will be a stone at the bottom of the cool river, and roll gently about there until I find some secure resting-place where I can stay for ever.'

So he told his wife that if she would ride with him to the middle of the river he would tell her what he had laughed at. She thought he was joking, and laughingly agreed; their horses were ordered and they set out.

On the way they came to a fine well beneath the shade of some lofty, wide-spreading trees, and the king proposed that they should get off and rest a little, drink some of the cool water, and then pass on. To this the queen consented; so they dismounted and sat down in the shade by the well-side to rest.

It happened that an old goat and his wife were browsing in the neighbourhood, and, as the king and queen sat there, the nanny goat came to the well's brink and peering over saw some lovely green leaves that sprang in tender shoots out of the side of the well.

'Oh!' cried she to her husband, 'come quickly and look. Here are some leaves which make my mouth water; come and get them for me!'

Then the billy goat sauntered up and looked over, and after that he eyed his wife a little crossly.

'You expect me to get you those leaves, do you? I suppose you don't consider how in the world I am to reach them? You don't seem to think at all; if you did you would know that if I tried to reach those leaves I should fall into the well and be drowned!'

'Oh,' cried the nanny goat, 'why should you fall in? Do try and get them!'

'I am not going to be so silly,' replied the billy goat.

But the nanny goat still wept and entreated.

'Look here,' said her husband, 'there are plenty of fools in the world, but I am not one of them. This silly king here, because he can't cure his wife of asking questions, is going to throw his life away. But I know how to cure you of your follies, and I'm going to.'

And with that he butted the nanny goat so severely that in two minutes she was submissively feeding somewhere else, and had made up her mind that the leaves in the well were not worth having.

Then the king, who had understood every word, laughed once more.

The queen looked at him suspiciously, but the king got up and walked across to where she sat.

'Are you still determined to find out what I was laughing at the other day?' he asked.

'Quite,' answered the queen angrily.

'Because,' said the king, tapping his leg with his riding whip, 'I've made up my mind not to tell you, and moreover, I have made up my mind to stop you mentioning the subject any more.'

'What do you mean?' asked the queen nervously.

'Well,' replied the king, 'I notice that if that goat is displeased with his wife, he just butts her, and that seems to settle the question----'

'Do you mean to say you would beat me?' cried the queen.

'I should be extremely sorry to have to do so,' replied the king; 'but I have got to persuade you to go home quietly, and to ask no more silly questions when I say I cannot answer them. Of course, if you will persist, why----'

And the queen went home, and so did the king; and it is said that they are both happier and wiser than ever before.

(Punjabi Story, Major Campbell, Feroshepore)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

THE STORY OF ZOULVISIA

In the midst of a sandy desert, somewhere in Asia, the eyes of travellers are refreshed by the sight of a high mountain covered with beautiful trees, among which the glitter of foaming waterfalls may be seen in the sunlight. In that clear, still air it is even possible to hear the song of the birds, and smell of the flowers; but though the mountain is plainly inhabited--for here and there a white tent is visible--none of the kings or princes who pass it on the road to Babylon or Baalbec ever plunge into its forests--or, if they do, they never come back. Indeed, so great is the terror caused by the evil reputation of the mountain that fathers, on their death-beds, pray their sons never to try to fathom its mysteries. But in spite of its ill-fame, a certain number of young men every year announce their intention of visiting it and, as we have said, are never seen again.

* * * * *

Now there was once a powerful king who ruled over a country on the other side of the desert, and, when dying, gave the usual counsel to his seven sons. Hardly, however, was he dead than the eldest, who succeeded to the throne, announced his intention of hunting in the enchanted mountain. In vain the old men shook their heads and tried to persuade him to give up his mad scheme. All was useless; he went, but did not return; and in due time the throne was filled by his next brother.

And so it happened to the other five, but when the youngest became king, and he also proclaimed a hunt in the mountain, a loud lament was raised in the city.

'Who will reign over us when you are dead? For dead you surely will be,' cried they. 'Stay with us, and we will make you happy.' And for a while he listened to their prayers, and the land grew rich and prosperous under his rule. But in a few years the restless fit again took possession of him, and this time he would hear nothing. Hunt in that forest he would, and calling his friends and attendants round him, he set out one morning across the desert.

They were riding through a rocky valley, when a deer sprang up in front of them and bounded away. The king instantly gave chase, followed by his attendants; but the animal ran so swiftly that they never could get up to it, and at length it vanished in the depths of the forest.

Then the young man drew rein for the first time, and looked about him. He had left his companions far behind, and, glancing back, he beheld them entering some tents, dotted here and there amongst the trees. For himself, the fresh coolness of the woods was more attractive to him than any food, however delicious, and for hours he strolled about as his fancy led him.

By-and-by, however, it began to grow dark, and he thought that the moment had arrived for them to start for the palace. So, leaving the forest with a sigh, he made his way down to the tents, but what was his horror to find his men lying about, some dead, some dying. These were past speech, but speech was needless. It was as clear as day that the wine they had drunk contained deadly poison.

'I am too late to help you, my poor friends,' he said, gazing at them sadly; 'but at least I can avenge you! Those that have set the snare will certainly return to see to its working. I will hide myself somewhere, and discover who they are!'

Near the spot where he stood he noticed a large walnut tree, and into this he climbed. Night soon fell, and nothing broke the stillness of the place; but with the earliest glimpse of dawn a noise of galloping hoofs was heard.

Pushing the branches aside the young man beheld a youth approaching, mounted on a white horse. On reaching the tents the cavalier dismounted, and closely inspected the dead bodies that lay about them. Then, one by one, he dragged them to a ravine close by and threw them into a lake at the bottom. While he was doing this, the servants who had followed him led away the horses of the ill-fated men, and the courtiers were ordered to let loose the deer, which was used as a decoy, and to see that the tables in the tents were covered as before with food and wine.

Having made these arrangements he strolled slowly through the forest, but great was his surprise to come upon a beautiful horse hidden in the depths of a thicket.

'There was a horse for every dead man,' he said to himself. 'Then whose is this?'

'Mine!' answered a voice from a walnut tree close by. 'Who are you that lure men into your power and then poison them? But you shall do so no longer. Return to your house, wherever it may be, and we will fight before it!'

The cavalier remained speechless with anger at these words; then with a great effort he replied:

'I accept your challenge. Mount and follow me. I am Zoulvisia.' And, springing on his horse, he was out of sight so quickly that the king had only time to notice that light seemed to flow from himself and his steed, and that the hair under his helmet was like liquid gold.

Clearly, the cavalier was a woman. But who could she be? Was she queen of all the queens? Or was she chief of a band of robbers? She was neither: only a beautiful maiden.

Wrapped in these reflections, he remained standing beneath the walnut tree, long after horse and rider had vanished from sight. Then he awoke with a start, to remember that he must find the way to the house of his enemy, though where it was he had no notion. However, he took the path down which the rider had come, and walked along it for many hours till he came to three huts side by side, in each of which lived an old fairy and her sons.

The poor king was by this time so tired and hungry that he could hardly speak, but when he had drunk some milk, and rested a little, he was able to reply to the questions they eagerly put to him.

'I am going to seek Zoulvisia,' said he, 'she has slain my brothers and many of my subjects, and I mean to avenge them.'

He had only spoken to the inhabitants of one house, but from all three came an answering murmur.

'What a pity we did not know! Twice this day has she passed our door, and we might have kept her prisoner.'

But though their words were brave their hearts were not, for the mere thought of Zoulvisia made them tremble.

'Forget Zoulvisia, and stay with us,' they all said, holding out their hands; 'you shall be our big brother, and we will be your little brothers.' But the king would not.

Drawing from his pocket a pair of scissors, a razor and a mirror, he gave one to each of the old fairies, saying:

'Though I may not give up my vengeance I accept your friendship, and therefore leave you these three tokens. If blood should appear on the face of either know that my life is in danger, and, in memory of our sworn brotherhood, come to my aid.'

'We will come,' they answered. And the king mounted his horse and set out along the road they showed him.

By the light of the moon he presently perceived a splendid palace, but, though he rode twice round it, he could find no door. He was considering what he should do next, when he heard the sound of loud snoring, which seemed to come from his feet. Looking down, he beheld an old man lying at the bottom of a deep pit, just outside the walls, with a lantern by his side.

'Perhaps he may be able to give me some counsel,' thought the king; and, with some difficulty, he scrambled into the pit and laid his hand on the shoulder of the sleeper.

'Are you a bird or a snake that you can enter here?' asked the old man, awakening with a start. But the king answered that he was a mere mortal, and that he sought Zoulvisia.

'Zoulvisia? The world's curse?' replied he, gnashing his teeth. 'Out of all the thousands she has slain I am the only one who has escaped, though why she spared me only to condemn me to this living death I cannot guess.'

'Help me if you can,' said the king. And he told the old man his story, to which he listened intently.

'Take heed then to my counsel,' answered the old man. 'Know that every day at sunrise Zoulvisia dresses herself in her jacket of pearls, and mounts the steps of her crystal watch-tower. From there she can see all over her lands, and behold the entrance of either man or demon. If so much as one is detected she utters such fearful cries that those who hear her die of fright. But hide yourself in a cave that lies near the foot of the tower, and plant a forked stick in front of it; then, when she has uttered her third cry, go forth boldly, and look up at the tower. And go without fear, for you will have broken her power.'

Word for word the king did as the old man had bidden him, and when he stepped forth from the cave, their eyes met.

'You have conquered me,' said Zoulvisia, 'and are worthy to be my husband, for you are the first man who has not died at the sound of my voice!' And letting down her golden hair, she drew up the king to the summit of the tower as with a rope. Then she led him into the hall of audience, and presented him to her household.

'Ask of me what you will, and I will grant it to you,' whispered Zoulvisia with a smile, as they sat together on a mossy bank by the stream. And the king prayed her to set free the old man to whom he owed his life, and to send him back to his own country.

* * * * *

'I have finished with hunting, and with riding about my lands,' said Zoulvisia, the day that they were married. 'The care of providing for us all belongs henceforth to you.' And turning to her attendants, she bade them bring the horse of fire before her.

'This is your master, O my steed of flame,' cried she; 'and you will serve him as you have served me.' And kissing him between his eyes, she placed the bridle in the hand of her husband.

The horse looked for a moment at the young man, and then bent his head, while the king patted his neck and smoothed his tail, till they felt themselves old friends. After this he mounted to do Zoulvisia's bidding, but before he started she gave him a case of pearls containing one of her hairs, which he tucked into the breast of his coat.

He rode along for some time, without seeing any game to bring home for dinner. Suddenly a fine stag started up almost under his feet, and he at once gave chase. On they sped, but the stag twisted and turned so that the king had no chance of a shot till they reached a broad river, when the animal jumped in and swam across. The king fitted his cross-bow with a bolt, and took aim, but though he succeeded in wounding the stag, it contrived to gain the opposite bank, and in his excitement he never observed that the case of pearls had fallen into the water.

* * * * *

The stream, though deep, was likewise rapid, and the box was swirled along miles, and miles, and miles, till it was washed up in quite another country. Here it was picked up by one of the water-carriers belonging to the palace, who showed it to the king. The workmanship of the case was so curious, and the pearls so rare, that the king could not make up his mind to part with it, but he gave the man a good price, and sent him away. Then, summoning his chamberlain, he bade him find out its history in three days, or lose his head.

But the answer to the riddle, which puzzled all the magicians and wise men, was given by an old woman, who came up to the palace and told the chamberlain that, for two handfuls of gold, she would reveal the mystery.

Of course the chamberlain gladly gave her what she asked, and in return she informed him that the case and the hair belonged to Zoulvisia.

'Bring her hither, old crone, and you shall have gold enough to stand up in,' said the chamberlain. And the old woman answered that she would try what she could do.

She went back to her hut in the middle of the forest, and standing in the doorway, whistled softly. Soon the dead leaves on the ground began to move and to rustle, and from underneath them there came a long train of serpents. They wriggled to the feet of the witch, who stooped down and patted their heads, and gave each one some milk in a red earthen basin. When they had all finished, she whistled again, and bade two or three coil themselves round her arms and neck, while she turned one into a cane and another into a whip. Then she took a stick, and on the river bank changed it into a raft, and seating herself comfortably, she pushed off into the centre of the stream.

All that day she floated, and all the next night, and towards sunset the following evening she found herself close to Zoulvisia's garden, just at the moment that the king, on the horse of flame, was returning from hunting.

'Who are you?' he asked in surprise; for old women travelling on rafts were not common in that country. 'Who are you, and why have you come here?'

'I am a poor pilgrim, my son,' answered she, 'and having missed the caravan, I have wandered foodless for many days through the desert, till at length I reached the river. There I found this tiny raft, and to it I committed myself, not knowing if I should live or die. But since you have found me, give me, I pray you, bread to eat, and let me lie this night by the dog who guards your door!'

This piteous tale touched the heart of the young man, and he promised that he would bring her food, and that she should pass the night in his palace.

'But mount behind me, good woman,' cried he, 'for you have walked far, and it is still a long way to the palace.' And as he spoke he bent down to help her, but the horse swerved on one side.

And so it happened twice and thrice, and the old witch guessed the reason, though the king did not.

'I fear to fall off,' said she; 'but as your kind heart pities my sorrows, ride slowly, and lame as I am, I think I can manage to keep up.'

At the door he bade the witch to rest herself, and he would fetch her all she needed. But Zoulvisia his wife grew pale when she heard whom he had brought, and besought him to feed the old woman and send her away, as she would cause mischief to befall them.

The king laughed at her fears, and answered lightly:

'Why, one would think she was a witch to hear you talk! And even if she were, what harm could she do to us?' And calling to the maidens he bade them carry her food, and to let her sleep in their chamber.

Now the old woman was very cunning, and kept the maidens awake half the night with all kinds of strange stories. Indeed, the next morning, while they were dressing their mistress, one of them suddenly broke into a laugh, in which the others joined her.

'What is the matter with you?' asked Zoulvisia. And the maid answered that she was thinking of a droll adventure told them the evening before by the new-comer.

'And, oh, madam!' cried the girl, 'it may be that she is a witch, as they say; but I am sure she never would work a spell to harm a fly! And as for her tales, they would pass many a dull hour for you, when my lord was absent!'

So, in an evil hour, Zoulvisia consented that the crone should be brought to her, and from that moment the two were hardly ever apart.

* * * * *

One day the witch began to talk about the young king, and to declare that in all the lands she had visited she had seen none like him.

'It was so clever of him to guess your secret so as to win your heart,' said she. 'And of course he told you his, in return?'

'No, I don't think he has got any,' returned Zoulvisia.

'Not got any secrets?' cried the old woman scornfully. 'That is nonsense! Every man has a secret, which he always tells to the woman he loves. And if he has not told it to you, it is that he does not love you!'

These words troubled Zoulvisia mightily, though she would not confess it to the witch. But the next time she found herself alone with her husband, she began to coax him to tell her in what lay the secret of his strength. For a long while he put her off with caresses, but when she would be no longer denied, he answered:

'It is my sabre that gives me strength, and day and night it lies by my side. But now that I have told you, swear upon this ring, that I will give you in exchange for yours, that you will reveal it to nobody.' And Zoulvisia swore; and instantly hastened to betray the great news to the old woman.

Four nights later, when all the world was asleep, the witch softly crept into the king's chamber and took the sabre from his side as he lay sleeping. Then, opening her lattice, she flew on to the terrace and dropped the sword into the river.

The next morning everyone was surprised because the king did not, as usual, rise early and go off to hunt. The attendants listened at the keyhole and heard the sound of heavy breathing, but none dared enter, till Zoulvisia pushed past. And what a sight met their gaze! There lay the king almost dead, with foam on his mouth, and eyes that were already closed. They wept, and they cried to him, but no answer came.

Suddenly a shriek broke from those who stood hindmost, and in strode the witch, with serpents round her neck and arms and hair. At a sign from her they flung themselves with a hiss upon the maidens, whose flesh was pierced with their poisonous fangs. Then turning to Zoulvisia, she said:

'I give you your choice--will you come with me, or shall the serpents slay you also?' And as the terrified girl stared at her, unable to utter one word, she seized her by the arm and led her to the place where the raft was hidden among the rushes. When they were both on board she took the oars, and they floated down the stream till they had reached the neighbouring country, where Zoulvisia was sold for a sack of gold to the king.

Now, since the young man had entered the three huts on his way through the forest, not a morning had passed without the sons of the three fairies examining the scissors, the razor and the mirror, which the young king had left them. Hitherto the surfaces of all three things had been bright and undimmed, but on this particular morning, when they took them out as usual, drops of blood stood on the razor and the scissors, while the little mirror was clouded over.

'Something terrible must have happened to our little brother,' they whispered to each other, with awestruck faces; 'we must hasten to his rescue ere it be too late.' And putting on their magic slippers they started for the palace.

The servants greeted them eagerly, ready to pour forth all they knew, but that was not much; only that the sabre had vanished, none knew where. The new-comers passed the whole of the day in searching for it, but it could not be found, and when night closed in, they were very tired and hungry. But how were they to get food? The king had not hunted that day, and there was nothing for them to eat. The little men were in despair, when a ray of the moon suddenly lit up the river beneath the walls.

'How stupid! Of course there are fish to catch,' cried they; and running down to the bank they soon succeeded in landing some fine fish, which they cooked on the spot. Then they felt better, and began to look about them.

Further out, in the middle of the stream, there was a strange splashing, and by-and-by the body of a huge fish appeared, turning and twisting as if in pain. The eyes of all the brothers were fixed on the spot, when the fish leapt in the air, and a bright gleam flashed through the night. 'The sabre!' they shouted, and plunged into the stream, and with a sharp tug, pulled out the sword, while the fish lay on the water, exhausted by its struggles. Swimming back with the sabre to land, they carefully dried it in their coats, and then carried it to the palace and placed it on the king's pillow. In an instant colour came back to the waxen face, and the hollow cheeks filled out. The king sat up, and opening his eyes he said:

'Where is Zoulvisia?'

'That is what we do not know,' answered the little men; 'but now that you are saved you will soon find out.' And they told him what had happened since Zoulvisia had betrayed his secret to the witch.

'Let me go to my horse,' was all he said. But when he entered the stable he could have wept at the sight of his favourite steed, which was nearly in as sad a plight as his master had been. Languidly he turned his head as the door swung back on its hinges, but when he beheld the king he rose up, and rubbed his head against him.

'Oh, my poor horse! How much cleverer were you than I! If I had acted like you I should never have lost Zoulvisia; but we will seek her together, you and I.'

* * * * *

For a long while the king and his horse followed the course of the stream, but nowhere could he learn anything of Zoulvisia. At length, one evening, they both stopped to rest by a cottage not far from a great city, and as the king was lying outstretched on the grass, lazily watching his horse cropping the short turf, an old woman came out with a wooden bowl of fresh milk, which she offered him.

He drank it eagerly, for he was very thirsty, and then laying down the bowl, began to talk to the woman, who was delighted to have someone to listen to her conversation.

'You are in luck to have passed this way just now,' said she, 'for in five days the king holds his wedding banquet. Ah! but the bride is unwilling, for all her blue eyes and her golden hair! And she keeps by her side a cup of poison, and declares that she will swallow it rather than become his wife. Yet he is a handsome man too, and a proper husband for her--more than she could have looked for, having come no one knows whither, and bought from a witch----'

The king started. Had he found her after all? His heart beat violently, as if it would choke him; but he gasped out:

'Is her name Zoulvisia?'

'Ay, so she says, though the old witch---- But what ails you?' she broke off, as the young man sprang to his feet and seized her wrists.

'Listen to me,' he said. 'Can you keep a secret?'

'Ay,' answered the old woman again, 'if I am paid for it.'

'Oh, you shall be paid, never fear--as much as your heart can desire! Here is a handful of gold: you shall have as much again if you will do my bidding.' The old crone nodded her head.

'Then go and buy a dress such as ladies wear at court, and manage to get admitted into the palace, and into the presence of Zoulvisia. When there, show her this ring, and after that she will tell you what to do.'

So the old woman set off, and clothed herself in a garment of yellow silk, and wrapped a veil closely round her head. In this dress she walked boldly up the palace steps behind some merchants whom the king had sent for to bring presents for Zoulvisia.

At first the bride would have nothing to say to any of them; but on perceiving the ring, she suddenly grew as meek as a lamb. And thanking the merchants for their trouble, she sent them away, and remained alone with her visitor.

'Grandmother,' asked Zoulvisia, as soon as the door was safely shut, 'where is the owner of this ring?'

'In my cottage,' answered the old woman, 'waiting for orders from you.'

'Tell him to remain there for three days; and now go to the king of this country, and say that you have succeeded in bringing me to reason. Then he will let me alone and will cease to watch me. On the third day from this I shall be wandering about the garden near the river, and there your guest will find me. The rest concerns myself only.'

* * * * *

The morning of the third day dawned, and with the first rays of the sun a bustle began in the palace; for that evening the king was to marry Zoulvisia. Tents were being erected of fine scarlet cloth, decked with wreaths of sweet-smelling white flowers, and in them the banquet was spread. When all was ready a procession was formed to fetch the bride, who had been wandering in the palace gardens since daylight, and crowds lined the way to see her pass. A glimpse of her dress of golden gauze might be caught, as she passed from one flowery thicket to another; then suddenly the multitude swayed, and shrank back, as a thunderbolt seemed to flash out of the sky to the place where Zoulvisia was standing. Ah! but it was no thunderbolt, only the horse of fire! And when the people looked again, it was bounding away with two persons on its back.

* * * * *

Zoulvisia and her husband both learnt how to keep happiness when they had got it; and that is a lesson that many men and woman never learn at all. And besides, it is a lesson which nobody can teach, and that every boy and girl must learn for themselves.

(From Contes Armeniens. Par Frederic Macler.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

GRASP ALL, LOSE ALL

Once, in former times, there lived in a certain city in India a poor oil-seller, called Dena, who never could keep any money in his pockets; and when this story begins he had borrowed from a banker, of the name of Lena, the sum of one hundred rupees; which, with the interest Lena always charged, amounted to a debt of three hundred rupees. Now Dena was doing a very bad business, and had no money with which to pay his debt, so Lena was very angry, and used to come round to Dena's house every evening and abuse him until the poor man was nearly worried out of his life. Lena generally fixed his visit just when Dena's wife was cooking the evening meal, and would make such a scene that the poor oil-seller and his wife and daughter quite lost their appetites, and could eat nothing. This went on for some weeks, till, one day, Dena said to himself that he could stand it no longer, and that he had better run away; and, as a man cannot fly easily with a wife and daughter, he thought he must leave them behind. So that evening, instead of turning into his house as usual after his day's work, he just slipped out of the city without knowing very well where he was going.

At about ten o'clock that night Dena came to a well by the wayside, near which grew a giant peepul tree; and, as he was very tired, he determined to climb it, and rest for a little before continuing his journey in the morning. Up he went and curled himself so comfortably amongst the great branches that, overcome with weariness, he fell fast asleep. Whilst he slept, some spirits, who roam about such places on certain nights, picked up the tree and flew away with it to a far-away shore where no creature lived, and there, long before the sun rose, they set it down. Just then the oil-seller awoke; but instead of finding himself in the midst of a forest, he was amazed to behold nothing but waste shore and wide sea, and was dumb with horror and astonishment. Whilst he sat up, trying to collect his senses, he began to catch sight here and there of twinkling, flashing lights, like little fires, that moved and sparkled all about, and wondered what they were. Presently he saw one so close to him that he reached out his hand and grasped it, and found that it was a sparkling red stone, scarcely smaller than a walnut. He opened a corner of his loin-cloth and tied the stone in it; and by-and-by he got another, and then a third, and a fourth, all of which he tied up carefully in his cloth. At last, just as the day was breaking, the tree rose, and, flying rapidly through the air, was deposited once more by the well where it had stood the previous evening.

When Dena had recovered a little from the fright which the extraordinary antics of the tree had caused him, he began to thank Providence that he was alive, and, as his love of wandering had been quite cured, he made his way back to the city and to his own house. Here he was met and soundly scolded by his wife, who assailed him with a hundred questions and reproaches. As soon as she paused for breath, Dena replied:

'I have only this one thing to say, just look what I have got!' And, after carefully shutting all the doors, he opened the corner of his loin-cloth and showed her the four stones, which glittered and flashed as he turned them over and over.

'Pooh!' said his wife, 'the silly pebbles! If it was something to eat, now, there'd be some sense in them; but what's the good of such things?' And she turned away with a sniff, for it had happened that the night before, when Lena had come round as usual to storm at Dena, he had been rather disturbed to find that his victim was from home, and had frightened the poor woman by his threats. Directly, however, he heard that Dena had come back, Lena appeared in the doorway. For some minutes he talked to the oil-seller at the top of his voice, until he was tired, then Dena said:

'If your honour would deign to walk into my humble dwelling, I will speak.'

So Lena walked in, and the other, shutting as before all the doors, untied the corner of his loin-cloth and showed him the four great flashing stones.

'This is all,' said he, 'that I have in the world to set against my debt, for, as your honour knows, I haven't a penny, but the stones are pretty!'

Now Lena looked and saw at once that these were magnificent rubies, and his mouth watered for them; but as it would never do to show what was in his mind, he went on:

'What do I care about your stupid stones? It is my money I want, my lawful debt which you owe me, and I shall get it out of you yet somehow or another, or it will be the worst for you.'

To all his reproaches Dena could answer nothing, but sat with his hands joined together beseechingly, asking for patience and pity. At length Lena pretended that, rather than have a bad debt on his hand, he would be at the loss of taking the stones in lieu of his money; and, whilst Dena nearly wept with gratitude, he wrote out a receipt for the three hundred rupees; and, wrapping the four stones in a cloth, he put them into his bosom, and went off to his house.

'How shall I turn these rubies into money?' thought Lena, as he walked along; 'I daren't keep them, for they are of great value, and if the rajah heard that I had them he would probably put me into prison on some pretence and seize the stones and all else that I have as well. But what a bargain I have got! Four rubies worth a king's ransom, for one hundred rupees! Well, well, I must take heed not to betray my secret.' And he went on making plans. Presently he made up his mind what to do, and, putting on his cleanest clothes, he set off to the house of the chief wazir, whose name was Musli, and, after seeking a private audience, he brought out the four rubies and laid them before him.

The wazir's eyes sparkled as he beheld the splendid gems.

'Fine, indeed,' murmured he. 'I can't buy them at their real value; but, if you like to take it, I will give you ten thousand rupees for the four.'

To this the banker consented gratefully; and handing over the stones in exchange for the rupees, he hurried home, thanking his stars that he had driven such a reasonable bargain and obtained such an enormous profit.

After Lena had departed the wazir began casting about in his mind what to do with the gems; and very soon determined that the best thing to do was to present them to the rajah, whose name was Kahre. Without losing a moment, he went that very day to the palace, and sought a private interview with the rajah; and when he found himself alone with his royal master, he brought the four jewels and laid them before him.

'Oh, ho!' said the rajah, 'these are priceless gems, and you have done well to give them to me. In return I give you and your heirs the revenues of ten villages.'

Now the wazir was overjoyed at these words, but only made his deepest obeisance; and, whilst the king put the rubies into his turban, hurried away beaming with happiness at the thought that for ten thousand rupees he had become lord of ten villages. The rajah was also equally pleased, and strolled off with his new purchases to the women's quarters and showed them to the queen, who was nearly out of her mind with delight. Then, as she turned them over and over in her hands, she said: 'Ah! if I had eight more such gems, what a necklace they would make! Get me eight more of them or I shall die!'

'Most unreasonable of women,' cried the rajah, 'where am I to get eight more such jewels as these? I gave ten villages for them, and yet you are not satisfied!'

'What does it matter?' said the rani; 'do you want me to die? Surely you can get some more where these came from?' And then she fell to weeping and wailing until the rajah promised that in the morning he would make arrangements to get some more such rubies, and that if she would be patient she should have her desire.

In the morning the rajah sent for the wazir, and said that he must manage to get eight more rubies like those he had brought him the day before, 'and if you don't I shall hang you,' cried the rajah, for he was very cross. The poor wazir protested in vain that he knew not where to seek them; his master would not listen to a word he said.

'You must,' said he; 'the rani shall not die for the want of a few rubies! Get more where those came from.'

* * * * *

The wazir left the palace, much troubled in mind, and bade his slaves bring Lena before him. 'Get me eight more such rubies as those you brought yesterday,' commanded the wazir, directly the banker was shown into his presence. 'Eight more, and be quick, or I am a dead man.'

'But how can I?' wailed Lena; 'rubies like those don't grow upon bushes!'

'Where did you get them from?' asked the wazir.

'From Dena, the oil-seller,' said the banker.

'Well, send for him and ask him where he got them,' answered the wazir. 'I am not going to hang for twenty Denas!' And more slaves were sent to summon Dena.

When Dena arrived he was closely questioned, and then all three started to see the rajah, and to him Dena told the whole story.

'What night was it that you slept in the peepul tree?' demanded the rajah.

'I can't remember,' said Dena; 'but my wife will know.'

Then Dena's wife was sent for, and she explained that it was on the last Sunday of the new moon.

Now everyone knows that it is on the Sunday of the new moon that spirits have special power to play pranks upon mortals. So the rajah forbade them all, on pain of death, to say a word to anyone; and declared that, on the next Sunday of the new moon, they four--Kahre, Musli, Lena and Dena--would go and sit in the peepul tree and see what happened.

The days dragged on to the appointed Sunday, and that evening the four met secretly, and entered the forest. They had not far to go before they reached the peepul tree, into which they climbed as the rajah had planned. At midnight the tree began to sway, and presently it moved through the air.

'See, sire,' whispered Dena, 'the tree is flying!'

'Yes, yes,' said the rajah, 'you have told the truth. Now sit quiet, and we shall see what happens.'

Away and away flew the tree with the four men clinging tightly to its branches, until at last it was set down by the waste sea-shore where a great wide sea came tumbling in on a desert beach. Presently, as before, they began to see little points of light that glistened like fires all around them. Then Dena thought to himself:

'Think! last time I only took four that came close to me, and I got rid of all my debt in return. This time I will take all I can get and be rich!'

'If I got ten thousand rupees for four stones,' thought Lena, 'I will gather forty now for myself, and become so wealthy that they will probably make me a wazir at least!'

'For four stones I received ten villages,' Musli was silently thinking; 'now I will get stones enough to purchase a kingdom, become a rajah, and employ wazirs of my own!'

And Kahre thought: 'What is the good of only getting eight stones? Why, here are enough to make twenty necklaces; and wealth means power!'

Full of avarice and desire, each scrambled down from the tree, spread his cloth, and darted hither and thither picking up the precious jewels, looking the while over his shoulder to see whether his neighbour fared better than he. So engrossed were they in the business of gathering wealth that the dawn came upon them unawares; and suddenly the tree rose up again and flew away, leaving them upon the sea-shore staring after it, each with his cloth heavy with priceless jewels.

* * * * *

Morning broke in the city, and great was the consternation in the palace when the chamberlains declared that the rajah had gone out the evening before and had not returned.

'Ah!' said one, 'it is all right! Musli wazir will know where he is, for it was he who was the king's companion.'

Then they went to the wazir's house, and there they learnt that the wazir had left it the evening before and had not returned; 'but,' said a servant, 'Lena the banker will know where he is, for it was with him that Musli went.'

Then they visited the house of Lena, and there they learnt that the banker had gone out the evening before, and that he too had not returned; but the porter told them that he was accompanied by Dena the oil-seller, so he would know where they were.

So they departed to Dena's house, and Dena's wife met them with a torrent of reproaches and wailings, for Dena too had gone off the evening before to Lena's house and had not returned.

In vain they waited, and searched--never did any of the hapless four return to their homes; and the confused tale which was told by Dena's wife was the only clue to their fate.

To this day, in that country, when a greedy man has overreached himself, and lost all in grasping at too much, folks say:

'All has he lost!--neither Dena, nor Lena, nor Musli, nor Kahre remain.' And not five men in a hundred know how the proverb began, nor what it really signifies.

(Major Campbell, Feroshepore.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

THE FATE OF THE TURTLE

In a very hot country, far away to the east, was a beautiful little lake where two wild ducks made their home, and passed their days swimming and playing in its clear waters. They had it all to themselves, except for a turtle, who was many years older than they were, and had come there before them, and, luckily, instead of taking a dislike to the turtle, as so often happens when you have only one person to speak to, they became great friends, and spent most of the day in each other's company.

All went on smoothly and happily till one summer, when the rains failed and the sun shone so fiercely that every morning there was a little less water in the lake and a little more mud on the bank. The water-lilies around the edge began to droop, and the palms to hang their heads, and the ducks' favourite swimming place, where they could dive the deepest, to grow shallower and shallower. At length there came a morning when the ducks looked at each other uneasily, and before nightfall they had whispered that if at the end of two days rain had not come, they must fly away and seek a new home, for if they stayed in their old one, which they loved so much, they would certainly die of thirst.

Earnestly they watched the sky for many hours before they tucked their heads under their wings and fell asleep from sheer weariness, but not the tiniest cloud was to be seen covering the stars that shone so big and brilliant, and hung so low in the heavens that you felt as if you could touch them. So, when the morning broke, they made up their minds that they must go and tell the turtle of their plans, and bid him farewell.

They found him comfortably curled up on a pile of dead rushes, more than half asleep, for he was old, and could not venture out in the heat as he once used.

'Ah! here you are,' he cried; 'I began to wonder if I was ever going to see you again, for, somehow, though the lake has grown smaller, I seem to have grown weaker, and it is lonely spending all day and night by oneself!'

'Oh! my friend,' answered the elder of the two ducks, 'if you have suffered we have suffered also. Besides, I have something to tell you, that I fear will cause you greater pain still. If we do not wish to die of thirst we must leave this place at once, and seek another where the sun's rays do not come. My heart bleeds to say this, for there is nothing--nothing else in the world--which would have induced us to separate from you.'

The turtle was so astonished as well as so distressed at the duck's speech that for a moment he could find no words to reply. But when he had forced back his tears, he said in a shaky voice:

'How can you think that I am able to live without you, when for so long you have been my only friends? If you leave me, death will speedily put an end to my grief.'

'Our sorrow is as great as yours,' answered the other duck, 'but what can we do? And remember that if we are not here to drink the water, there will be the more for you! If it had not been for this terrible misfortune, be sure that nothing would have parted us from one whom we love so dearly.'

'My friends,' replied the turtle, 'water is as necessary to me as to you, and if death stares in your faces, it stares in mine also. But in the name of all the years we have passed together, do not, I beseech you, leave me to perish here alone! Wherever you may go take me with you!'

There was a pause. The ducks felt wretched at the thought of abandoning their old comrade, yet, at the same time, how could they grant his prayer? It seemed quite impossible, and at length one of them spoke:

'Oh, how can I find words to refuse?' cried he, 'yet how can we do what you ask? Consider that, like yours, our bodies are heavy and our feet small. Therefore, how could we walk with you over mountains and deserts, till we reached a land where the sun's rays no longer burn? Why, before the day was out we should all three be dead of fatigue and hunger! No, our only hope lies in our wings--and, alas! you cannot fly!'

'No, I cannot fly, of course,' answered the turtle, with a sigh. 'But you are so clever, and have seen so much of the world--surely you can think of some plan?' And he fixed his eyes eagerly on them. Now, when the ducks saw how ardently the turtle wished to accompany them their hearts were touched, and making a sign to their friend that they wished to be alone they swam out into the lake to consult together. Though he could not hear what they said, the turtle could watch, and the half-hour that their talk lasted felt to him like a hundred years. At length he beheld them returning side by side, and so great was his anxiety to know his fate he almost died from excitement before they reached him.

'We hope we have found a plan that may do for you,' said the big duck gravely, 'but we must warn you that it is not without great danger, especially if you are not careful to follow our directions.'

'How is it possible that I should not follow your directions when my life and happiness are at stake?' asked the turtle joyfully. 'Tell me what they are, and I will promise to obey them gratefully.'

'Well, then,' answered the duck, 'whilst we are carrying you through the air, in the manner that we have fixed upon, you must remain as quiet as if you were dead. However high above the earth you may find yourself, you must not feel afraid, nor move your feet nor open your mouth. No matter what you see or hear, it is absolutely needful for you to be perfectly still, or I cannot answer for the consequences.'

'I will be absolutely obedient,' answered the turtle, 'not only on this occasion but during all my life; and once more I promise faithfully not to move head or foot, to fear nothing, and never to speak a word during the whole journey.'

This being settled, the ducks swam about till they found, floating in the lake, a good stout stick. This they tied to their necks with some of the tough water-lily roots, and returned as quickly as they could to the turtle.

'Now,' said the elder duck, pushing the stick gently towards his friend, 'take this stick firmly in your mouth, and do not let it go till we have set you down on earth again.'

The turtle did as he was told, and the ducks in their turn seized the stick by the two ends, spread their wings and mounted swiftly into the air, the turtle hanging between them.

For a while all went well. They swept across valleys, over great mountains, above ruined cities, but no lake was to be seen anywhere. Still, the turtle had faith in his friends, and bravely hung on to the stick.

At length they saw in the distance a small village, and very soon they were passing over the roofs of the houses. The people were so astonished at the strange sight, that they all--men, women and children--ran out to see it, and cried to each other:

'Look! look! behold a miracle! Two ducks supporting a turtle! Was ever such a thing known before!' Indeed, so great was the surprise that men left their ploughing and women their weaving in order to add their voices to their friends'.

The ducks flew steadily on, heeding nothing of the commotion below; but not so the turtle. At first he kept silence, as he had been bidden to do, but at length the clamour below proved too much for him, and he began to think that everyone was envying him the power of travelling through the air. In an evil moment he forgot the promises he had made so solemnly, and opened his mouth to reply, but, before he could utter a word, he was rushing so swiftly through the air that he quickly became unconscious, and in this state was dashed to pieces against the side of a house. Then the ducks let fall after him the stick that had held up their friend, and which was of no further use. Sadly they looked at each other and shook their heads.

'We feared it would end so,' said they, 'yet, perhaps, he was right after all. Certainly this death was better than the one which awaited him.'

(From Les Contes et Fables Indiennes. Par M. Galland, 1724.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

THE SNAKE PRINCE

Once upon a time there lived by herself, in a city, an old woman who was desperately poor. One day she found that she had only a handful of flour left in the house, and no money to buy more nor hope of earning it. Carrying her little brass pot, very sadly she made her way down to the river to bathe and to obtain some water, thinking afterwards to come home and to make herself an unleavened cake of what flour she had left; and after that she did not know what was to become of her.

Whilst she was bathing she left her little brass pot on the river bank covered with a cloth, to keep the inside nice and clean; but when she came up out of the river and took the cloth off to fill the pot with water, she saw inside it the glittering folds of a deadly snake. At once she popped the cloth again into the mouth of the pot and held it there; and then she said to herself:

'Ah, kind death! I will take thee home to my house, and there I will shake thee out of my pot and thou shalt bite me and I will die, and then all my troubles will be ended.'

With these sad thoughts in her mind the poor old woman hurried home, holding her cloth carefully in the mouth of the pot; and when she got home she shut all the doors and windows, and took away the cloth, and turned the pot upside down upon her hearthstone. What was her surprise to find that, instead of the deadly snake which she expected to see fall out of it, there fell out with a rattle and a clang a most magnificent necklace of flashing jewels!

For a few minutes she could hardly think or speak, but stood staring; and then with trembling hands she picked the necklace up, and folding it in the corner of her veil, she hurried off to the king's hall of public audience.

'A petition, O king!' she said. 'A petition for thy private ear alone!' And when her prayer had been granted, and she found herself alone with the king, she shook out her veil at his feet, and there fell from it in glittering coils the splendid necklace. As soon as the king saw it he was filled with amazement and delight, and the more he looked at it the more he felt that he must possess it at once. So he gave the old woman five hundred silver pieces for it, and put it straightway into his pocket. Away she went full of happiness; for the money that the king had given her was enough to keep her for the rest of her life.

As soon as he could leave his business the king hurried off and showed his wife his prize, with which she was as pleased as he, if not more so; and, as soon as they had finished admiring the wonderful necklace, they locked it up in the great chest where the queen's jewellery was kept, the key of which hung always round the king's neck.

A short while afterwards, a neighbouring king sent a message to say that a most lovely girl baby had been born to him; and he invited his neighbours to come to a great feast in honour of the occasion. The queen told her husband that of course they must be present at the banquet, and she would wear the new necklace which he had given her. They had only a short time to prepare for the journey, and at the last moment the king went to the jewel chest to take out the necklace for his wife to wear, but he could see no necklace at all, only, in its place, a fat little boy baby crowing and shouting. The king was so astonished that he nearly fell backwards, but presently he found his voice, and called for his wife so loudly that she came running, thinking that the necklace must at least have been stolen.

'Look here! look!' cried the king, 'haven't we always longed for a son? And now heaven has sent us one!'

'What do you mean?' cried the queen. 'Are you mad?'

'Mad? no, I hope not,' shouted the king, dancing in excitement round the open chest. 'Come here, and look! Look what we've got instead of that necklace!'

Just then the baby let out a great crow of joy, as though he would like to jump up and dance with the king; and the queen gave a cry of surprise, and ran up and looked into the chest.

'Oh!' she gasped, as she looked at the baby, 'what a darling! Where could he have come from?'

'I'm sure I can't say,' said the king; 'all I know is that we locked up a necklace in the chest, and when I unlocked it just now there was no necklace, but a baby, and as fine a baby as ever was seen.'

By this time the queen had the baby in her arms. 'Oh, the blessed one!' she cried, 'fairer ornament for the bosom of a queen than any necklace that ever was wrought. Write,' she continued, 'write to our neighbour and say that we cannot come to his feast, for we have a feast of our own, and a baby of our own! Oh, happy day!'

So the visit was given up; and, in honour of the new baby, the bells of the city, and its guns, and its trumpets, and its people, small and great, had hardly any rest for a week; there was such a ringing, and banging, and blaring, and such fireworks, and feasting, and rejoicing, and merry-making, as had never been seen before.

A few years went by; and, as the king's boy baby and his neighbour's girl baby grew and throve, the two kings arranged that as soon as they were old enough they should marry; and so, with much signing of papers and agreements, and wagging of wise heads, and stroking of grey beards, the compact was made, and signed, and sealed, and lay waiting for its fulfilment. And this too came to pass; for, as soon as the prince and princess were eighteen years of age, the kings agreed that it was time for the wedding; and the young prince journeyed away to the neighbouring kingdom for his bride, and was there married to her with great and renewed rejoicings.

Now, I must tell you that the old woman who had sold the king the necklace had been called in by him to be the nurse of the young prince; and although she loved her charge dearly, and was a most faithful servant, she could not help talking just a little, and so, by-and-by, it began to be rumoured that there was some magic about the young prince's birth; and the rumour of course had come in due time to the ears of the parents of the princess. So now that she was going to be the wife of the prince, her mother (who was curious, as many other people are) said to her daughter on the eve of the ceremony:

'Remember that the first thing you must do is to find out what this story is about the prince. And in order to do it, you must not speak a word to him whatever he says until he asks you why you are silent; then you must ask him what the truth is about his magic birth; and until he tells you, you must not speak to him again.'

And the princess promised that she would follow her mother's advice.

Therefore when they were married, and the prince spoke to his bride, she did not answer him. He could not think what was the matter, but even about her old home she would not utter a word. At last he asked why she would not speak; and then she said:

'Tell me the secret of your birth.'

Then the prince was very sad and displeased, and although she pressed him sorely he would not tell her, but always reply:

'If I tell you, you will repent that ever you asked me.'

For several months they lived together; and it was not such a happy time for either as it ought to have been, for the secret was still a secret, and lay between them like a cloud between the sun and the earth, making what should be fair, dull and sad.

At length the prince could bear it no longer; so he said to his wife one day: 'At midnight I will tell you my secret if you still wish it; but you will repent it all your life.' However, the princess was overjoyed that she had succeeded, and paid no attention to his warnings.

That night the prince ordered horses to be ready for the princess and himself a little before midnight. He placed her on one, and mounted the other himself, and they rode together down to the river to the place where the old woman had first found the snake in her brass pot. There the prince drew rein and said sadly: 'Do you still insist that I should tell you my secret?' And the princess answered 'Yes.' 'If I do,' answered the prince, 'remember that you will regret it all your life.' But the princess only replied 'Tell me!'

'Then,' said the prince, 'know that I am the son of the king of a far country, but by enchantment I was turned into a snake.'

The word 'snake' was hardly out of his lips when he disappeared, and the princess heard a rustle and saw a ripple on the water; and in the faint moonlight she beheld a snake swimming into the river. Soon it disappeared and she was left alone. In vain she waited with beating heart for something to happen, and for the prince to come back to her. Nothing happened and no one came; only the wind mourned through the trees on the river bank, and the night birds cried, and a jackal howled in the distance, and the river flowed black and silent beneath her.

In the morning they found her, weeping and dishevelled, on the river bank; but no word could they learn from her or from anyone as to the fate of her husband. At her wish they built on the river bank a little house of black stone; and there she lived in mourning, with a few servants and guards to watch over her.

A long, long time passed by, and still the princess lived in mourning for her prince, and saw no one, and went nowhere away from her house on the river bank and the garden that surrounded it. One morning, when she woke up, she found a stain of fresh mud upon the carpet. She sent for the guards, who watched outside the house day and night, and asked them who had entered her room while she was asleep. They declared that no one could have entered, for they kept such careful watch that not even a bird could fly in without their knowledge; but none of them could explain the stain of mud. The next morning, again, the princess found another stain of wet mud, and she questioned everyone most carefully; but none could say how the mud came there. The third night the princess determined to lie awake herself and watch; and, for fear that she might fall asleep, she cut her finger with a penknife and rubbed salt into the cut, that the pain of it might keep her from sleeping. So she lay awake, and at midnight she saw a snake come wriggling along the ground with some mud from the river in its mouth; and when it came near the bed, it reared up its head and dropped its muddy head on the bedclothes. She was very frightened, but tried to control her fear, and called out:

'Who are you, and what do you here?'

And the snake answered:

'I am the prince, your husband, and I am come to visit you.'

Then the princess began to weep; and the snake continued:

'Alas! did I not say that if I told you my secret you would repent it? and have you not repented?'

'Oh, indeed!' cried the poor princess, 'I have repented it, and shall repent it all my life! Is there nothing I can do?'

And the snake answered:

'Yes, there is one thing, if you dared to do it.'

'Only tell me,' said the princess, 'and I will do anything!'

'Then,' replied the snake, 'on a certain night you must put a large bowl of milk and sugar in each of the four corners of this room. All the snakes in the river will come out to drink the milk, and the one that leads the way will be the queen of the snakes. You must stand in her way at the door, and say: "Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!" and perhaps she will do it. But if you are frightened, and do not stop her, you will never see me again.' And he glided away.

On the night of which the snake had told her, the princess got four large bowls of milk and sugar, and put one in each corner of the room, and stood in the doorway waiting. At midnight there was a great hissing and rustling from the direction of the river, and presently the ground appeared to be alive with horrible writhing forms of snakes, whose eyes glittered and forked tongues quivered as they moved on in the direction of the princess's house. Foremost among them was a huge, repulsive scaly creature that led the dreadful procession. The guards were so terrified that they all ran away; but the princess stood in the doorway, as white as death, and with her hands clasped tight together for fear she should scream or faint, and fail to do her part. As they came closer and saw her in the way, all the snakes raised their horrid heads and swayed them to and fro, and looked at her with wicked beady eyes, while their breath seemed to poison the very air. Still the princess stood firm, and, when the leading snake was within a few feet of her, she cried: 'Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!' Then all the rustling, writhing crowd of snakes seemed to whisper to one another 'Her husband? her husband?' But the queen of snakes moved on until her head was almost in the princess's face, and her little eyes seemed to flash fire. And still the princess stood in the doorway and never moved, but cried again: 'Oh, Queen of Snakes, Queen of Snakes, give me back my husband!' Then the queen of snakes replied: 'To-morrow you shall have him--to-morrow!' When she heard these words and knew that she had conquered, the princess staggered from the door, and sank upon her bed and fainted. As in a dream, she saw that her room was full of snakes, all jostling and squabbling over the bowls of milk until it was finished. And then they went away.

In the morning the princess was up early, and took off the mourning dress which she had worn for five whole years, and put on gay and beautiful clothes. And she swept the house and cleaned it, and adorned it with garlands and nosegays of sweet flowers and ferns, and prepared it as though she were making ready for her wedding. And when night fell she lit up the woods and gardens with lanterns, and spread a table as for a feast, and lit in the house a thousand wax candles. Then she waited for her husband, not knowing in what shape he would appear. And at midnight there came striding from the river the prince, laughing, but with tears in his eyes; and she ran to meet him, and threw herself into his arms, crying and laughing too.

So the prince came home; and the next day they two went back to the palace, and the old king wept with joy to see them. And the bells, so long silent, were set a-ringing again, and the guns firing, and the trumpets blaring, and there was fresh feasting and rejoicing.

And the old woman who had been the prince's nurse became nurse to the prince's children--at least she was called so; though she was far too old to do anything for them but love them. Yet she still thought that she was useful, and knew that she was happy. And happy, indeed, were the prince and princess, who in due time became king and queen, and lived and ruled long and prosperously.

(Major Campbell, Feroshepore.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

THE PRINCE AND PRINCESS IN THE FOREST

There were, once upon a time, a king and queen of Denmark who had an only son, a handsome and clever lad. When he was eighteen, his father, the old king, fell very ill, and there was no hope that he would ever get well again. The queen and the prince were very unhappy, for they loved him dearly; but though they did all they could, he only grew worse and worse, and, one day, when the summer had come and the birds were singing, he raised his head and, taking a long look out of the window, fell back dead.

During many weeks the queen could hardly eat or sleep, so sorely did she grieve for him, and the prince feared that she would die also if she went on weeping; so he begged her to go with him to a beautiful place that he knew of on the other side of the forest, and after some time she consented. The prince was overjoyed, and arranged that they should set off early next morning.

They travelled all day, only stopping now and then to rest, and already the queen began to be better and to take a little interest in the things she saw. Just as the evening was coming on they entered the forest. Here it was quite dark, for the trees grew so close together that the sun could not shine through them, and very soon they lost the path, and wandered helplessly about wondering what they should do.

'If we sleep in this dreadful place,' said the queen, who was tired and frightened, 'the wild beasts will eat us.' And she began to cry.

'Cheer up, mother,' answered her son, 'I have a feeling that luck is coming to us.' And at the next turning they came to a little house, in the window of which a light was burning.

'Didn't I tell you so?' cried the prince. 'Stay here a moment and I will go and see if I can get food and shelter for the night.' And away he ran as fast as he could go, for by this time they were very hungry, as they had brought very little food with them and had eaten up every scrap! When one takes a long journey on foot one does not like to have too much to carry.

The prince entered the house and looked about him, going from one room to the other, but seeing nobody and finding nothing to eat. At last, as he was going sorrowfully away, he caught sight of a sword and shirt of mail hanging on the wall in an inner room, with a piece of paper fastened under them. On the paper was some writing, which said that whoever wore the coat and carried the sword would be safe from all danger.

The prince was so delighted at the sight that he forgot how hungry he was, and instantly slipped on the coat of chain armour under his tunic, and hid the sword under his cloak, for he did not mean to say anything about what he had found. Then he went back to his mother, who was waiting impatiently for him.

'What have you been doing all this time?' she asked angrily. 'I thought you had been killed by robbers!'

'Oh, just looking round,' he answered; 'but though I searched everywhere I could find nothing to eat.'

'I am very much afraid that it is a robbers' den,' said the queen. 'We had better go on, hungry though we are.'

'No, it isn't; but still, we had better not stay here,' replied the prince, 'especially as there is nothing to eat. Perhaps we shall find another house.'

They went on for some time, until, sure enough, they came to another house, which also had a light in the window.

'We'll go in here,' said the prince.

'No, no; I am afraid!' cried the queen. 'We shall be attacked and killed! It is a robbers' den: I am sure it is!'

'Yes, it looks like it; but we can't help that,' said her son. 'We have had nothing to eat for hours, and I'm nearly as tired as you.'

The poor queen was, indeed, quite worn out; she could hardly stand for fatigue, and in spite of her terror was half anxious to be persuaded.

'And there's going to be a storm,' added the prince; who feared nothing now that he had the sword.

So they went into the house, where they found nobody. In the first room stood a table laid for a meal, with all sorts of good things to eat and drink, though some of the dishes were empty.

'Well, this looks nice,' said the prince, sitting down and helping himself to some delicious strawberries piled on a golden dish, and some iced lemonade. Never had anything tasted so nice; but, all the same, it was a robbers' den they had come to, and the robbers, who had only just dined, had gone out into the forest to see whom they could rob.

When the queen and the prince could eat no more they remembered that they were very tired, and the prince looked about till he discovered a comfortable bed, with silken sheets, standing in the next room.

'You get into bed, mother,' he said, 'and I'll lie down by the side. Don't be alarmed; you can sleep quite safely till the morning.' And he lay down with his sword in his hand, and kept watch until the day began to break; then the queen woke up and said she was quite rested and ready to start again.

'First I'll go out into the forest and see if I can find our road,' said the prince. 'And while I'm gone you light the fire and make some coffee. We must eat a good breakfast before we start.'

And he ran off into the wood.

After he had gone the queen lit the fire, and then thought she would like to see what was in the other rooms; so she went from one to another, and presently came to one that was very prettily furnished, with lovely pictures on the walls, and pale blue curtains and soft yellow cushions and comfortable easy chairs. As she was looking at all these things, suddenly a trap-door opened in the floor, and the robber-chief came out of the hole and seized her ankles. The queen almost died of fright, and shrieked loudly, then fell on her knees and begged him to spare her life.

'Yes, if you will promise me two things,' he replied; 'first that you will take me home to your country and let me be crowned king instead of your son; and secondly, that you will kill him in case he should try to take the throne from me--if you will not agree to this I shall kill you.'

'Kill my own son!' gasped the queen, staring at him in horror.

'You need not do that exactly,' said the robber. 'When he returns, just lie on the bed and say that you have been taken ill, and add that you have dreamed that in a forest, a mile away, there are some beautiful apples. If you could only get some of these you would be well again, but if not you will die.'

The queen shuddered as she listened. She was fond of her son, but she was a terrible coward; and so in the end she agreed, hoping that something would occur to save the prince. She had hardly given her promise when a step was heard, and the robber hastily hid himself.

'Well, mother,' cried the prince as he entered, 'I have been through the forest and found the road, so we will start directly we have had some breakfast.'

'Oh, I feel so ill!' said the queen. 'I could not walk a single step; and there is only one thing that will cure me.'

'What is that?' asked the prince.

'I dreamed,' answered the queen, in a faint voice, 'that, a mile away, there is a forest where the most beautiful apples grow, and if I could have some of them I should soon be well again.'

'Oh! but dreams don't mean anything,' said the prince. 'There is a magician who lives near here. I'll go to him and ask for a spell to cure you.'

'My dreams always mean something,' said the queen, shaking her head. 'If I don't get any apples I shall die.' She did not know why the robber wanted to send the prince to this particular forest, but as a matter of fact it was full of wild animals who would tear to pieces any traveller who entered it.

'Well, I'll go,' answered the prince. 'But I really must have some breakfast first; I shall walk all the faster.'

'If you do not hurry you will find me dead when you come back,' murmured the queen fretfully. She thought her son was not nearly anxious enough about her, and by this time she had begun to believe that she really was as ill as she had said.

* * * * *

When the prince had eaten and drunk, he set off, and soon came to a forest, and sure enough it was full of lions and tigers, and bears and wolves, who came rushing towards him; but instead of springing on him and tearing him to pieces, they lay down on the ground and licked his hands. He speedily found the tree with the apples which his mother wanted, but the branches were so high he could not reach them, and there was no way of climbing up the smooth trunk.

'It is no use after all, I can't get up there,' he said to himself. 'What am I to do now?'

But, as he turned away, his sword chanced to touch the tree, and immediately two apples fell down. He picked them up joyfully, and was going away when a little dog came out of a hill close by, and running up to him, began tugging at his clothes and whining.

'What do you want, little dog?' asked the prince, stooping down to pat his soft black head.

The dog ran to a hole that was in the hill and sat there looking out, as much as to say: 'Come along in with me.'

'I may as well go and see what is in there,' thought the prince, and he went over to the hill. But the hole was so small that he could not get through it, so he thrust his sword into it, and immediately it became larger.

'Ha, ha!' he chuckled; 'it's worth something to have a sword like that.' And he bent down and crept through the hole.

The first thing he beheld, when he entered a room at the very end of a dark passage, was a beautiful princess, who was bound by an iron chain to an iron pillar.

'What evil fate brought you here?' he asked in surprise: and the lady answered:

'It isn't much use for me to tell you lest my lot becomes yours.'

'I am not afraid of that. Tell me who you are and what has brought you here,' begged the prince.

'My story is not long,' she said, smiling sadly. 'I am a princess from Arabia, and twelve robbers who dwell in this place are fighting among themselves as to which shall have me to wife.'

'Shall I save you?' asked the prince. And she answered:

'Yes; but you can't do it. To begin with, how could you break the chain I am bound with?'

'Oh, that's easy enough,' said he, taking out his sword; and directly it touched the chain the links fell apart and the princess was free.

'Come!' said the prince, taking her hand. But she drew back.

'No, I dare not!' she cried. 'If we should meet the robbers in the passage they would kill us both.'

'Not they!' said the prince, brandishing his sword. 'But how long have you been here?' he added quickly.

'About twenty years, I think,' said the princess, reckoning with her fingers.

'Twenty years!' exclaimed the prince. 'Then you had better shut your eyes, for when you have been sitting there so long it might hurt you to go too suddenly into the daylight. So you are the Princess of Arabia, whose beauty is famous throughout all the world! I, too, am a prince.'

'Will you not come back to Arabia and marry me, now you have saved my life?' asked the princess. 'Even if my father is living still, he must be old, and after his death you can be king.'

'No,' replied the prince, 'I cannot do that--I must live and die in my own country. But at the end of a year I will follow you and marry you.' And that was all he would say.

Then the princess took a heavy ring from her finger and put it on his. Her father's and her mother's names were engraved in it, as well as her own, and she asked him to keep it as a reminder of his promise.

'I will die before I part from it,' said the prince. 'And if at the end of a year I am still living, I will come. I believe I have heard that at the other side of this forest there is a port from which ships sail to Arabia. Let us hasten there at once.'

Hand in hand they set off through the forest, and when they came to the port they found a ship just ready to sail. The princess said good-bye to the prince, and went on board the vessel, and when she reached her own country there were great rejoicings, for her parents had never expected to see her again. She told them how a prince had saved her from the robbers, and was coming in a year's time to marry her, and they were greatly pleased.

'All the same,' said the king, 'I wish he were here now. A year is a long time.'

When the princess was no longer before his eyes, the prince recollected why he had entered the forest, and made all the haste he could back to the robbers' home.

The robber-chief could smell the apples from afar, for he had a nose like an ogre, and he said to the queen:

'That is a strange fellow! If he had gone into the forest the wild beasts must have eaten him unless he has a powerful charm to protect him. If that is so we must get it away from him.'

'No, he has nothing,' answered the queen, who was quite fascinated by the robber.

But the robber did not believe her.

'We must think of a way to get it,' he said. 'When he comes in say you are well again, and have some food ready for him. Then, whilst he is eating, tell him you dreamed that he was attacked by wild beasts, and ask him how he managed to escape from them. After he has told you I can easily find a way to take his charm from him.'

Shortly after the prince came in.

'How are you, mother!' he said gaily. 'Here are your apples. Now you will soon be well again, and ready to come away with me.'

'Oh, I am better already,' she said. 'And see, your dinner is all hot for you, eat it up, and then we will start.'

Whilst he was eating she said to him: 'I had a horrible dream while you were away. I saw you in a forest full of wild animals, and they were running round you and growling fiercely. How did you manage to escape from them?'

'Oh, it was only a dream!' laughed the prince.

'But my dreams are always true,' said his mother. 'Tell me how it was.'

The prince wondered for some time whether he should tell her or not, but at last he decided to let her into the secret.

'One should tell one's mother everything,' he thought. And he told her.

'See, mother, here are a sword and a mail shirt which I found in the first house we entered in the forest, and as long as I carry them nothing can hurt me. That is what saved me from the wild beasts.'

'How can I be thankful enough!' exclaimed the queen. And directly the prince's back was turned, she hurried to tell the robber.

* * * * *

The robber, as soon as he heard the news, made a sleeping-draught, and bade the queen give it to her son before he went to bed that night.

Accordingly, as soon as the prince began to get sleepy, the queen handed him the cup containing the draught.

'Drink this, to please me,' she said. 'It will do you good after all you've gone through, and make you sleep well.'

'What an odd taste it has!' murmured the prince as he drank it.

Immediately he fell asleep; and the robber came in and took away his sword and shirt of mail.

'These things belong to my brother,' he said. After he had got them both in his hand the robber woke him.

'I am the master now,' said he. 'Choose one of two things--either you must die, or your eyes will be put out, and you will be sent back to the forest.'

The prince's blood grew cold at these words. Then a thought struck him, and he turned to his mother: 'Is this your doing?' he asked sternly. And though she burst into tears and denied it, the prince knew she was not telling the truth.

'Well,' said he, '"whilst there is life there is hope." I will go back to the forest.'

Then the robber put out his eyes, gave him a stick, and some food and drink, and drove him into the forest, hoping that the wild beasts would kill him, as he no longer had the sword and shirt to protect him.

'Now,' he said to the queen, 'we will return to your country.'

The next day they set sail, and as soon as they reached home, they were married, and the robber became king.

Meanwhile the poor prince was wandering about in the forest, hoping to find someone who would help him, and perhaps take him into service, for now he had no money and no home. It so happened that there had been a great hunt in the forest, and the wild beasts had all fled before the hunters and were hiding, so nothing did him any harm. At last one day, just when his food was all gone and he had made up his mind that he must surely die of hunger, he came to the port whence the ships sailed for Arabia. One vessel was just ready to start, and the captain was going on board when he saw the prince.

'Why, here is a poor blind fellow!' he said. 'No doubt that is the work of the robbers. Let us take him to Arabia with us. Would you like to come, my good man?' he asked the prince.

Oh, how glad he was to hear someone speak kindly to him again! And he answered that he would, and the sailors helped him to climb up the side of the ship. When they got to Arabia the captain took him to the public baths, and ordered one of the slaves to wash him. Whilst he was being washed the princess's ring slipped off his finger and was afterwards found by the slave who cleaned out the bath. The man showed it to a friend of his who lived at the palace.

'Why, it is the princess's ring!' he said. 'Where did it come from?'

'It fell off a blind man's finger,' said the slave. 'He must have stolen it; but I dare say you will be able to return it to the princess.'

So that evening the man took the ring to the palace and gave it to his daughter, who was the princess's favourite slave, and the girl gave it to her mistress. When the princess saw it she uttered a cry of joy.

'It is the ring I gave my betrothed!' she said. 'Take me to him at once.'

The bath-keeper thought it strange that the princess should be betrothed to a blind beggar, but he did as she bade him, and when she saw the prince she cried:

'At last you have come! The year is over, and I thought you were dead. Now we will be married immediately.' And she went home and told the king that he was to send an escort to bring her betrothed to the palace. Naturally the king was rather surprised at the sudden arrival of the prince; but when he heard that he was blind he was very much annoyed.

'I cannot have a blind person to succeed me,' he said. 'It is perfectly absurd!'

But the princess had had her own way all her life, and in the end the king gave way as he had always done. The prince was taken to the palace with much ceremony and splendour; but in spite of this the king was not contented. Still, it could not be helped, and really it was time the princess was married, though she looked as young as ever. There had been hundreds of knights and princes who had begged her to bestow her hand upon them, but she would have nothing to do with anyone; and now she had taken it into her head to marry this blind prince, and nobody else would she have.

* * * * *

One evening, as it was fine, the prince and princess went into the garden, and sat down under a tree.

Two ravens were perched on a bush near by, and the prince, who could understand bird language, heard one of them say: 'Do you know that it is Midsummer-eve to-night?'

'Yes,' said the other.

'And do you know that part of the garden which is known as the Queen's Bed?'

'Yes.'

'Well, perhaps you don't know this, that whoever has bad eyes, or no eyes at all, should bathe his eye-sockets in the dew that falls there to-night, because then he will get his sight back. Only he must do it between twelve and one o'clock.'

That was good news for the prince and princess to hear, and the young man begged the princess to lead him to the place called the Queen's Bed, which was the little plot of grass where the queen used often to lie down and take her midday nap. Then, between twelve and one o'clock, he bathed his eyes with the dew that was falling there, and found he could see again as well as ever.

'I can see you!' he said to the princess, gazing at her as if he had never seen anything before.

'I don't believe it,' she answered.

'Well, go and hang your handkerchief on a bush, and if I find it at once you must believe me,' he said.

And so she did, and he went straight up to the handkerchief.

'Yes, indeed, you can see,' cried the princess. 'To think that my mother's bed has really given back your sight!' and she went to the bank and sat down again; and by-and-by, as the day was hot, the princess fell asleep. As the prince watched her he suddenly saw something shining on her neck. It was a little golden lamp that gave out a bright light, and it hung from a golden chain. The prince thought he would like to examine it more closely, so he unfastened the chain, but as he did so the lamp fell to the ground. Before he could pick it up a hawk flew in, snatched up the little lamp and flew away again with it. The prince set off in pursuit, and ran on and on without being able to catch the bird, until at length he had lost his way. Trying to find it, he wandered on, up and down, until he came to the forest where he had found the princess.

Meantime, the princess woke up, and finding herself alone she set out to look for him. In the end she also lost her way, and as she was walking about, not knowing what to do, the robbers captured her and took her back to the cave from which the prince had rescued her. So there they were after all their trouble--no better off than before!

The prince wandered on, trying to find his way back to Arabia, until he chanced one day to meet twelve youths, walking gaily through the forest, singing and laughing. 'Where are you going?' he asked. And they told him they were looking for work.

'I'll join you, if I may,' said the prince. And they answered: 'The more the merrier.'

Then the prince went with them, and they all journeyed on until they met an old troll.

'Where are you going, my masters?' asked the troll.

'To seek service,' they told him.

'Then come and serve me,' he said; 'there will be plenty to eat and drink, and not much work to do, and if, at the end of a year, you can answer three questions, I'll give you each a sack of gold. Otherwise you must be turned into beasts.'

The youths thought this sounded easy enough, so they went home with the troll to his castle.

'You will find all that you want here,' he said; 'and all you need do is to take care of the house, for I am going away, and shall only return when the year is over.'

Then he went away, and the young men, left to themselves, had a fine time of it; for they did no work, and only amused themselves with singing and drinking. Every day they found the table laid with good things to eat and drink, and when they had finished, the plates and dishes were cleared away by invisible hands. Only the prince, who was sad for his lost princess, ate and drank sparingly, and worked hard keeping the house in order.

One day, as he sat in his own room, he heard the voice of the old troll beneath his window talking to another troll.

'To-morrow,' said he, 'the year is up.'

'And what questions will you ask?' inquired the other.

'First I shall ask how long they have been here--they don't know, the young fools! Secondly I shall ask what shines on the roof of the castle.'

'And what is that?'

'The lamp that was stolen by me from the princess as she slept in the garden.'

'And what is the third question?'

'I shall ask where the food and drink they consume every day come from. I steal it from the king's table; but they don't know that.'

* * * * *

The day after, the troll entered.

'Now I shall ask my questions,' said he. 'To begin with: How long have you been here?'

The young men had been so busy drinking and making merry that they had forgotten all about the agreement, so they remained silent.

'One week,' said one, at last.

'Two months,' guessed another. But the prince answered, 'One year.'

'Right,' replied the troll. But the second question was more difficult.

'What is it that shines on the roof?'

The young men guessed and guessed. 'The sun--the moon.' But none of them really knew.

'May I answer?' asked the prince.

'Yes, certainly,' replied the troll; and the prince spoke.

'The lamp that you stole from the princess whilst she was asleep in the garden.' And again the troll nodded.

The third question was harder still.

'Where does the meat and drink you have had here come from?'

None of the young men could guess.

'May I say?' asked the prince.

'Yes, if you can,' replied the troll.

'It comes from the king's table,' said the prince.

And that was all. Now they might take the sacks of gold and go, and the young men went off in such a hurry that the prince was left behind. Presently, they met an old man who asked for money.

'No, we haven't any,' they answered.

So they hurried on, and by-and-by up came the prince.

'Has your lordship a piece of money for a poor man?' asked the old fellow.

'Yes,' said the prince, and gave him his whole sackful.

'I don't want it,' said the old man, who was really the troll they had just left in disguise. 'But since you're so generous, here is the princess's lamp, and the princess herself is in the cave where you found her; but how you're going to save her again without the magic sword I don't know.'

When he heard that, the prince knew where she was; and that was the beginning of her rescue. So he disguised himself to look like a peddler and travelled on until he reached his own city, where his mother, the queen, and the robber-chief were living. Then he went in to a goldsmith's shop and ordered a great number of kitchen pots to be made out of pure gold. That was not an order the goldsmith had every day, but the things were ready at last, saucepans and kettles and gridirons all of pure gold. Then the prince put them in his basket and went up to the palace, and asked to see the queen.

Directly she heard about the wonderful gold pots and pans she came out at once, and began unpacking the basket and admiring the things. She was so absorbed in them that the prince soon found an opportunity to steal into the bedroom and take the sword and shirt which were hung there, and go back again without his mother having noticed his absence.

'The things are all beautiful!' she said. 'How much would you take for them?'

'Name your own price, your majesty,' answered the prince.

'I really don't know what to say,' said the queen. 'Wait till my husband comes back--men understand such things better; and then, as you are a stranger, he would like to chat with you a little.' The prince bowed, and waited silently in a corner.

* * * * *

Soon after the robber returned.

'Come and see all these lovely gold saucepans!' cried the queen.

But, as the robber entered the room, the prince touched him with the magic sword, and he fell to the ground.

'Perhaps, now you know me, mother,' the prince said, taking off his disguise, 'you had better repent for all the wrong you have done me, or your life will be short.'

'Oh, have mercy!' she cried, 'I could not help it. I was so frightened.'

The prince had mercy. He ordered the wicked king to be stripped of his fine clothes, and to be driven into the forest, where the wild beasts tore him to pieces. The queen he sent to her own country. Then he set off for the cave where the princess was sitting chained as before, and with the help of the magic sword he rescued her again without any difficulty. They soon reached the port and set sail for Arabia, where they were married; and till they died, a long while after, they reigned happily over both countries.

(From Eventyr fra Gylbauck samlede og optegnede af Evald Tang Kristensen. Translated from the Danish by Mrs. Skovgaard-Pedersen.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

THE CLEVER WEAVER

Once upon a time the king of a far country was sitting on his throne, listening to the complaints of his people, and judging between them. That morning there had been fewer cases than usual to deal with, and the king was about to rise and go into his gardens, when a sudden stir was heard outside, and the lord high chamberlain entered, and inquired if his majesty would be graciously pleased to receive the ambassador of a powerful emperor who lived in the east, and was greatly feared by the neighbouring sovereigns. The king, who stood as much in dread of him as the rest, gave orders that the envoy should be admitted at once, and that a banquet should be prepared in his honour. Then he settled himself again on his throne, wondering what the envoy had to say.

The envoy said nothing. He advanced to the throne where the king was awaiting him, and stooping down, traced on the floor with a rod which he held in his hand a black circle all round it. Then he sat down on a seat that was near, and took no further notice of anyone.

The king and his courtiers were equally mystified and enraged at this strange behaviour, but the envoy sat as calm and still as an image, and it soon became plain that they would get no explanation from him. The ministers were hastily summoned to a council, but not one of them could throw any light upon the subject. This made the king more angry than ever, and he told them that unless before sunset they could find someone capable of solving the mystery he would hang them all.

The king was, as the ministers knew, a man of his word; and they quickly mapped out the city into districts, so that they might visit house by house, and question the occupants as to whether they could fathom the action of the ambassador. Most of them received no reply except a puzzled stare; but, luckily, one of them was more observant than the rest, and on entering an empty cottage where a swing was swinging of itself, he began to think it might be worth while for him to see the owner. Opening a door leading into another room, he found a second swing, swinging gently like the first, and from the window he beheld a patch of corn, and a willow which moved perpetually without any wind, in order to frighten away the sparrows. Feeling more and more curious, he descended the stairs and found himself in a large light workshop in which was seated a weaver at his loom. But all the weaver did was to guide his threads, for the machine that he had invented to set in motion the swings and the willow pole made the loom work.

When he saw the great wheel standing in the corner, and had guessed the use of it, the merchant heaved a sigh of relief. At any rate, if the weaver could not guess the riddle, he at least might put the minister on the right track. So without more ado he told the story of the circle, and ended by declaring that the person who could explain its meaning should be handsomely rewarded.

'Come with me at once,' he said. 'The sun is low in the heavens, and there is no time to lose.'

The weaver stood thinking for a moment and then walked across to a window, outside of which was a hen-coop with two knuckle-bones lying beside it. These he picked up, and taking the hen from the coop, he tucked it under his arm.

'I am ready,' he answered, turning to the minister.

In the hall the king still sat on his throne, and the envoy on his seat. Signing to the minister to remain where he was, the weaver advanced to the envoy, and placed the knuckle-bones on the floor beside him. For answer, the envoy took a handful of millet seed out of his pocket and scattered it round; upon which the weaver set down the hen, who ate it up in a moment. At that the envoy rose without a word, and took his departure.

As soon as he had left the hall, the king beckoned to the weaver.

'You alone seem to have guessed the riddle,' said he, 'and great shall be your reward. But tell me, I pray you, what it all means?'

'The meaning, O king,' replied the weaver, 'is this: The circle drawn by the envoy round your throne is the message of the emperor, and signifies, "If I send an army and surround your capital, will you lay down your arms?" The knuckle-bones which I placed before him told him, "You are but children in comparison with us. Toys like these are the only playthings you are fit for." The millet that he scattered was an emblem of the number of soldiers that his master can bring into the field; but by the hen which ate up the seed he understood that one of our men could destroy a host of theirs.'

'I do not think,' he added, 'that the emperor will declare war.'

'You have saved me and my honour,' cried the king, 'and wealth and glory shall be heaped upon you. Name your reward, and you shall have it even to the half of my kingdom.'

'The small farm outside the city gates, as a marriage portion for my daughter, is all I ask,' answered the weaver, and it was all he would accept. 'Only, O king,' were his parting words, 'I would beg of you to remember that weavers also are of value to a state, and that they are sometimes cleverer even than ministers!'

(From Contes Armeniens. Par Frederic Macler.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

THE BOY WHO FOUND FEAR AT LAST

Once upon a time there lived a woman who had one son whom she loved dearly. The little cottage in which they dwelt was built on the outskirts of a forest, and as they had no neighbours, the place was very lonely, and the boy was kept at home by his mother to bear her company.

They were sitting together on a winter's evening, when a storm suddenly sprang up, and the wind blew the door open. The woman started and shivered, and glanced over her shoulder as if she half expected to see some horrible thing behind her. 'Go and shut the door,' she said hastily to her son, 'I feel frightened.'

'Frightened?' repeated the boy. 'What does it feel like to be frightened?'

'Well--just frightened,' answered the mother. 'A fear of something, you hardly know what, takes hold of you.'

'It must be very odd to feel like that,' replied the boy. 'I will go through the world and seek fear till I find it.' And the next morning, before his mother was out of bed, he had left the forest behind him.

After walking for some hours he reached a mountain, which he began to climb. Near the top, in a wild and rocky spot, he came upon a band of fierce robbers, sitting round a fire. The boy, who was cold and tired, was delighted to see the bright flames, so he went up to them and said, 'Good greeting to you, sirs,' and wriggled himself in between the men, till his feet almost touched the burning logs.

The robbers stopped drinking and eyed him curiously, and at last the captain spoke.

'No caravan of armed men would dare to come here, even the very birds shun our camp, and who are you to venture in so boldly?'

'Oh, I have left my mother's house in search of fear. Perhaps you can show it to me?'

'Fear is wherever we are,' answered the captain.

'But where?' asked the boy, looking round. 'I see nothing.' 'Take this pot and some flour and butter and sugar over to the churchyard which lies down there, and bake us a cake for supper,' replied the robber. And the boy, who was by this time quite warm, jumped up cheerfully, and slinging the pot over his arm, ran down the hill.

When he got to the churchyard he collected some sticks and made a fire; then he filled the pot with water from a little stream close by, and mixing the flour and butter and sugar together, he set the cake on to cook. It was not long before it grew crisp and brown, and then the boy lifted it from the pot and placed it on a stone, while he put out the fire. At that moment a hand was stretched from a grave, and a voice said:

'Is that cake for me?'

'Do you think I am going to give to the dead the food of the living?' replied the boy, with a laugh. And giving the hand a tap with his spoon, and picking up the cake, he went up the mountain side, whistling merrily.

'Well, have you found fear?' asked the robbers when he held out the cake to the captain.

'No; was it there?' answered the boy. 'I saw nothing but a hand which came from a grave, and belonged to someone who wanted my cake, but I just rapped the fingers with my spoon, and said it was not for him, and then the hand vanished. Oh, how nice the fire is!' And he flung himself on his knees before it, and so did not notice the glances of surprise cast by the robbers at each other.

'There is another chance for you,' said one at length. 'On the other side of the mountain lies a deep pool; go to that, and perhaps you may meet fear on the way.'

'I hope so, indeed,' answered the boy. And he set out at once.

He soon beheld the waters of the pool gleaming in the moonlight, and as he drew near he saw a tall swing standing just over it, and in the swing a child was seated, weeping bitterly.

'That is a strange place for a swing,' thought the boy; 'but I wonder what he is crying about.' And he was hurrying on towards the child, when a maiden ran up and spoke to him.

'I want to lift my little brother from the swing,' cried she, 'but it is so high above me, that I cannot reach. If you will get closer to the edge of the pool, and let me mount on your shoulder, I think I can reach him.'

'Willingly,' replied the boy, and in an instant the girl had climbed to his shoulders. But instead of lifting the child from the swing, as she could easily have done, she pressed her feet so firmly on either side of the youth's neck, that he felt that in another minute he would be choked, or else fall into the water beneath him. So gathering up all his strength, he gave a mighty heave, and threw the girl backwards. As she touched the ground a bracelet fell from her arm, and this the youth picked up.

'I may as well keep it as a remembrance of all the queer things that have happened to me since I left home,' he said to himself, and turning to look for the child, he saw that both it and the swing had vanished, and that the first streaks of dawn were in the sky.

With the bracelet on his arm, the youth started for a little town which was situated in the plain on the further side of the mountain, and as, hungry and thirsty, he entered its principal street, a Jew stopped him. 'Where did you get that bracelet?' asked the Jew. 'It belongs to me.'

'No, it is mine,' replied the boy.

'It is not. Give it to me at once, or it will be the worse for you!' cried the Jew.

'Let us go before a judge, and tell him our stories,' said the boy. 'If he decides in your favour, you shall have it; if in mine, I will keep it!'

To this the Jew agreed, and the two went together to the great hall, in which the kadi was administering justice. He listened very carefully to what each had to say, and then pronounced his verdict. Neither of the two claimants had proved his right to the bracelet, therefore it must remain in the possession of the judge till its fellow was brought before him.

When they heard this, the Jew and the boy looked at each other, and their eyes said: 'Where are we to go to find the other one?' But as they knew there was no use in disputing the decision, they bowed low and left the hall of audience.

* * * * *

Wandering he knew not whither, the youth found himself on the sea-shore. At a little distance was a ship which had struck on a hidden rock, and was rapidly sinking, while on deck the crew were gathered, with faces white as death, shrieking and wringing their hands.

'Have you met with fear?' shouted the boy. And the answer came above the noise of the waves.

'Oh, help! help! We are drowning!'

Then the boy flung off his clothes, and swam to the ship, where many hands were held out to draw him on board.

'The ship is tossed hither and thither, and will soon be sucked down,' cried the crew again. 'Death is very near, and we are frightened!'

'Give me a rope,' said the boy in reply, and he took it, and made it safe round his body at one end, and to the mast at the other, and sprang into the sea. Down he went, down, down, down, till at last his feet touched the bottom, and he stood up and looked about him. There, sure enough, a sea-maiden with a wicked face was tugging hard at a chain which she had fastened to the ship with a grappling iron, and was dragging it bit by bit beneath the waves. Seizing her arms in both his hands, he forced her to drop the chain, and the ship above remaining steady, the sailors were able gently to float her off the rock. Then taking a rusty knife from a heap of seaweed at his feet, he cut the rope round his waist and fastened the sea-maiden firmly to a stone, so that she could do no more mischief, and bidding her farewell, he swam back to the beach, where his clothes were still lying.

The youth dressed himself quickly and walked on till he came to a beautiful shady garden filled with flowers, and with a clear little stream running through. The day was hot, and he was tired, so he entered the gate, and seated himself under a clump of bushes covered with sweet-smelling red blossoms, and it was not long before he fell asleep. Suddenly a rush of wings and a cool breeze awakened him, and raising his head cautiously, he saw three doves plunging into the stream. They splashed joyfully about, and shook themselves, and then dived to the bottom of a deep pool. When they appeared again they were no longer three doves, but three beautiful damsels, bearing between them a table made of mother of pearl. On this they placed drinking cups fashioned from pink and green shells, and one of the maidens filled a cup from a crystal goblet, and was raising it to her mouth, when her sister stopped her.

'To whose health do you drink?' asked she.

'To the youth who prepared the cake, and rapped my hand with the spoon when I stretched it out of the earth,' answered the maiden, 'and was never afraid as other men were! But to whose health do you drink?'

'To the youth on whose shoulders I climbed at the edge of the pool, and who threw me off with such a jerk, that I lay unconscious on the ground for hours,' replied the second. 'But you, my sister,' added she, turning to the third girl, 'to whom do you drink?'

'Down in the sea I took hold of a ship and shook it and pulled it till it would soon have been lost,' said she. And as she spoke she looked quite different from what she had done with the chain in her hands, seeking to work mischief. 'But a youth came, and freed the ship and bound me to a rock. To his health I drink,' and they all three lifted their cups and drank silently.

As they put their cups down, the youth appeared before them.

'Here am I, the youth whose health you have drunk; and now give me the bracelet that matches a jewelled band which of a surety fell from the arm of one of you. A Jew tried to take it from me, but I would not let him have it, and he dragged me before the kadi, who kept my bracelet till I could show him its fellow. And I have been wandering hither and thither in search of it, and that is how I have found myself in such strange places.'

'Come with us, then,' said the maidens, and they led him down a passage into a hall, out of which opened many chambers, each one of greater splendour than the last. From a shelf heaped up with gold and jewels the eldest sister took a bracelet, which in every way was exactly like the one which was in the judge's keeping, and fastened it to the youth's arm.

'Go at once and show this to the kadi,' said she, 'and he will give you the fellow to it.'

'I shall never forget you,' answered the youth, 'but it may be long before we meet again, for I shall never rest till I have found fear.' Then he went his way, and won the bracelet from the kadi. After this, he again set forth in his quest of fear.

On and on walked the youth, but fear never crossed his path, and one day he entered a large town, where all the streets and squares were so full of people, he could hardly pass between them.

'Why are all these crowds gathered together?' he asked of a man who stood next him.

'The ruler of this country is dead,' was the reply, 'and as he had no children, it is needful to choose a successor. Therefore each morning one of the sacred pigeons is let loose from the tower yonder, and on whomsoever the bird shall perch, that man is our king. In a few minutes the pigeon will fly. Wait and see what happens.'

Every eye was fixed on the tall tower which stood in the centre of the chief square, and the moment that the sun was seen to stand straight over it, a door was opened and a beautiful pigeon, gleaming with pink and grey, blue and green, came rushing through the air. Onward it flew, onward, onward, till at length it rested on the head of the boy. Then a great shout arose:

'The king! the king!' but as he listened to the cries, a vision, swifter than lightning, flashed across his brain. He saw himself seated on a throne, spending his life trying, and never succeeding, to make poor people rich; miserable people happy; bad people good; never doing anything he wished to do, not able even to marry the girl that he loved.

'No! no!' he shrieked, hiding his face in his hands; but the crowds who heard him thought he was overcome by the grandeur that awaited him, and paid no heed.

'Well, to make quite sure, let fly more pigeons,' said they, but each pigeon followed where the first had led, and the cries arose louder than ever:

'The king! the king!' And as the young man heard, a cold shiver, that he knew not the meaning of, ran through him.

'This is fear whom you have so long sought,' whispered a voice, which seemed to reach his ears alone. And the youth bowed his head as the vision once more flashed before his eyes, and he accepted his doom, and made ready to pass his life with fear beside him.

(Adapted from Turkische Volksmarchen. Von Dr. Ignaz Kunos. E. J. Brill, Leiden.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

HE WINS WHO WAITS

Once upon a time there reigned a king who had an only daughter. The girl had been spoiled by everybody from her birth, and, besides being beautiful, was clever and wilful, and when she grew old enough to be married she refused to have anything to say to the prince whom her father favoured, but declared she would choose a husband for herself. By long experience the king knew that when once she had made up her mind, there was no use expecting her to change it, so he inquired meekly what she wished him to do.

'Summon all the young men in the kingdom to appear before me a month from to-day,' answered the princess; 'and the one to whom I shall give this golden apple shall be my husband.'

'But, my dear--' began the king, in tones of dismay.

'The one to whom I shall give this golden apple shall be my husband,' repeated the princess, in a louder voice than before. And the king understood the signal, and with a sigh proceeded to do her bidding.

* * * * *

The young men arrived--tall and short, dark and fair, rich and poor. They stood in rows in the great courtyard in front of the palace, and the princess, clad in robes of green, with a golden veil flowing behind her, passed before them all, holding the apple. Once or twice she stopped and hesitated, but in the end she always passed on, till she came to a youth near the end of the last row. There was nothing specially remarkable about him, the bystanders thought; nothing that was likely to take a girl's fancy. A hundred others were handsomer, and all wore finer clothes; but he met the princess's eyes frankly and with a smile, and she smiled too, and held out the apple.

'There is some mistake,' cried the king, who had anxiously watched her progress, and hoped that none of the candidates would please her. 'It is impossible that she can wish to marry the son of a poor widow, who has not a farthing in the world! Tell her that I will not hear of it, and that she must go through the rows again and fix upon someone else'; and the princess went through the rows a second and a third time, and on each occasion she gave the apple to the widow's son. 'Well, marry him if you will,' exclaimed the angry king; 'but at least you shall not stay here.' And the princess answered nothing, but threw up her head, and taking the widow's son by the hand, they left the castle.

That evening they were married, and after the ceremony went back to the house of the bridegroom's mother, which, in the eyes of the princess, did not look much bigger than a hen-coop.

The old woman was not at all pleased when her son entered bringing his bride with him.

'As if we were not poor enough before,' grumbled she. 'I dare say this is some fine lady who can do nothing to earn her living.' But the princess stroked her arm, and said softly:

'Do not be vexed, dear mother; I am a famous spinner, and can sit at my wheel all day without breaking a thread.'

And she kept her word; but in spite of the efforts of all three, they became poorer and poorer; and at the end of six months it was agreed that the husband should go to the neighbouring town to get work. Here he met a merchant who was about to start on a long journey with a train of camels laden with goods of all sorts, and needed a man to help him. The widow's son begged that he would take him as a servant, and to this the merchant assented, giving him his whole year's salary beforehand. The young man returned home with the news, and next day bade farewell to his mother and his wife, who were very sad at parting from him.

'Do not forget me while you are absent,' whispered the princess as she flung her arms round his neck; 'and as you pass by the well which lies near the city gate, stop and greet the old man you will find sitting there. Kiss his hand, and then ask him what counsel he can give you for your journey.'

Then the youth set out, and when he reached the well where the old man was sitting he asked the questions as his wife had bidden him.

'My son,' replied the old man, 'you have done well to come to me, and in return remember three things: "She whom the heart loves, is ever the most beautiful." "Patience is the first step on the road to happiness." "He wins who waits."'

The young man thanked him and went on his way. Next morning early the caravan set out, and before sunset it had arrived at the first halting place, round some wells, where another company of merchants had already encamped. But no rain had fallen for a long while in that rocky country, and both men and beasts were parched with thirst. To be sure, there was another well about half a mile away, where there was always water; but to get it you had to be lowered deep down, and, besides, no one who had ever descended that well had been known to come back.

However, till they could store some water in their bags of goat-skin, the caravans dared not go further into the desert, and on the night of the arrival of the widow's son and his master, the merchants had decided to offer a large reward to anyone who was brave enough to go down into the enchanted well and bring some up. Thus it happened that at sunrise the young man was aroused from his sleep by a herald making his round of the camp, proclaiming that every merchant present would give a thousand piastres to the man who would risk his life to bring water for themselves and their camels.

The youth hesitated for a little while when he heard the proclamation. The story of the well had spread far and wide, and long ago had reached his ears. The danger was great, he knew; but then, if he came back alive, he would be the possessor of eighty thousand piastres. He turned to the herald who was passing the tent:

'I will go,' said he.

'What madness!' cried his master, who happened to be standing near. 'You are too young to throw away your life like that. Run after the herald and tell him you take back your offer.' But the young man shook his head, and the merchant saw that it was useless to try and persuade him.

'Well, it is your own affair,' he observed at last. 'If you must go, you must. Only, if you ever return, I will give you a camel's load of goods and my best mule besides.' And touching his turban in token of farewell, he entered the tent.

Hardly had he done so than a crowd of men were seen pouring out of the camp.

'How can we thank you!' they exclaimed, pressing round the youth. 'Our camels as well as ourselves are almost dead of thirst. See! here is the rope we have brought to let you down.'

'Come, then,' answered the youth. And they all set out.

On reaching the well, the rope was knotted securely under his arms, a big goat-skin bottle was given him, and he was gently lowered to the bottom of the pit. Here a clear stream was bubbling over the rocks, and, stooping down, he was about to drink, when a huge Arab appeared before him, saying in a loud voice:

'Come with me!'

The young man rose, never doubting that his last hour had come; but as he could do nothing, he followed the Arab into a brilliantly lighted hall, on the further side of the little river. There his guide sat down, and drawing towards him two boys, one black and the other white, he said to the stranger:

'I have a question to ask you. If you answer it right, your life shall be spared. If not, your head will be forfeit, as the head of many another has been before you. Tell me: which of my two children do I think the handsomer.'

The question did not seem a hard one, for while the white boy was as beautiful a child as ever was seen, his brother was ugly even for a negro. But, just as the youth was going to speak, the old man's counsel flashed into the youth's mind, and he replied hastily: 'The one whom we love best is always the handsomest.'

'You have saved me!' cried the Arab, rising quickly from his seat, and pressing the young man in his arms. 'Ah! if you could only guess what I have suffered from the stupidity of all the people to whom I have put that question, and I was condemned by a wicked genius to remain here until it was answered! But what brought you to this place, and how can I reward you for what you have done for me?'

'By helping me to draw enough water for my caravan of eighty merchants and their camels, who are dying for want of it,' replied the youth.

'That is easily done,' said the Arab. 'Take these three apples, and when you have filled your skin, and are ready to be drawn up, lay one of them on the ground. Half-way to the earth, let fall another, and at the top, drop the third. If you follow my directions no harm will happen to you. And take, besides, these three pomegranates, green, red and white. One day you will find a use for them!'

The young man did as he was told, and stepped out on the rocky waste, where the merchants were anxiously awaiting him. Oh, how thirsty they all were! But even after the camels had drunk, the skin seemed as full as ever.

Full of gratitude for their deliverance, the merchants pressed the money into his hands, while his own master bade him choose what goods he liked, and a mule to carry them.

So the widow's son was rich at last, and when the merchant had sold his merchandise, and returned home to his native city, his servant hired a man by whom he sent the money and the mule back to his wife.

'I will send the pomegranates also,' thought he 'for if I leave them in my turban they may some day fall out,' and he drew them out of his turban. But the fruit had vanished, and in their places were three precious stones, green, white and red.

For a long time he remained with the merchant, who gradually trusted him with all his business, and gave him a large share of the money he made. When his master died, the young man wished to return home, but the widow begged him to stay and help her; and one day he awoke with a start, to remember that twenty years had passed since he had gone away.

'I want to see my wife,' he said next morning to his mistress. 'If at any time I can be of use to you, send a messenger to me; meanwhile, I have told Hassan what to do.' And mounting a camel he set out.

* * * * *

Now, soon after he had taken service with the merchant a little boy had been born to him, and both the princess and the old woman toiled hard all day to get the baby food and clothing. When the money and the pomegranates arrived there was no need for them to work any more, and the princess saw at once that they were not fruit at all, but precious stones of great value. The old woman, however, not being accustomed, like her daughter-in-law, to the sight of jewels, took them only for common fruit, and wished to give them to the child to eat. She was very angry when the princess hastily took them from her and hid them in her dress, while she went to the market and bought the three finest pomegranates she could find, which she handed the old woman for the little boy.

Then she bought beautiful new clothes for all of them, and when they were dressed they looked as fine as could be. Next, she took out one of the precious stones which her husband had sent her, and placed it in a small silver box. This she wrapped up in a handkerchief embroidered in gold, and filled the old woman's pockets with gold and silver pieces.

'Go, dear mother,' she said, 'to the palace, and present the jewel to the king, and if he asks you what he can give you in return, tell him that you want a paper, with his seal attached, proclaiming that no one is to meddle with anything you may choose to do. Before you leave the palace distribute the money amongst the servants.'

The old woman took the box and started for the palace. No one there had ever seen a ruby of such beauty, and the most famous jeweller in the town was summoned to declare its value. But all he could say was:

'If a boy threw a stone into the air with all his might, and you could pile up gold as high as the flight of the stone, it would not be sufficient to pay for this ruby.'

At these words the king's face fell. Having once seen the ruby he could not bear to part with it, yet all the money in his treasury would not be enough to buy it. So for a little while he remained silent, wondering what offer he could make the old woman, and at last he said:

'If I cannot give you its worth in money, is there anything you will take in exchange?'

'A paper signed by your hand, and sealed with your seal, proclaiming that I may do what I will, without let or hindrance,' answered she promptly. And the king, delighted to have obtained what he coveted at so small a cost, gave her the paper without delay. Then the old woman took her leave and returned home.

The fame of this wonderful ruby soon spread far and wide, and envoys arrived at the little house to know if there were more stones to sell. Each king was so anxious to gain possession of the treasure that he bade his messenger outbid all the rest, and so the princess sold the two remaining stones for a sum of money so large that if the gold pieces had been spread out they would have reached from here to the moon. The first thing she did was to build a palace by the side of the cottage, and it was raised on pillars of gold, in which were set great diamonds, which blazed night and day. Of course the news of this palace was the first thing that reached the king her father, on his return from the wars, and he hurried to see it. In the doorway stood a young man of twenty, who was his grandson, though neither of them knew it, and so pleased was the king with the appearance of the youth, that he carried him back to his own palace, and made him commander of the whole army.

Not long after this, the widow's son returned to his native land. There, sure enough, was the tiny cottage where he had lived with his mother, but the gorgeous building beside it was quite new to him. What had become of his wife and his mother, and who could be dwelling in that other wonderful place. These were the first thoughts that flashed through his mind; but not wishing to betray himself by asking questions of passing strangers, he climbed up into a tree that stood opposite the palace and watched.

By-and-by a lady came out, and began to gather some of the roses and jessamine that hung about the porch. The twenty years that had passed since he had last beheld her vanished in an instant, and he knew her to be his own wife, looking almost as young and beautiful as on the day of their parting. He was about to jump down from the tree and hasten to her side, when she was joined by a young man who placed his arm affectionately round her neck. At this sight the angry husband drew his bow, but before he could let fly the arrow, the counsel of the wise man came back to him: 'Patience is the first step on the road to happiness.' And he laid it down again.

At this moment the princess turned, and drawing her companion's head down to hers, kissed him on each cheek. A second time blind rage filled the heart of the watcher, and he snatched up his bow from the branch where it hung, when words, heard long since, seemed to sound in his ears:

'He wins who waits.' And the bow dropped to his side. Then, through the silent air came the sound of the youth's voice:

'Mother, can you tell me nothing about my father? Does he still live, and will he never return to us?'

'Alas! my son, how can I answer you?' replied the lady. 'Twenty years have passed since he left us to make his fortune, and, in that time, only once have I heard aught of him. But what has brought him to your mind just now?'

'Because last night I dreamed that he was here,' said the youth, 'and then I remembered what I have so long forgotten, that I had a father, though even his very history was strange to me. And now, tell me, I pray you, all you can concerning him.'

And standing under the jessamine, the son learnt his father's history, and the man in the tree listened also.

'Oh,' exclaimed the youth, when it was ended, while he twisted his hands in pain, 'I am general-in-chief, you are the king's daughter, and we have the most splendid palace in the whole world, yet my father lives we know not where, and for all we can guess, may be poor and miserable. To-morrow I will ask the king to give me soldiers, and I will seek him over the whole earth till I find him.'

Then the man came down from the tree, and clasped his wife and son in his arms. All that night they talked, and when the sun rose it still found them talking. But as soon as it was proper, he went up to the palace to pay his homage to the king, and to inform him of all that had happened and who they all really were. The king was overjoyed to think that his daughter, whom he had long since forgiven and sorely missed, was living at his gates, and was, besides, the mother of the youth who was so dear to him. 'It was written beforehand,' cried the monarch. 'You are my son-in-law before the world, and shall be king after me.'

And the man bowed his head.

He had waited; and he had won.

(From Contes Armeniens. Par Frederic Macler.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

THE STEEL CANE

Once upon a time there lived an old woman who had a small cottage on the edge of the forest. Behind the cottage was a garden in which all sorts of vegetables grew, and, beyond that, a field with two or three cows in it, so her neighbours considered her quite rich, and envied her greatly.

As long as she was strong enough to work all day in her garden the old woman never felt lonely, but after a while she had a bad illness, which left her much weaker than before, and she began to think that now and then it would be nice to have some one to speak to. Just at this moment she heard of the death of a shepherd and his wife, who dwelt on the other side of the plain, leaving a little boy quite alone in the world.

'That will just suit me,' she said; and sent a man over to bring the child, whom she intended to adopt for her own.

Now the boy, who was about twelve years old, ought to have considered himself very lucky, for his new mother was as kind to him as the old one. But, unfortunately, he made friends with some bad rude companions whose tricks caused them to be a terror to everyone, and the poor old woman never ceased regretting her lost solitude.

Things went on in this way for some years, till the boy became a man.

'Perhaps, if he were to be married he might sober down,' she thought to herself. And she inquired among the neighbours what girls there were of an age to choose from. At length one was found, good and industrious, as well as pretty; and as the young man raised no objections the wedding took place at once, and the bride and bridegroom went to live in the cottage with the old woman. But no change was to be seen in the husband's conduct. All day long he was out amusing himself in the company of his former friends, and if his wife dared to say anything to him on his return home he beat her with his stick. And next year, when a baby was born to them, he beat it also.

At length the old woman's patience was worn out. She saw that it was quite useless to expect the lazy, idle creature to mend his ways, and one day she said to him:

'Do you mean to go on like this for ever? Remember, you are no longer a boy, and it is time that you left off behaving like one. Come, shake off your bad habits, and work for your wife and child, and above all, stop beating them. If not I will transform you into an ass, and heavy loads shall be piled on your back, and men shall ride you. Briars shall be your food, a goad shall prick you, and in your turn you shall know how it feels to be beaten.'

But if she expected her words to do any good she soon found out her mistake, for the young man only grew angry and cried rudely:

'Bah! hold your tongue or I will whip you also.'

'Will you?' she answered grimly: and, swift as lightning she picked up a steel cane that stood in the corner and laid it across his shoulders. In an instant his ears had grown long and his face longer, his arms had become legs, and his body was covered with close grey hair. Truly, he was an ass; and a very ugly one, too!

'Leave the house!' commanded the old woman. And, shambling awkwardly, he went.

As he was standing in the path outside, not knowing what to do, a man passed by.

'Ho! my fine fellow, you are exactly what I was looking for! You don't seem to have a master, so come with me. I will find something for you to do.' And taking him by the ear he led him from the cottage.

For seven years the ass led a hard life, just as the old woman had foretold. But instead of remembering that he had brought all his suffering on himself, and being sorry for his evil ways, he grew harder, and more bitter. At the end of the seven years his ass skin wore out, and he became a man again, and one day returned to the cottage.

His wife opened the door in answer to his knock; then, letting fall the latch, she ran inside, crying:

'Grandmother! grandmother! your son has come back!'

'I thought he would,' replied the old woman, going on with her spinning. 'Well, we could have done very well without him. But as he is here I suppose he must come in.'

And come in he did. But as the old woman expected, he behaved still worse than before. For some weeks she allowed him to do what he liked; then at last she said:

'So experience has taught you nothing! After all, there are very few people who have sense to learn by it. But take care lest I change you into a wolf, to be a prey for dogs and men!'

'You talk too much. I shall break your head for you!' was all the answer she got.

Had the young man looked at her face he might have taken warning, but he was busy making a pipe, and took no notice. The next moment the steel cane had touched his shoulders, and a big grey wolf bounded through the door.

Oh! what a yapping among the dogs, and what a shouting among the neighbours as they gave chase.

For seven years he led the life of a hunted animal, often cold and nearly always hungry, and never daring to allow himself a sound sleep. At the end of that time his wolf skin wore out also, and again he appeared at the cottage door. But the second seven years had taught him no more than the first--his conduct was worse than before; and one day he beat his wife and son so brutally that they screamed to the old woman to come to their aid.

She did, and brought the steel cane with her. In a second the ruffian had vanished, and a big black crow was flying about the room, crying 'Gour! Gour!'

The window was open, and he darted through it; and seeking the companions who had ruined him, he managed to make them understand what had happened.

'We will avenge you,' said they; and taking up a rope, set out to strangle the old woman.

But she was ready for them. One stroke of her cane and they were all changed into a troop of black crows, and this time their feathers are lasting still.

(From Contes Armeniens. Par Frederic Macler.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

THE PUNISHMENT OF THE FAIRY GANGANA

Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who ruled over a country so small that you could easily walk round it in one day. They were both very good, simple people; not very wise, perhaps, but anxious to be kind to everybody; and this was often a mistake, for the king allowed all his subjects to talk at once, and offer advice upon the government of the kingdom as well as upon private matters. And the end of it all was, that it was very difficult to get any laws made, and, still more, to get anyone to obey them.

Now, no traveller ever passed through the kingdom without inquiring how it came to be so small. And this was the reason. As soon as Petaldo (for that was the king's name) had been born, his father and mother betrothed him to the niece of their friend the fairy Gangana--if she should ever have one. But as the years passed on, and Gangana was still without a niece, the young prince forgot all about his destined bride, and when he was twenty-five he secretly married the beautiful daughter of a rich farmer, with whom he had fallen violently in love.

When the fairy heard the news she fell into a violent rage, and hurried off to tell the king. The old man thought in his heart that his son had waited quite long enough; but he did not dare to say so, lest some dreadful spell might be thrown over them all, and they should be changed into birds or snakes, or, worst of all, into stones. So, much against his will, he was obliged to disinherit the young man, and to forbid him to come to court. Indeed, he would have been a beggar had it not been for the property his wife had had given her by the farmer, which the youth obtained permission to erect into a kingdom.

Most princes would have been very angry at this treatment, especially as the old king soon died, and the queen was delighted to reign in his place. But Petaldo was a contented young man, and was quite satisfied with arranging his tiny court on the model of his father's, and having a lord chamberlain, and a high steward and several gentlemen in attendance; while the young queen appointed her own ladies-in-waiting and maids of honour. He likewise set up a mint to coin money, and chose a seneschal as head of the five policemen who kept order in the capital and punished the boys who were caught in the act of throwing stones at the palace windows.

The first to fill this important office was the young king's father-in-law, an excellent man of the name of Caboche. He was much beloved by everyone, and so sensible that he was not at all vain at rising at once to the dignity of seneschal, when he had only been a common farmer, but went about his fields every day as usual. This conduct so struck his king that very soon he never did anything without consulting him.

Each morning Caboche and his son-in-law had breakfast together, and when they had finished, the king took out of his iron chest great bundles of state papers, which he desired to talk over with his seneschal. Sometimes they would spend two hours at least in deciding these important matters, but more often after a few minutes Caboche would say:

'Excuse me, sire, but your majesty does not understand this affair in the least. Leave it to me, and I will settle it.'

'But what am I to do, then?' asked the king. And his minister answered:

'Oh, you can rule your wife, and see after your fruit garden. You will find that those two things will take up all your time.'

'Well, perhaps you are right,' the king replied; secretly glad to be rid of the cares of government. But though Caboche did all the work, Petaldo never failed to appear on grand occasions, in his royal mantle of red linen, holding a sceptre of gilded wood. Meanwhile he passed his mornings in studying books, from which he learned the proper seasons to plant his fruit trees, and when they should be pruned; and his afternoons in his garden, where he put his knowledge into practice. In the evening he played cards with his father-in-law, and supped in public with the queen, and by ten o'clock everybody in the palace was fast asleep.

The queen, on her side, was quite as happy as her husband. She loved to be in her dairy, and nobody in the kingdom could make such delicious cheeses. But however busy she might be, she never forgot to bake a little barley cake, and make a tiny cream cheese, and to put them under a particular rose-tree in the garden. If you had asked her whom they were for, and where they went to, she could not have told you, but would have said that on the night of her marriage a fairy had appeared to her in a dream, and had bidden her to perform this ceremony.

After the king and the queen had six children, a little boy was born, with a small red cap on his head, so that he was quite different from his brothers and sisters, and his parents loved Cadichon better than any of them.

The years went on, and the children were growing big, when, one day, after Gillette the queen had finished baking her cake, and had turned it out on a plate, a lovely blue mouse crept up the leg of the table and ran to the plate. Instead of chasing it away, as most women would have done, the queen pretended not to notice what the mouse was doing, and was much surprised to see the little creature pick up the cake and carry it off to the chimney. She sprang forwards to stop it, when, suddenly, both the mouse and cake vanished, and in their place stood an old woman only a foot high, whose clothes hung in rags about her. Taking up a sharp pointed iron stick, she drew on the earthen floor some strange signs, uttering seven cries as she did so, and murmuring something in a low voice, among which the queen was sure she caught the words, 'faith,' 'wisdom,' 'happiness.' Then, seizing the kitchen broom, she whirled it three times round her head, and vanished. Immediately there arose a great noise in the next room, and on opening the door, the queen beheld three large cockchafers, each one with a princess between its feet, while the princes were seated on the backs of three swallows. In the middle was a car formed of a single pink shell, and drawn by two robin redbreasts, and in this car Cadichon was sitting by the side of the blue mouse, who was dressed in a splendid mantle of black velvet fastened under her chin. Before the queen had recovered from her surprise, cockchafers, redbreasts, mouse and children had all flown, singing, to the window, and disappeared from view.

The loud shrieks of the queen brought her husband and father running into the room, and when at last they made out from her broken sentences what had really happened, they hastily snatched up some stout sticks that were lying about and set off to the rescue--one going in one direction and the other in another.

For at least an hour the queen sat sobbing where they had left her, when at last she was roused by a piece of folded paper falling at her feet. She stooped and picked it up eagerly, hoping that it might contain some news of her lost children. It was very short, but when she had read the few words, Gillette was comforted, for it bade her take heart, as they were well and happy under the protection of a fairy. 'On your own faith and prudence depend your happiness,' ended the writer. 'It is I who have all these years eaten the food you placed under the rose-tree, and some day I shall reward you for it. "Everything comes to him who knows how to wait," is the advice given by,--The Fairy of the Fields.'

Then the queen rose up, and bathed her face, and combed her shining hair; and as she turned away from her mirror she beheld a linnet sitting on her bed. No one would have known that it was anything but a common linnet, and yesterday the queen would have thought so too. But this morning so many wonderful things had happened that she did not doubt for a moment that the writer of the letter was before her.

'Pretty linnet,' said she, 'I will try to do all you wish. Only give me, I pray you, now and then, news of my little Cadichon.'

And the linnet flapped her wings and sang, and flew away. So the queen knew that she had guessed rightly, and thanked her in her heart.

By-and-by the king and his seneschal returned, hungry and tired with their fruitless search. They were amazed and rather angry to find the queen, whom they had left weeping, quite cheerful. Could she really care for her children so little and have forgotten them so soon? What could have caused this sudden change? But to all their questions Gillette would only answer: 'Everything comes to him who knows how to wait.'

'That is true,' replied her father; 'and, after all, your majesty must remember that the revenues of your kingdom would hardly bear the cost of seven princes and princesses brought up according to their rank. Be grateful, then, to those who have relieved you of the burden.'

'You are right! You are always right!' cried the king, whose face once more beamed with smiles. And life at the palace went on as before, till Petaldo received a piece of news which disturbed him greatly.

The queen, his mother, who had for some time been a widow, suddenly made up her mind to marry again, and her choice had fallen on the young king of the Green Isles, who was younger than her own son, and, besides, handsome and fond of pleasure, which Petaldo was not. Now the grandmother, foolish though she was in many respects, had the sense to see that a woman as old and as plain as she was, could hardly expect a young man to fall in love with her, and that, if this was to happen, it would be needful to find some spell which would bring back her youth and beauty. Of course, the fairy Gangana could have wrought the change with one wave of her wand; but unluckily the two were no longer friends, because the fairy had tried hard to persuade the queen to declare her niece heiress to the crown, which the queen refused to do. Naturally, therefore, it was no use asking the help of Gangana to enable the queen to take a second husband, who would be certain to succeed her; and messengers were sent all over the neighbouring kingdoms, seeking to find a witch or a fairy who would work the wished-for miracle. None, however, could be found with sufficient skill, and at length the queen saw that if ever the king of the Green Isles was to be her husband she must throw herself on the mercy of the fairy Gangana.

The fairy's wrath was great when she heard the queen's story, but she knew very well that, as the king of the Green Isles had spent all his money, he would probably be ready to marry even an old woman, like her friend, in order to get more. So, in order to gain time, she hid her feelings, and told the queen that in three days the spell would be accomplished.

* * * * *

Her words made the queen so happy that twenty years seemed to fall from her at once, and she counted, not only the hours, but the minutes to the appointed time. It came at last, and the fairy stood before her in a long robe of pink and silver, held up by a tiny brown dwarf, who carried a small box under his arm. The queen received her with all the marks of respect that she could think of, and at the request of Gangana, ordered the doors and windows of the great hall to be closed, and her attendants to retire, so that she and her guest might be quite alone. Then, opening the box, which was presented to her on one knee by the dwarf, the fairy took from it a small vellum book with silver clasps, a wand that lengthened out as you touched it, and a crystal bottle filled with very clear green water. She next bade the queen sit on a seat in the middle of the room, and the dwarf to stand opposite her, after which she stooped down and drew three circles round them with a golden rod, touched each of them thrice with her wand, and sprinkled the liquid over both. Gradually the queen's big features began to grow smaller and her face fresher, while at the same time the dwarf became about twice as tall as he had been before. This sight, added to the blue flames which sprang up from the three circles, so frightened the queen that she fainted in her chair, and when she recovered, both the page and the fairy had vanished.

At first she felt vaguely puzzled, not remembering clearly what had happened; then it all came back to her, and jumping up she ran to the nearest mirror. Oh! how happy she was! Her long nose and her projecting teeth had become things of beauty, her hair was thick and curly, and bright gold. The fairy had indeed fulfilled her promise! But, in her hurry and pleasure, the queen never noticed that she had not been changed into a beautiful young lady, but into a very tall little girl of eight or nine years old! Instead of her magnificent velvet dress, edged with fur and embroidered in gold, she wore a straight muslin frock, with a little lace apron, while her hair, which was always combed and twisted and fastened with diamond pins, hung in curls down her back. But if she had only known, something besides this had befallen her, for except as regards her love for the king of the Green Isles, her mind as well as her face had become that of a child, and this her courtiers were aware of, if she was not. Of course they could not imagine what had occurred, and did not know how to behave themselves, till the chief minister set them the example by ordering his wife and daughters to copy the queen's clothes and way of speaking. Then, in a short time, the whole court, including the men, talked and dressed like children, and played with dolls, or little tin soldiers, while at the state dinners nothing was seen but iced fruits, or sweet cakes made in the shape of birds and horses. But whatever she might be doing, the queen hardly ceased talking about the king of the Green Isles, whom she always spoke of as 'my little husband,' and as weeks passed on, and he did not come, she began to get very cross and impatient, so that her courtiers kept away from her as much as they could. By this time, too, they were growing tired of pretending to be children, and whispered their intention of leaving the palace and taking service under a neighbouring sovereign, when, one day, a loud blast of trumpets announced the arrival of the long-expected guest. In an instant all was smiles again, and in spite of the strictest rules of court etiquette, the queen insisted on receiving the young king at the bottom of the stairs. Unfortunately, in her haste, she fell over her dress, and rolled down several steps, screaming like a child, from fright. She was not really much hurt, though she had scratched her nose and bruised her forehead, but she was obliged to be carried to her room and have her face bathed in cold water. Still, in spite of this, she gave strict orders that the king should be brought to her presence the moment he entered the palace.

A shrill blast outside her door sent a twinge of pain through the queen's head, which by this time was aching badly; but in her joy at welcoming her future husband she paid no heed to it. Between two lines of courtiers, bowing low, the young king advanced quickly; but at the sight of the queen and her bandages, broke out into such violent fits of laughter that he was forced to leave the room, and even the palace.

When the queen had recovered from the vexation caused by the king's rude behaviour, she bade her attendants to hasten after him and fetch him back, but no promises or entreaties would persuade him to return. This of course made the queen's temper even worse than it was before, and a plot was set on foot to deprive her of the crown, which would certainly have succeeded had not the fairy Gangana, who had only wished to prevent her marriage, restored her to her proper shape. But, far from thanking her friend for this service, the sight of her old face in the mirror filled her with despair; and from that day she hated Gangana with a deadly hatred.

And where were Petaldo's children all this while? Why, in the island of Bambini, where they had playfellows to their hearts' content, and plenty of fairies to take care of them all. But out of all the seven princes and princesses whom the queen had seen carried off through the window, there was only Cadichon who was good and obedient; the other six were so rude and quarrelsome that they could get no one to play with them, and at last, as a punishment, the fairy changed them all into marionettes, till they should learn to behave better.

Now, in an unlucky moment, the Fairy of the Fields determined to visit her friend the queen of the fairies, who lived in a distant island, in order to consult her as to what was to become of Cadichon.

As she was entering the Hall of Audience, Gangana was leaving it, and sharp words were exchanged between them. After her enemy had flown off in a rage, the Fairy of the Fields poured out the whole story of Gangana's wickedness to the queen, and implored her counsel.

'Be comforted,' answered the fairy queen. 'For a while she must work her will, and at this moment she is carrying off Cadichon to the island where she still holds her niece captive. But should she make an evil use of the power she has, her punishment will be swift and great. And now I will give you this precious phial. Guard it carefully, for the liquid it contains will cause you to become invisible, and safe from the piercing eyes of all fairies. Against the eyes of mortals it has no charm!'

With a heart somewhat lighter, the Fairy of the Fields returned to her own island, and, the better to protect the six new marionettes from the wicked fairy, she sprinkled them with a few drops of the liquid, only avoiding just the tips of their noses, so that she might be able to know them again. Then she set off for the kingdom of Petaldo, which she found in a state of revolt, because for the first time since he had ascended the throne he had dared to impose a tax. Indeed, matters might have ended in a war, or in cutting off the king's head, had not the fairy discovered a means of contenting everybody, and of whispering anew to the queen that all was well with her children, for she dared not tell her of the loss of Cadichon.

And what had become of Cadichon? Well, the Fairy of the Fields had found out--by means of her books, which had told her--that the poor little boy had been placed by Gangana in an enchanted island, round which flowed a rapid river, sweeping rocks and trees in its current. Besides the river, the island was guarded by twenty-four enormous dragons, breathing flames, and forming a rampart of fire which it seemed as if none could pass.

The Fairy of the Fields knew all this, but she had a brave heart, and determined that by some means or other she would overcome all obstacles, and rescue Cadichon from the power of Gangana. So, taking with her the water of invisibility, she sprinkled it over her, and mounting her favourite winged lizard, set out for the island. When it appeared in sight she wrapped herself in her fireproof mantle; then, bidding the lizard return home, she slipped past the dragons and entered the island.

Scarcely had she done so than she beheld Gangana approaching her, talking loudly and angrily to a genius who flew by her side. From what she said, the fairy learned that Petaldo's mother, the old queen, had died of rage on hearing of the marriage of the king of the Green Isles to a young and lovely bride, and instead of leaving her kingdom to Gangana, had bequeathed it to one of the children of her son Petaldo.

'But all the trouble I have had with that foolish old woman shall not go for nothing,' cried Gangana. 'Go at once to my stables, and fetch out the strongest and swiftest griffins you can find in the stalls, and harness them to the yellow coach. Drive this, with all the speed you may, to the Isle of Bambini, and carry off the six children of Petaldo that are still there. I will see to Petaldo and Gillette myself. When I have got them all safe here I will change the parents into rabbits and the children into dogs. As for Cadichon, I have not quite made up my mind what I shall do with him.'

The Fairy of the Fields did not wait to hear more. No time was to be lost in seeking the help of the fairy queen if Petaldo and his family were to be saved from this dreadful doom. So, without waiting to summon her lizard, she flew across the island and past the dragons till her feet once more touched the ground again. But at that instant a black cloud rolled over her, loud thunder rent the air, and the earth rocked beneath her. Then wild lightnings lit up the sky, and by their flashes she saw the four-and-twenty dragons fighting together, uttering shrieks and yells, till the whole earth must have heard the uproar. Trembling with terror, the fairy stood rooted to the spot; and when day broke, island, torrent, and dragons had vanished, and in their stead was a barren rock. On the summit of the rock stood a black ostrich, and on its back were seated Cadichon, and the little niece of the fairy Gangana, for whose sake she had committed so many evil deeds. While the Fairy of the Fields was gazing in surprise at this strange sight, the ostrich spread its wings and flew off in the direction of the Fortunate Isle, and, followed unseen by the good fairy, entered the great hall where the queen was sitting on her throne.

Proud and exultant was Gangana in her new shape, for, by all the laws of fairydom, if she succeeded in laying Cadichon at the feet of the queen, and received him back from her, he was in her power for life, and she might do with him as she would. This the good fairy knew well, and pressed on with all her strength, for the dreadful events of the night had almost exhausted her. But, with a mighty effort, she snatched the children away from the back of the ostrich, and placed them on the lap of the queen.

With a scream of baffled rage the ostrich turned away, and Gangana stood in her place, waiting for the doom which she had brought upon herself.

'You have neglected all my warnings,' said the queen, speaking more sternly than any fairy had ever heard her; 'and my sentence is that during two hundred years you lose all your privileges as a fairy, and under the form of an ostrich shall become the slave of the lowest and wickedest of the genii whom you have made your friends. As for these children, I shall keep them with me, and they shall be brought up at my court.'

And so they were, until they grew up and were old enough to be married. Then the Fairy of the Fields took them back to the kingdom of the old queen, where Petaldo was now reigning. But the cares of state proved too heavy both for him and Gillette, after the quiet life they had led for so many years, and they were rejoiced to be able to lay aside their crowns, and place them on the heads of Cadichon and his bride, who was as good as she was beautiful, though she was the niece of the wicked Gangana! And so well had Cadichon learned the lessons taught him at the court of the fairy queen, that never since the kingdom was a kingdom had the people been so well governed or so happy. And they went about the streets and the fields smiling with joy at the difference between the old times and the new, and whispering softly to each other:

'Everything comes to him who knows how to wait.'

(From Le Cabinet des Fees.)

The Olive Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

THE SILENT PRINCESS

Once upon a time there lived in Turkey a pasha who had only one son, and so dearly did he love this boy that he let him spend the whole day amusing himself, instead of learning how to be useful like his friends.

Now the boy's favourite toy was a golden ball, and with this he would play from morning till night, without troubling anybody. One day, as he was sitting in the summer-house in the garden, making his ball run all along the walls and catching it again, he noticed an old woman with an earthen pitcher coming to draw water from a well which stood in a corner of the garden. In a moment he had caught his ball and flung it straight at the pitcher, which fell to the ground in a thousand pieces. The old woman started with surprise, but said nothing; only turned round to fetch another pitcher, and as soon as she had disappeared, the boy hurried out to pick up his ball.

Scarcely was he back in the summer-house when he beheld the old woman a second time, approaching the well with the pitcher on her shoulder. She had just taken hold of the handle to lower it into the water, when--crash! And the pitcher lay in fragments at her feet. Of course she felt very angry, but for fear of the pasha she still held her peace, and spent her last pence in buying a fresh pitcher. But when this also was broken by a blow from the ball, her wrath burst forth, and shaking her fist towards the summer-house where the boy was hiding, she cried:

'I wish you may be punished by falling in love with the silent princess.' And having said this she vanished.

For some time the boy paid no heed to her words--indeed he forgot them altogether; but as years went by, and he began to think more about things, the remembrance of the old woman's wish came back to his mind.

'Who is the silent princess? And why should it be a punishment to fall in love with her?' he asked himself, and received no answer. However, that did not prevent him from putting the question again and again, till at length he grew so weak and ill that he could eat nothing, and in the end was forced to lie in bed altogether. His father the pasha became so frightened by this strange disease, that he sent for every physician in the kingdom to cure him, but no one was able to find a remedy.

'How did your illness first begin, my son?' asked the pasha one day. 'Perhaps, if we knew that, we should also know better what to do for you.'

Then the youth told him what had happened all those years before, when he was a little boy, and what the old woman had said to him.

'Give me, I pray you,' he cried, when his tale was finished, 'give me, I pray you, leave to go into the world in search of the princess, and perhaps this evil state may cease.' And, sore though his heart was to part from his only son, the pasha felt that the young man would certainly die if he remained at home any longer.

'Go, and peace be with you,' he answered; and went out to call his trusted steward, whom he ordered to accompany his young master.

Their preparations were soon made, and early one morning the two set out. But neither old man nor young had the slightest idea where they were going, or what they were undertaking. First they lost their way in a dense forest, and from that they at length emerged in a wilderness where they wandered for six months, not seeing a living creature and finding scarcely anything to eat or drink, till they became nothing but skin and bone, while their garments hung in tatters about them. They had forgotten all about the princess, and their only wish was to find themselves back in the palace again, when, one day, they discovered that they were standing on the shoulder of a mountain. The stones beneath them shone as brightly as diamonds, and both their hearts beat with joy at beholding a tiny old man approaching them. The sight awoke all manner of recollections; the numb feeling that had taken possession of them fell away as if by magic, and it was with glad voices that they greeted the new-comer. 'Where are we, my friend?' asked they; and the old man told them that this was the mountain where the sultan's daughter sat, covered by seven veils, and the shining of the stones was only the reflection of her own brilliance.

On hearing this news all the dangers and difficulties of their past wandering vanished from their minds.

'How can I reach her soonest?' asked the youth eagerly. But the old man only answered:

'Have patience, my son, yet awhile. Another six months must go by before you arrive at the palace where she dwells with the rest of the women. And, even so, think well, when you can, as should you fail to make her speak, you will have to pay forfeit with your life, as others have done. So beware!'

But the prince only laughed at this counsel--as others had also done.

* * * * *

After three months they found themselves on the top of another mountain, and the prince saw with surprise that its sides were coloured a beautiful red. Perched on some cliffs, not far off, was a small village, and the prince proposed to his friend that they should go and rest there. The villagers, on their part, welcomed them gladly, and gave them food to eat and beds to sleep on, and thankful indeed were the two travellers to repose their weary limbs.

The next morning they asked their host if he could tell them whether they were still many days' journey from the princess, and whether he knew why the mountain was so much redder than other mountains.

'For three and a half more months you must still pursue your way,' answered he, 'and by that time you will find yourselves at the gate of the princess's palace. As for the colour of the mountain, that comes from the soft hue of her cheeks and mouth, which shines through the seven veils which cover her. But none have ever beheld her face, for she sits there, uttering no word, though one hears whispers of many having lost their lives for her sake.'

The prince, however, would listen no further; and thanking the man for his kindness, he jumped up and, with the steward, set out to climb the mountain.

On and on and on they went, sleeping under the trees or in caves, and living upon berries and any fish they could catch in the rivers. But at length, when their clothes were nearly in rags and their legs so tired that they could hardly walk any further, they saw on the top of the next mountain a palace of yellow marble.

'There it is, at last,' cried the prince; and fresh blood seemed to spring in his veins. But as he and his companion began to climb towards the top they paused in horror, for the ground was white with dead men's skulls. It was the prince who first recovered his voice, and he said to his friend, as carelessly as he could:

'These must be the skulls of the men who tried to make the princess speak and failed. Well, if we fail too, our bones will strew the ground likewise.'

'Oh! turn back now, my prince, while there is yet time,' entreated his companion. 'Your father gave you into my charge; but when we set out I did not know that certain death lay before us.'

'Take heart, O Lala, take heart!' answered the prince. 'A man can but die once. And, besides, the princess will have to speak some day, you know.'

So they went on again, past skulls and dead men's bones in all degrees of whiteness. And by-and-by they reached another village, where they determined to rest for a little while, so that their wits might be fresh and bright for the task that lay before them. But this time, though the people were kind and friendly, their faces were gloomy, and every now and then woeful cries would rend the air.

'Oh! my brother, have I lost you?' 'Oh! my son, shall I see you no more?' And then, as the prince and his companion asked the meaning of these laments--which, indeed, was plain enough--the answer was given:

'Ah, you also have come hither to die! This town belongs to the father of the princess, and when any rash man seeks to move the princess to speech he must first obtain leave of the sultan. If that is granted him he is then led into the presence of the princess. What happens afterwards, perhaps the sight of these bones may help you to guess.'

The young man bowed his head in token of thanks, and stood thoughtful for a short time. Then, turning to the Lala, he said:

'Well, our destiny will soon be decided! Meanwhile we will find out all we can, and do nothing rashly.'

For two or three days they wandered about the bazaars, keeping their eyes and ears open, when, one morning, they met a man carrying a nightingale in a cage. The bird was singing so joyously that the prince stopped to listen, and at once offered to buy him from his owner.

'Oh, why cumber yourself with such a useless thing,' cried the Lala in disgust; 'have you not enough to occupy your hands and mind, without taking an extra burden?' But the prince, who liked having his own way, paid no heed to him, and paying the high price asked by the man, he carried the bird back to the inn, and hung him up in his chamber. That evening, as he was sitting alone, trying to think of something that would make the princess talk, and failing altogether, the nightingale pecked open her cage door, which was lightly fastened by a stick, and, perching on his shoulder, murmured softly in his ear:

'What makes you so sad, my prince?' The young man started. In his native country birds did not talk, and, like many people, he was always rather afraid of what he did not understand. But in a moment he felt ashamed of his folly, and explained that he had travelled for more than a year, and over thousands of miles, to win the hand of the sultan's daughter. And now that he had reached his goal he could think of no plan to force her to speak.

'Oh! do not trouble your head about that,' replied the bird, 'it is quite easy! Go this evening to the women's apartments, and take me with you, and when you enter the princess's private chamber hide me under the pedestal which supports the great golden candlestick. The princess herself will be wrapped so thickly in her seven veils that she can see nothing, neither can her face be seen by anyone. Then inquire after her health, but she will remain quite silent; and next say that you are sorry to have disturbed her, and that you will have a little talk with the pedestal of the candlestick. When you speak I will answer.'

The prince threw his mantle over the bird, and started for the palace, where he begged an audience of the sultan. This was soon granted him, and leaving the nightingale hidden by the mantle, in a dark corner outside the door, he walked up to the throne on which his highness was sitting, and bowed low before him.

'What is your request?' asked the sultan, looking closely at the young man, who was tall and handsome; but when he heard the tale he shook his head pityingly.

'If you can make her speak she shall be your wife,' answered he; 'but if not--did you mark the skulls that strewed the mountain side?'

'Some day a man is bound to break the spell, O sultan,' replied the youth boldly; 'and why should not I be he as well as another? At any rate, my word is pledged, and I cannot draw back now.'

'Well, go if you must,' said the sultan. And he bade his attendants lead the way to the chamber of the princess, but to allow the young man to enter alone.

Catching up, unseen, his mantle and the cage as they passed into the dark corridor--for by this time night was coming on--the youth found himself standing in a room bare except for a pile of silken cushions, and one tall golden candlestick. His heart beat high as he looked at the cushions, and knew that, shrouded within the shining veils that covered them, lay the much longed-for princess. Then, fearful that after all other eyes might be watching him, he hastily placed the nightingale under the open pedestal on which the candlestick was resting, and turning again he steadied his voice, and besought the princess to tell him of her well-being.

Not by even a movement of her hand did the princess show that she had heard, and the young man, who of course expected this, went on to speak of his travels and of the strange countries he had passed through; but not a sound broke the silence.

* * * * *

'I see clearly that you are interested in none of these things,' said he at last, 'and as I have been forced to hold my peace for so many months, I feel that now I really must talk to somebody, so I shall go and address my conversation to the candlestick.' And with that he crossed the room behind the princess, and cried: 'O fairest of candlesticks, how are you?'

'Very well indeed, my lord,' answered the nightingale; 'but I wonder how many years have gone by since any one has spoken with me. And, now that you have come, rest, I pray you, awhile, and listen to my story.'

'Willingly,' replied the youth, curling himself up on the floor, for there was no cushion for him to sit on.

'Once upon a time,' began the nightingale, 'there lived a pasha whose daughter was the most beautiful maiden in the whole kingdom. Suitors she had in plenty, but she was not easy to please, and at length there were only three whom she felt she could even think of marrying. Not knowing which of the three she liked best, she took counsel with her father, who summoned the young men into his presence, and then told them that they must each of them learn some trade, and whichever of them proved the cleverest at the end of six months should become the husband of the princess.

'Though the three suitors may have been secretly disappointed, they could not help feeling that this test was quite fair, and left the palace together, talking as they went of what handicrafts they might set themselves to follow. The day was hot, and when they reached a spring that gushed out of the side of the mountain, they stopped to drink and rest, and then one of them said:

'"It will be best that we should each seek our fortunes alone; so let us put our rings under this stone, and go our separate ways. And the first one who returns hither will take his ring, and the others will take theirs. Thus we shall know whether we have all fulfilled the commands of the pasha, or if some accident has befallen any of us."

'"Good," replied the other two. And three rings were placed in a little hole, and carefully covered again by the stone.

'Then they parted, and for six months they knew naught of each other, till, on the day appointed, they met at the spring. Right glad they all were, and eagerly they talked of what they had done, and how the time had been spent.

'"I think I shall win the princess," said the eldest, with a laugh, "for it is not everybody that is able to accomplish a whole year's journey in an hour!"

'"That is very clever, certainly," answered his friend; "but if you are to govern a kingdom it may be still more useful to have the power of seeing what is happening at a distance; and that is what I have learnt," replied the second.

'"No, no, my dear comrades," cried the third, "your trades are all very well; but when the pasha hears that I can bring back the dead to life he will know which of us three is to be his son-in-law. But come, there only remain a few hours of the six months he granted us. It is time that we hastened back to the palace."

'"Stop a moment," said the second, "it would be well to know what is going on in the palace." And plucking some small leaves from a tree near by, he muttered some words and made some signs, and laid them on his eyes. In an instant he turned pale, and uttered a cry.

'"What is it? What is it?" exclaimed the others; and, with a shaking voice, he gasped:

'"The princess is lying on her bed, and has barely a few minutes to live. Oh! can no one save her?"

'"I can," answered the third, taking a small box from his turban; "this ointment will cure any illness. But how to reach her in time?"

'"Give it to me," said the first. And he wished himself by the bedside of the princess, which was surrounded by the sultan and his weeping courtiers. Clearly there was not a second to lose, for the princess had grown unconscious, and her face cold. Plunging his finger into the ointment he touched her eyes, mouth and ears with the paste, and with beating heart awaited the result.

'It was swifter than he supposed. As he looked the colour came back into her cheeks, and she smiled up at her father. The sultan, almost speechless with joy at this sudden change, embraced his daughter tenderly, and then turned to the young man to whom he owed her life:

'"Are you not one of those three whom I sent forth to learn a trade six months ago?" asked he. And the young man answered yes, and that the other two were even now on their way to the palace, so that the sultan might judge between them.'

At this point in his story the nightingale stopped, and asked the prince which of the three he thought had the best right to the princess.

'The one who had learned how to prepare the ointment,' replied he.

'But if it had not been for the man who could see what was happening at a distance they would never have known that the princess was ill,' said the nightingale. 'I would give it to him.' And the strife between them waxed hot, till, suddenly, the listening princess started up from her cushions and cried:

'Oh, you fools! cannot you understand that if it had not been for him who had power to reach the palace in time the ointment itself would have been useless, for death would have claimed her? It is he and no other who ought to have the princess!'

At the first sound of the princess's voice, a slave, who was standing at the door, ran at full speed to tell the sultan of the miracle which had taken place, and the delighted father hastened to the spot. But by this time the princess perceived that she had fallen into a trap which had been cunningly laid for her, and would not utter another word. All she could be prevailed on to do was to make signs to her father that the man who wished to be her husband must induce her to speak three times. And she smiled to herself beneath her seven veils as she thought of the impossibility of that.

When the sultan told the prince that though he had succeeded once, he would have twice to pass through the same test, the young man's face clouded over. It did not seem to him fair play, but he dared not object, so he only bowed low, and contrived to step back close to the spot where the nightingale was hidden. As it was now quite dark he tucked unseen the little cage under his cloak, and left the palace.

'Why are you so gloomy?' asked the nightingale, as soon as they were safely outside. 'Everything has gone exactly right! Of course the princess was very angry with herself for having spoken. And did you see that, at her first words, the veils that covered her began to rend? Take me back to-morrow evening, and place me on the pillar by the lattice. Fear nothing, you have only to trust to me!'

The next evening, towards sunset, the prince left the cage behind him, and with the bird in the folds of his garment slipped into the palace and made his way straight to the princess's apartments. He was at once admitted by the slaves who guarded the door, and took care to pass near the window so that the nightingale hopped unseen to the top of a pillar. Then he turned and bowed low to the princess, and asked her several questions; but, as before, she answered nothing, and, indeed, gave no sign that she heard. After a few minutes the young man bowed again, and crossing over to the window, he said:

'Oh, pillar! it is no use speaking to the princess, she will not utter one word; and as I must talk to somebody, I have come to you. Tell me how you have been all this long while?'

'I thank you,' replied a voice from the pillar, 'I am feeling very well. And it is lucky for me that the princess is silent, or else you would not have wanted to speak to me. To reward you, I will relate to you an interesting tale that I lately overheard, and about which I should like to have your opinion.'

'That will be charming,' answered the prince, 'so pray begin at once.'

'Once upon a time,' said the nightingale, 'there lived a woman who was so beautiful that every man who saw her fell in love with her. But she was very hard to please, and refused to wed any of them, though she managed to keep friends with all. Years passed away in this manner, almost without her noticing them, and one by one the young men grew tired of waiting, and sought wives who may have been less handsome, but were also less proud, and at length only three of her former wooers remained--Baldschi, Jagdschi, and Firedschi. Still she held herself apart, thought herself better and lovelier than other women, when, on a certain evening, her eyes were opened at last to the truth. She was sitting before her mirror, combing her curls, when amongst her raven locks she found a long white hair!

'At this dreadful sight her heart gave a jump, and then stood still.

'"I am growing old," she said to herself, "and if I do not choose a husband soon, I shall never get one! I know that either of those men would gladly marry me to-morrow, but I cannot decide between them. I must invent some way to find out which of them is the best, and lose no time about it."

'So instead of going to sleep, she thought all night long of different plans, and in the morning she arose and dressed herself.

'"That will have to do," she muttered as she pulled out the white hair which had cost her so much trouble. "It is not very good, but I can think of nothing better; and--well, they are none of them clever, and I dare say they will easily fall into the trap." Then she called her slave and bade her let Jagdschi know that she would be ready to receive him in an hour's time. After that she went into the garden and dug a grave under a tree, by which she laid a white shroud.

'Jagdschi was delighted to get the gracious message; and, putting on his newest garments, he hastened to the lady's house, but great was his dismay at finding her stretched on her cushions, weeping bitterly.

'"What is the matter, O Fair One?" he asked, bowing low before her.

'"A terrible thing has happened," said she, her voice choked with sobs. "My father died two nights ago, and I buried him in my garden. But now I find that he was a wizard, and was not dead at all, for his grave is empty and he is wandering about somewhere in the world."

'"That is evil news indeed," answered Jagdschi; "but can I do nothing to comfort you?"

'"There is one thing you can do," replied she, "and that is to wrap yourself in the shroud and lay yourself in the grave. If he should not return till after three hours have elapsed he will have lost his power over me, and be forced to go and wander elsewhere."

'Now Jagdschi was proud of the trust reposed in him, and wrapping himself in the shroud, he stretched himself at full length in the grave. After some time Baldschi arrived in his turn, and found the lady groaning and lamenting. She told him that her father had been a wizard, and that in case, as was very likely, he should wish to leave his grave and come to work her evil, Baldschi was to take a stone and be ready to crush in his head, if he showed signs of moving.

'Baldschi, enchanted at being able to do his lady a service, picked up a stone, and seated himself by the side of the grave wherein lay Jagdschi.

'Meanwhile the hour arrived in which Firedschi was accustomed to pay his respects, and, as in the case of the other two, he discovered the lady overcome with grief. To him she said that a wizard who was an enemy of her father's had thrown the dead man out of his grave, and had taken his place. "But," she added, "if you can bring the wizard into my presence, all his power will go from him; if not, then I am lost."

'"Ah, lady, what is there that I would not do for you!" cried Firedschi; and running down to the grave, he seized the astonished Jagdschi by the waist, and flinging the body over his shoulder, he hastened with him into the house. At the first moment Baldschi was so surprised at this turn of affairs, for which the lady had not prepared him, that he sat still and did nothing. But by-and-by he sprang up and hurled the stone after the two flying figures, hoping that it might kill them both. Fortunately it touched neither, and soon all three were in the presence of the lady. Then Jagdschi, thinking that he had delivered her from the power of the wizard, slid off the back of Firedschi, and threw the shroud from him.'

'Tell me, my prince,' said the nightingale, when he had finished his story, 'which of the three men deserved to win the lady? I myself should choose Firedschi.'

'No, no,' answered the prince, who understood the wink the bird had given him; 'it was Baldschi who took the most trouble, and it was certainly he who deserved the lady.'

But the nightingale would not agree; and they began to quarrel, till a third voice broke in:

'How can you talk such nonsense?' cried the princess--and as she spoke a sound of tearing was heard. 'Why, you have never even thought of Jagdschi, who lay for three hours in the grave, with a stone held over his head! Of course it was he whom the lady chose for her husband!'

* * * * *

It was not many minutes before the news reached the sultan; but even now he would not consent to the marriage till his daughter had spoken a third time. On hearing this, the young man took counsel with the nightingale how best to accomplish this, and the bird told him that as the princess, in her fury at having fallen into the snare laid for her, had ordered the pillar to be broken in pieces, he must be hidden in the folds of a curtain that hung by the door.

The following evening the prince entered the palace, and walked boldly up to the princess's apartments. As he entered the nightingale flew from under his arm and perched himself on top of the door, where he was entirely concealed by the folds of the dark curtain. The young man talked as usual to the princess without obtaining a single word in reply, and at length he left her lying under the heap of shining veils--now rent in many places--and crossed the room towards the door, from which came a voice that gladly answered him.

For a while the two talked together: then the nightingale asked if the prince was fond of stories, as he had lately heard one which interested and perplexed him greatly. In reply, the prince begged that he might hear it at once, and without further delay the nightingale began:

'Once upon a time, a carpenter, a tailor, and a student set out together to see the world. After wandering about for some months they grew tired of travelling, and resolved to stay and rest in a small town that took their fancy. So they hired a little house, and looked about for work to do, returning at sunset to smoke their pipes and talk over the events of the day.

'One night in the middle of summer it was hotter than usual, and the carpenter found himself unable to sleep. Instead of tossing about on his cushions, making himself more uncomfortable than he was already, the man wisely got up and drank some coffee and lit his long pipe. Suddenly his eye fell on some pieces of wood in a corner and, being very clever with his fingers, he had soon set up a perfect statue of a girl about fourteen years old. This so pleased and quieted him that he grew quite drowsy, and going back to bed fell fast asleep.

'But the carpenter was not the only person who lay awake that night. Thunder was in the air, and the tailor became so restless that he thought he would go downstairs and cool his feet in the little fountain outside the garden door. To reach the door he had to pass through the room where the carpenter had sat and smoked, and against the wall he beheld standing a beautiful girl. He stood speechless for an instant before he ventured to touch her hand, when, to his amazement, he found that she was fashioned out of wood.

'"Ah! I can make you more beautiful still," said he. And fetching from a shelf a roll of yellow silk which he had bought that day from a merchant, he cut and draped and stitched, till at length a lovely robe clothed the slender figure. When this was finished, the restlessness had departed from him, and he went back to bed.

'As dawn approached the student arose and prepared to go to the mosque with the first ray of sunlight. But, when he saw the maiden standing there, he fell on his knees and lifted his hands in ecstasy.

'"Oh, thou art fairer than the evening air, clad in the beauty of ten thousand stars," he murmured to himself. "Surely a form so rare was never meant to live without a soul." And forthwith he prayed with all his might that life should be breathed into it.

'And his prayer was heard, and the beautiful statue became a living girl, and the three men all fell in love with her, and each desired to have her to wife.

'Now,' said the nightingale, 'to which of them did the maiden really belong? It seems to me that the carpenter had the best right to her.'

'Oh, but the student would never have thought of praying that she might be given a soul had not the tailor drawn attention to her loveliness by the robe which he put upon her,' answered the prince, who guessed what he was expected to say: and they soon set up quite a pretty quarrel. Suddenly the princess, furious that neither of them alluded to the part played by the student, quite forgot her vow of silence and cried loudly:

'Idiots that you are! how could she belong to any one but the student? If it had not been for him, all that the others did would have gone for nothing! Of course it was he who married the maiden!' And as she spoke the seven veils fell from her, and she stood up, the fairest princess that the world has ever seen.

'You have won me,' she said smiling, holding out her hand to the prince.

And so they were married: and after the wedding-feast was over they sent for the old woman whose pitcher the prince had broken so long ago, and she dwelt in the palace, and became nurse to their children, and lived happily till she died.

(Adapted from Turkische Volksmarchen aus Stambul gesammelt, ubersetzt und eingeleitet von Dr. Ignaz Kunos. Brill, Leiden.)

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: oll.txt =====



Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

APU OLLANTAY

 

A DRAMA OF THE TIME OF THE INCAS

 

SOVEREIGNS OF PERU

 

ABOUT A.D. 1470

 

FIRST REDUCED TO WRITING BY

 

DR. VALDEZ, CUBA OF SICUANI

 

A.D. 1770

 

THE ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT COPIED BY

 

DR. JUSTO PASTOR JUSTINIANI

 

THIS JUSTINIANI TEXT

 

COPIED AT LARIS, IN APRIL 1863, BY

 

CLEMENTS R. MARKHAM

 

A FREE TRANSLATION INTO ENGLISH

 

BY

 

SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B.

 

[1910]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, April 2003, by J. B. Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

 

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

 

INTRODUCTION

THE drama was cultivated by the Incas, and dramatic performances were enacted before them. Garcilasso de la Vega, Molina, and Salcamayhua are the authorities who received and have recorded the information given by the Amautas respecting the Inca drama. Some of these dramas, and portions of others, were preserved in the memories of members of Inca and Amauta families. The Spanish priests, especially the Jesuits of Juli, soon discovered the dramatic aptitude of the people. Plays were composed and acted, under priestly auspices, which contained songs and other fragments of the ancient Inca drama. These plays were called 'Autos Sacramentales.'

But complete Inca dramas were also preserved in the memories of members of the Amauta caste and, until the rebellion of 1781, they were acted. The drama of Ollantay was first reduced to writing and arranged for acting by Dr. Don Antonio Valdez, the Cura of Tinto. It was acted before his friend Jose Gabriel Condorcanqui [*1]1

[p. 326]

in about 1775. Taking the name of his maternal ancestor, the Inca Tupac Amaru, the ill-fated Condorcanqui rose in rebellion, was defeated, taken, and put to death under torture, in the great square of Cuzco. In the monstrous sentence 'the representation of dramas as well as all other festivals which the Indians celebrate in memory of their Incas' was prohibited. [*1] This is a clear proof that before 1781 these Quichua dramas were acted.

The original manuscript of Valdez was copied by his friend Don Justo Pastor Justiniani, and this copy was inherited by his son. There was another copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, but it is corrupt, and there are several omissions and mistakes of a copyist. Dr. Valdez died, at a very advanced age, in 1816. In 1853 the original manuscript was in the possession of his nephew and heir, Don Narciso Cuentas of Tinta.

The Justiniani copy was, in 1853, in the possession of Dr. Don Pablo Justiniani, Cura of Laris, and son of Don Justo Pastor Justiniani. He is a descendant of

[p. 327]

the Incas. [*1] In April 1853 I went to Laris, a secluded valley of the Andes, and made a careful copy of the drama of Ollantay. From this Justiniani text my first very faulty line-for-line translation was made in 1871, as well as the present free translation.

The first printed notice of Ollantay appeared in the Museo Erudito, Nos. 5 to 9, published at Cuzco in 1837, and edited by Don Jose Palacios. The next account of the drama, with extracts, was in the 'Antiguedades Peruanas,' a work published in 1851 jointly by Dr. von Tschudi and Don Mariaiao Rivero of Arequipa. The complete text, from the copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco, was first published at Vienna in 1853 by Dr. von Tschudi in his 'Die Kechua Sprache. It

[p. 328]

was obtained for him by Dr. Ruggendas of Munich. The manuscript was a corrupt version, and in very bad condition, in parts illegible from damp. In 1868 Don Jose Barranca published a Spanish translation, from the Dominican text of von Tschudi. The learned Swiss naturalist, von Tschudi, published a revised edition of his translation at Vienna in 1875, with a parallel German translation. In 18711 printed the Justiniani text with a literal, line-for-line translation, but with many mistakes, since corrected; and in 1874, a Peruvian, Don Jose Fernandez Nodal, published the Quichua text with a Spanish translation.

In 1878 Gavino Pacheco Zegarra published his version of Ollantay, with a free translation in French. His text is a manuscript of the drama which he found in his uncle's library. Zegarra, as a native of Peru whose language was Quichua, had great advantages. He was a very severe, and often unfair, critic of his predecessors.

The work of Zegarra is, however, exceedingly valuable. He was not only a Quichua scholar, but also accomplished and well read. His notes on special words and on the construction of sentences are often very interesting. But his conclusions respecting several passages which are in the Justiniani text, but not in the others, are certainly erroneous. Thus he entirely spoils the dialogue between the Uillac Uma and Piqui Chaqui by omitting the humorous part contained in the Justiniani text; and makes other similar omissions merely because the passages are not in his text. Zegarra gives a useful vocabulary at the end of all the words which occur in the drama.

The great drawback to the study of Zegarra's work is that he invented a number of letters to express the various modifications of sound as they appealed to his

[p. 329]

ear. No one else can use them, while they render the reading of his own works difficult and intolerably tiresome.

The last publication of a text of Ollantay was by the Rev. J. H. Gybbon Spilsbury, at Buenos Ayres in 1907, accompanied by Spanish, English, and French translations in parallel columns.

There is truth in what Zegarra says, that the attempts to translate line for line, by von Tschudi and myself, 'fail to convey a proper idea of the original drama to European readers, the result being alike contrary to the genius of the modern languages of Europe and to that of the Quichua language.' Zegarra accordingly gives a very free translation in French.

In the present translation I believe that I have always preserved the sense of the original, without necessarily binding myself to the words. The original is in octosyllabic lines. Songs and important speeches are in quatrains of octosyllabic lines, the first and last rhyming, and the second and third. I have endeavoured to keep to octosyllabic lines as far as possible, because they give a better idea of the original; and I have also tried to preserve the form of the songs and speeches.

The drama opens towards the close of the reign of the Inca Pachacuti, the greatest of all the Incas, and the scene is laid at Cuzco or at Ollantay-tampu, in the valley of the Vilcamayu. The story turns on the love of a great chief, but not of the blood-royal, with a daughter of the Inca. This would not have been prohibited in former reigns, for the marriage of a sister by the sovereign or his heir, and the marriage of princesses only with princes of the blood-royal, were rules first introduced by Pachacuti. [*1] His imperial power and greatness led

[p. 330]

him to endeavour to raise the royal family far above all others.

The play opens with a dialogue between Ollantay and Piqui Chaqui, his page, a witty and humorous lad. Ollantay talks of his love for the Princess Cusi Coyllur, and wants Piqui Chaqui to take a message to her, while the page dwells on the danger of loving in such a quarter, and evades the question of taking a message. Then to them enters the Uillac Uma, or High Priest of the Sun, who remonstrates with Ollantay--a scene of great solemnity, and very effective.

The next scene is in the Queen's palace. Anahuarqui, the Queen, is discovered with the Princess Cusi Coyllur, who bitterly laments the absence of Ollantay. To them enters the Inca Pachacuti, quite ignorant that his daughter has not only married Ollantay in secret, but that she is actually with child by him. Her mother keeps her secret. The Inca indulges in extravagant expressions of love for his daughter. Then boys and girls enter dancing and singing a harvest song. Another very melancholy yarahui is sung; both capable of being turned by the Princess into presages of the fate of herself and her husband.

In the third scene Ollantay prefers his suit to the Inca Pachacuti in octosyllabic quatrains, the first and last

[p. 331]

lines rhyming, and the second and third. His suit is rejected with scorn and contempt. Ollantay next appears on the heights above Cuzco. In a soliloquy he declares himself the implacable enemy of Cuzco and the Inca. Then Piqui Chaqui arrives with the news that the Queen's palace is empty, and abandoned, and that Cusi Coyllur has quite disappeared; while search is being made for Ollantay. While they are together a song is sung behind some rocks, in praise of Cusi Coyllur's beauty. Then the sound of clarions and people approaching is heard, and Ollantay and Piqui Chaqui take to flight. The next scene finds the Inca enraged at the escape of Ollantay, and ordering his general Rumi-naui to march at once, and make him prisoner. To them enters a chasqui, or messenger, bringing the news that Ollantay has collected a great army at Ollantay-tampu, and that the rebels have proclaimed him Inca.

The second act opens with a grand scene in the hall of the fortress-palace of Ollantay-tampu. Ollantay is proclaimed Inca by the people, and he appoints the Mountain Chief, Urco Huaranca, general of his army. Urco Huaranca explains the dispositions he has made to oppose the army advancing from Cuzco, and his plan of defence. In the next scene Rumi-naui, as a fugitive in the mountains, describes his defeat and the complete success of the strategy of Ollantay and Urco Huaranca. His soliloquy is in the octosyllabic quatrains. The last scene of the second act is in the gardens of the Convent of Virgins of the Sun. A young girl is standing by a gate which opens on the street. This, as afterwards appears, is Yma Sumac, the daughter of Ollantay and Cusi Coyllur, aged ten, but ignorant of her parentage. To her enters Pitu Salla, an attendant, who chides her for being so fond of looking out at the gate. The conversation which follows shows that Yma Sumac detests the convent and

[p. 332]

refuses to take the vows. She also has heard the moans of some sufferer, and importunes Pitu Salla to tell her who it is. Yma Sumac goes as Mama Ccacca enters and cross examines Pitu Salla on her progress in persuading Yma Sumac to adopt convent life. This Mama Ccacca is one of the Matrons or Mama Cuna, and she is also the jailer of Cusi Coyllur.

The third act opens with an amusing scene between the Uillac Uma and Piqui Chaqui, who meet in a street in Cuzco. Piqui Chaqui wants to get news, but to tell nothing, and in this he succeeds. The death of Inca Pachacuti is announced to him, and the accession of Tupac Yupanqui, and with this news he departs.

Next there is an interview between the new Inca Tupac Yupanqui, the Uillac Uma, and the defeated general Rumi-naui, who promises to retrieve the former disaster and bring the rebels to Cuzco, dead or alive. It after wards appears that the scheme of Rumi-naui was one of treachery. He intended to conceal his troops in eaves and gorges near Ollantay-tampu ready to rush in, when a signal was made. Rumi-naui then cut and slashed his face, covered himself with mud, and appeared at the gates of Ollantay-tampu, declaring that he had received this treatment from the new Inca, and imploring protection. [*1] Ollantay received him with the greatest kindness and hospitality. In a few days Ollantay and his people celebrated the Raymi or great festival of the sun with

[p. 333]

much rejoicing and drinking. Rumi-naui pretended to join in the festivities, but when most of them were wrapped in drunken sleep, he opened the gates, let in his own men, and made them all prisoners.

There is next another scene in the garden of the convent, in which Yma Sumac importunes Pitu Salla to tell her the secret of the prisoner. Pitu Salla at last yields and opens a stone door. Cusi Coyllur is discovered, fastened to a wall, and in a dying state. She had been imprisoned, by order of her father, Inca Pachacuti on the birth of Yma Sumac. She is restored with food and water, and the relationship is discovered when Cusi Coyllur hears the child's name, for she had given it to her.

Next the Inca Tupac Yupanqui is discovered in the great hall of his palace, seated on his tiana or throne, with the Uillac Uma in attendance. To them enters a chasqui, or messenger, who describes the result of Rumi-naui's treachery in octosyllabic quatrains. Rumi-naui himself enters and receives the thanks of his sovereign. Then the prisoners are brought in guarded-Ollantay, Hanco Huayllu, Urco Huaranca, and Piqui Chaqui. The Inca upbraids them for their treason. He then asks the Uillac Uma for his judgment. The High Priest recommends mercy. Rumi-naui advises immediate execution: The Inca seems to concur and they are ordered off, when suddenly the Inca cries 'Stop.' He causes them all to be released, appoints Ollantay to the highest post in the empire next to himself, and Urco Huaranca to a high command. There are rejoicings, and in the midst of it all Yma Sumac forces her way into the hall, and throws herself at the Inca's feet, entreating him to save her mother from death. The Inca hands over the matter to Ollantay, but this Yma Sumac will not have, and, the Uillac Uma intervening, the Inca consents to go with the child.

[p. 334]

The final scene is in the gardens of the convent. The Inca enters with Yma Sumac, followed by the whole strength of the company. Mama Ccacca is ordered to open the stone door and Cusi Coyllur is brought out, She proves to be the sister of the Inca and the wife of Ollantay. There are explanations, and all ends happily.

Of the antiquity of the drama of Ollantay there is now no question. General Mitre wrote an elaborate paper on its authenticity, raising several points to prove that it was of modern origin. But every point he raised has been satisfactorily refuted. At the same time there are many other points, some of them referred to by Zegarra, which establish the antiquity of the drama beyond any doubt. The antiquity of the name Ollantay-tampu, applied to the fortress in memory of the drama, is proved by its use in the narratives of Molina (1560) and of Salcamayhua.

An able review of the literature connected with the drama of Ollantay was written by Don E. Larrabure y Unanue, the present Vice-President of Peru, who considers that Ollantay would make a good acting play with magnificent scenic effects.

MS. TEXTS.

1. The original text of Valdez. In 1853 the property of Don Narciso Cuentas of Tinta, heir of Dr. Valdez.

2. The Justiniani text. In 1853 at Laris. Copy of the Valdez text.

3. Markham's copy of the Justiniani text (printed 1871).

4. Rosas copy of the Justiniani text.

5. Copy in the convent of San Domingo at Cuzco (the Dominican text).

[p. 335]

6. Von Tschudi's copy of the Dominican text (printed 1853).

7. Text of Zegarra (printed 1878).

8. Second text of von Tschudi.

9. Text of Spilsbury.

10. Text of Sahuaraura penes Dr. Gonzalez de la Rosa.

There is light thrown upon the name Ollantay by the evidence taken during the journey of the Viceroy Toledo from Jauja to Cuzco, from November 1570 to March 1571. He wanted information respecting the origin of the Inca government, and 200 witnesses were examined, the parentage or lineage of each witness being recorded. Among these we find six witnesses of the Antasayac ayllu. Sayac means a station or division, Anta is a small town near Cuzco. The names of the six Anta witnesses were

ANCAILLO; USCA; HUACRO;
 MANCOY; AUCA PURI; ULLANTAY;
 Besides ANTONIO PACROTRICA and PUNICU PAUCAR,
 Chiefs of Anta.

We thus find that the name of Ollantay belonged to Anta. Now the Incas were under great obligations to the chief of Anta, for that chief had rescued the eldest son of Inca Rocca from the chief of Ayamarca, and had restored him to his father. For this great service the chief of Anta was declared to be a noble of the highest rank and cousin to the Inca family. Moreover, the daughter of the Anta chief was married to the Inca Uira-cocha, and was the mother of Pachacuti. Assuming, as seems probable, that Ollantay was a son of the chief of Anta, he would be a cousin of the Inca, and of very

[p. 336]

high rank, though not an agnate of the reigning family. This, I take it, is what is intended. Pachacuti desired to raise his family high above all others, and that, consequently, there should be no marriages with subjects even of the highest rank; and his excessive severity on the transgression of his rule by his daughter is thus explained.

Footnotes

^325:1

INCA-PACHACUTI
 |
 TUPAC YUPANQUI
 |
 INCA HUAYNA CCAPAC
 |
 MANCO INCA
 |
 TUPAC AMARU
 |
 +------+       
 |              
 JUANA NUSTA = DIEGO CONDORCANQUI
 |
 FELIPE CONDORCANQUI
 |
 PEDRO CONDORCANQUI
 |
 MIGUEL CONDORCANQUI
 |
 JOSE GABRIEL CONDORCANQUI
 (TUPAC AMARU)

^326:1 'Sentencia pronunciada en el Cuzco por el Visitador Don Jose Antonio de Areche, contra Jose Gabriel Tupac Amaru.' In Coleccion de obras y documentos de Don Pedro de Angelis, vol. V. (Buenos Ayres, 1836-7).

^327:1

INCA PACHACUTI.
 |
 TUPAC YUPANQUI
 |
 HUAYNA CCAPAC
 |
 MANCO INCA
 |
 MARIA TUPAC USCA = PEDRO ORTIZ DE ORUE
 |
 +------+       
 |              
 CATALINA ORTIZ =LUIS JUSTINIANI
 |
 LUIS JUSTINIANI
 |
 LUIS JUSTINIANI
 |
 NICOLO JUSTINIANI
 |
 JUSTO PASTOR JUSTINIANI
 |
 Dr. PABLO POLICARPO JUSTINIANI
 (Cura of Laris)

^329:1 The wives of the Incas were called ccoya. The ccoya of the second Inca was a daughter of the chief of Sanoc. The third Inca married a daughter of the chief of Oma, the fourth married a girl of Tacucaray, the wife of the fifth was a daughter of a Cuzco chief. The sixth Inca married a daughter of the chief of Huayllacan, the seventh married a daughter of the chief of Ayamarca, and the eighth went to Anta for a wife. This Anta lady was the mother of Pachacuti. The wife of Pachacuti, named Anahuarqui, was a daughter of the chief of Choco. There was no rule about marrying sisters when Pachacuti succeeded. He introduced it by making his son Tupac Yupanqui marry his daughter Mama Ocllo, but this was quite unprecedented. The transgression of a rule which he had just made may account for his extreme severity.

^332:1 A bust, on an earthen vase, was presented to Don Antonio Maria Alvarez, the political chief of Cuzco, in 1837, by an Indian who declared that it had been handed down in his family from time immemorial, as a likeness of the general, Rumi-naui, who plays an important part in this drama of Ollantay. The person represented must have been a general, from the ornament on the forehead, called mascapaycha, and there are wounds cut on the face.--Museo Erudito, No. B.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 337]

 

OLLANTAY

 

ACTS AND SCENES

ACT 1. Sc. 1.--Open space near Cuzco.
                     Ollantay, Piqui Chaqui, Uillac Uma.
          Sc. 2.--Hall in the Colcampata.
                     Anahuarqui, Cusi Coyllur, Inca Pachacuti, Boys and Girls, Singers.
          Sc. 3.--Hall in the Inca's palace.
                     Pachacuti, Rumi-naui, Ollantay.
          Sc. 4.--Height above Cuzco.
                     Ollantay, Piqui Chaqui, Unseen Singer.
          Sc. 5.--Hall in the Inca's palace.
                     Pachacuti, Rumi-naui, and a Chasqui.

ACT II. Sc. 1.--Ollantay-tampu Hall.
                     Ollantay, Urco Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, People and Soldiers.
          Sc. 2.--A wild place in the mountains.
                     Rumi-naui's soliloquy.
          Sc. 3.--Gardens of the Virgins.
                     Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla, Mama Ccacca.

ACT III. Sc. 1.--Pampa Maroni at Cuzco.
                     Uillac Uma and Piqui Chaqui.
          Sc. 2.--Palace of Tupac Yupanqui.
                     Tupac Yupanqui, Uillac Uma, Rumi-naui.

[p. 338]

         Sc. 3.--Ollantay-tampu, Terrace.
                     Rumi-naui, Ollantay, Guards.
          Sc. 4.--House of Virgins, Corridor.
                     Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla.
          Sc. 5.--House of Virgins, Garden.
                     Yma Sumac, Pitu Salla, Cusi Coyllur.
          Sc. 6.--Palace of Tupac Yupanqui.
                     Tupac Yupanqui, Uillac Uma, a Chasqui, Rumi-naui, Ollantay, Urco Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, Piqui Chaqui, Chiefs and Guards. then Yma Sumac.
          Sc. 7.--House of Virgins, Garden.
                     All of Scene 6, and Mama Ccacca, Cusi Coyllur, Pitu Salla.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 339]

 

OLLANTAY DRAMATIS PERSONAe

 

SCENE

In Cuzco and its environs, and Ollantay-tampu

 

DRAMATIS PERSONAe

APU OLLANTAY.--General of Anti-suyu, the eastern province of the empire. A young chief, but not of the blood-royal. His rank was that of a Tucuyricuo or Viceroy. The name occurs among the witnesses examined by order of the Viceroy Toledo, being one of the six of the Antasayac ayllu.

PACHACUTI.--The Sovereign Inca.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.--Sovereign. Inca, son and heir of Pachacuti.

RUMI-NAUI.--A great chief, General of Colla-suyu. The word means 'Stone-eye.'

UILLAC UMA.--High Priest of the Sun. The word Uma means head, and Uillac, a councillor and diviner.

URCO HUARANCA.--A chief. The words mean' Mountain Chief.' The word huaranca means 1000; hence, Chief of a Thousand.

HANCO HUAYLLU AUQUI.--An old officer, of the blood-royal.

PIQUI CHAQUI.--Page to Ollantay. The words mean 'fleet-footed.'

ANAHUARQUI.--The Ccoya or Queen, wife of Pachacuti.

[p. 340]

CUSI COYLLUR NUSTA.--A Princess, daughter of Pachacuti. The words mean 'the joyful star.'

YMA SUMAC.--Daughter of Cusi Coyllur. The words mean 'How beautiful.'

PITU SALLA.--A girl, companion of Yma Sumac.

CCACCA MAMA.--A matron of Virgins of the Sun. Jailer of Cusi Coyllur.

 Nobles, captains, soldiers, boys and girls dancing, singers, attendants, messengers or Chasqui.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 341]

 

ACT I

 

SCENE I

 An open space near the junction of the two torrents of Cuzco, the Huatanay and Tullumayu or Rodadero, called Pumap Chupan, just outside the gardens of the Sun. The Temple of the Sun beyond the gardens, and the Sacsahuaman hill surmounted by the fortress, rising in the distance. The palace of Colcampata on the hillside.

	 
		(Enter OLLANTAY L. [in a gilded tunic, breeches of llama sinews, usutas or shoes of llama hide, a red mantle of ccompi or fine cloth, and the chucu or head-dress of his rank, holding a battle-axe (champi) and club (macana)] and PIQUI CHAQUI coming up from the back R. [in a coarse brown tunic of auasca or llama cloth, girdle used as a sling, and chucu or head-dress of a Cuzqueno].)
		
		   Ollantay. Where, young fleet-foot, hast thou been?
 Hast thou the starry Nusta seen?
   Piqui Chaqui. The Sun forbids such sacrilege
 'Tis not for me to see the star.
 Dost thou, my master, fear no ill,
 Thine eyes upon the Inca's child?
   Ollantay. In spite of all I swear to love
 That tender dove, that lovely star;
 My heart is as a lamb [*1] with her,
 And ever will her presence seek.

[p. 342]

  Piqui Chaqui. Such thoughts are prompted by Supay [*1];
 That evil being possesses thee.
 All round are beauteous girls to choose
 Before old age, and weakness come.
 If the great Inca knew thy plot
 And what thou seekest to attain,
 Thy head would fall by his command,
 Thy body would be quickly burnt.
   Ollantay. Boy, do not dare to cross me thus.
 One more such word and thou shalt die.
 These hands will tear thee limb from limb,
 If still thy councils are so base.
   Piqui Chaqui. Well! treat thy servant as a dog,
 But do not night and day repeat,
 'Piqui Chaqui! swift of foot!
 Go once more to seek the star.'
   Ollantay. Have I not already said
 That e'en if death's fell scythe [*2] was here,
 If mountains should oppose my path
 Like two fierce foes [*3] who block the way,
 Yet will I fight all these combined
 And risk all else to gain my end,
 And whether it be life or death
 I'll cast myself at Coyllur's feet.
   Piqui Chaqui. Rut if Supay himself should come?
   Ollantay. I'd strike the evil spirit down.

[p. 343]

  Piqui Chaqui. If thou shouldst only see his nose,
 Thou wouldst not speak as thou dost now.
   Ollantay. Now, Piqui Chaqui, speak the truth,
 Seek not evasion or deceit.
 Dost thou not already know,
 Of all the flowers in the field,
 Not one can equal my Princess?
   Piqui Chaqui. Still, my master, thou dost rave.
 I think I never saw thy love.
 Stay! was it her who yesterday
 Came forth with slow and faltering steps
 And sought a solitary [*1] path [*2]?
 If so, 'tis true she's like the sun,
 The moon less beauteous than her face. [*3]
   Ollantay. It surely was my dearest love.
 How beautiful, how bright is she
 This very moment thou must go
 And take my message to the Star.
   Piqui Chaqui. I dare not, master; in the day,
 1 fear to pass the palace gate.
 With all the splendour of the court,
 I could not tell her from the rest.
   Ollantay. Didst thou not say thou sawest her?
   Piqui Chaqui. I said so, but it was not sense.
 A star can only shine at night
 Only at night could I be sure.
   Ollantay. Begone, thou lazy good-for-nought.
 The joyful star that I adore,
 If placed in presence of the Sun,
 Would shine as brightly as before.

[p. 344]

  Piqui Chaqui. Lo! some person hither comes,
 Perhaps an old crone seeking alms;
 Yes! Look! he quite resembles one.
 Lot him the dangerous message take.
 Send it by him, O noble Chief!
 From me they would not hear the tale;
 Thy page is but a humble lad.

	 
		(Enter the UILLAC UMA, or High Priest of the Sun, at the back, arms raised to the Sun. In a grey tunic and black mantle from the shoulders to the ground, a long knife in his belt, the undress chucu on his head.)
		
		   Uillac Uma. O giver of all warmth and light
 O Sun! I fall and worship thee.
 For thee the victims are prepared,
 A thousand llamas and their lambs
 Are ready for thy festal day.
 The sacred fire'll lap their blood,
 In thy dread presence, mighty one,
 After long fast [*1] thy victims fall.
   Ollantay. Who comes hither, Piqui Chaqui?
 Yes, 'tis the holy Uillac Uma;
 He brings his tools of augury.
 No puma [*2] more astute and wise
 I hate that ancient conjurer
 Who prophesies of evil things,
 I feel the evils he foretells;
 'Tis he who ever brings ill-luck.

[p. 345]

  Piqui Chaqui. Silence, master, do not speak,
 The old man doubly is informed;
 Fore-knowing every word you say,
 Already he has guessed it all.

(He lies down on a bank.)

  Ollantay (aside). He sees me. I must speak to him.

	 
		(The Uillac Uma comes forward.)
		
		 O Uillac Uma, Great High Priest,
 I bow before thee with respect
 May the skies be clear for thee,
 And brightest sunshine meet thine eyes.
   Uillac Uma. Brave Ollantay! Princely one!
 May all the teeming land be thine;
 May thy far-reaching arm of might
 Reduce the wide-spread universe.
   Ollantay. Old man! thine aspect causes fear,
 Thy presence here some ill forebodes;
 All round thee dead men's bones appear,
 Baskets, flowers, sacrifice.
 All men when they see thy face
 Are filled with terror and alarm.
 What means it all? why comest thou?
 It wants some months before the least.
 Is it that the Inca is ill?
 Perchance hast thou some thought divined
 Which soon will turn to flowing blood.
 Why comest thou? the Sun's great day,
 The Moon's libations are not yet
 The moon has not yet nearly reached
 The solemn time for sacrifice.
   Uillac Uma. Why dost thou these questions put,
 In tones of anger and reproach?

[p. 346]

Am I, forsooth, thy humble slave?
 That I know all I'll quickly prove.
   Ollantay. My beating heart is filled with dread,
 Beholding thee so suddenly;
 Perchance thy coming is a sign,
 Of evils overtaking me.
   Uillac Uma. Fear not, Ollantay! not for that,
 The High Priest comes to thee this day.
 It is perhaps for love of thee,
 That, as a straw is blown by wind,
 A friend, this day, encounters thee.
 Speak to me as to a friend,
 Hide nothing from my scrutiny.
 This day I come to offer thee
 A last and most momentous choice
 'Tis nothing less than life or death.
   Ollantay. Then make thy words more clear to me,
 That I may understand the choice
 Till now 'tis but a tangled skein,
 Unravel it that I may know.
   Uillac Uma. 'Tis well. Now listen, warlike. Chief
 My science has enabled me,
 To learn and see all hidden things
 Unknown to other mortal men.
 My power will enable me
 To make of thee a greater prince.
 I brought thee up from tender years,
 And cherished thee with love and care
 I now would guide thee in the right,
 And ward off all that threatens thee.
 As chief of Anti-suyu now,
 The people venerate thy name;
 Thy Sovereign trusts and honours thee,
 E'en to sharing half his realm.
 From all the rest he chose thee out,

[p. 347]

And placed all power in thy hands;
 He made thy armies great and strong,
 And strengthened thee against thy foes
 How numerous soe'er they be,
 They have been hunted down by thee.
 Are these good reasons for thy wish,
 To wound thy Sovereign to the heart?
 His daughter is beloved by thee;
 Thy passion thou wouldst fain indulge,
 Lawless and forbidden though it be.
 I call upon thee, stop in time,
 Tear this folly from thy heart.
 If thy passion is immense,
 Still let honour hold its place.
 You reel, you stagger on the brink
 I'd snatch thee from the very edge.
 Thou knowest well it cannot be,
 The Inca never would consent.
 If thou didst e'en propose it now,
 He would be overcome with rage;
 From favoured prince and trusted chief,
 Thou wouldst descend to lowest rank.
   Ollantay. How is it that thou canst surely know
 What still is hidden in my heart?
 Her mother only knows my love,
 Yet thou revealest all to me.
   Uillac Uma. I read thy secret on the moon,
 As if upon the Quipu knots;
 And what thou wouldst most surely hide,
 Is plain to me as all the rest.
   Ollantay. In my heart I had divined
 That thou wouldst search me through and through
 Thou knowest all, O Councillor,
 And wilt thou now desert thy son?
   Uillac Uma. How oft we mortals heedless drink,

[p. 348]

A certain death from golden cup
 Recall to mind how ills befall,
 And that a stubborn heart 's the cause.
   Ollantay (kneeling). Plunge that dagger in my breast,
 Thou holdst it ready in thy belt;
 Cut out my sad and broken heart
 I ask the favour at thy feet.
   Uillac Uma (to Piqui Chaqui). Gather me that flower, boy.

	 
		(Piqui Chaqui gives him a withered flower and lies down again, pretending to sleep.)
		
		 (To Ollantay). Behold, it is quite dead and dry.
 Once more behold! e'en now it weeps,
 It weeps. The water flows from it.

	 
		(Water flows out of the flower.)
		
		   Ollantay. More easy for the barren rocks
 Or for sand to send forth water,
 Than that I should cease to love
 The fair princess, the joyful star.
   Uillac Uma. Put a seed into the ground,
 It multiplies a hundredfold;
 The more thy crime shall grow and swell,
 The greater far thy sudden fall.
   Ollantay. Once for all, I now confess
 To thee, O great and mighty Priest;
 Now learn my fault. To thee I speak,
 Since thou hast torn it from my heart.
 The lasso to tie me is long,
 'Tis ready to twist round my throat
 Yet its threads are woven with gold,
 It avenges a brilliant crime.
 Cusi Coyllur e'en now is my wife,
 Already we 're bound and are one;

[p. 349]

My blood now runs in her veins,
 E'en now I am noble as she.
 Her mother has knowledge of all,
 The Queen can attest what I say;
 Let me tell all this to the King,
 I pray for thy help and advice.
 I will speak without fear and with force,
 He may perhaps give way to his rage
 Yet he may consider my youth,
 May remember the battles I've fought;
 The record is carved on my club.

	 
		(Holds up his macana.)
		
		 He may think of his enemies crushed,
 The thousands I've thrown at his feet.
   Uillac Uma. Young Prince! thy words are too bold,
 Thou hast twisted the thread of thy fate--
 Beware, before 'tis too late;
 Disentangle and weave it afresh,
 Go alone to speak to the King,
 Alone bear the blow that you seek;
 Above all let thy words be but few,
 And say them with deepest respect;
 Be it life, be it death that you find,
 I will never forget thee, my son.

[Walks up and exit.

  Ollantay. Ollantay, thou art a man,
 No place in thy heart for fear;
 Cusi Coyllur, surround me with light.
 Piqui Chaqui, where art thou?
   Piqui Chaqui (jumping up). I was asleep, my master,
 And dreaming of evil things.
   Ollantay. Of what?
   Piqui Chaqui. Of a fox with a rope round its neck.

[p. 350]

  Ollantay. Sure enough, thou art the fox.
   Piqui Chaqui. It is true that my nose is growing finer,
 And my ears a good deal longer.
   Ollantay. Come, lead me to the Coyllur.
   Piqui Chaqui. It is still daylight.

[Exeunt.

Footnotes

^341:1 Chita is the lamb of the llama. A lamb of two or three months was a favourite pet in the time of the Incas. It followed its mistress, adorned with a little bell and ribbons.

^342:1 Supay, an evil spirit, according to some authorities.

^342:2 Ichuna, a sickle or scythe. The expression has been cited by General Mitre and others as an argument that the drama is modern, because this is a metaphor confined to the old world. But ichuna was in use, in Quichua, in this sense, before the Spaniards came. The word is from Ichu, grass.

^342:3 The Peruvians personified a mountain as two spirits, good and evil. In writing poetically of a mountain opposing, it would be referred to in the persons of its genii or spirits, and spoken of as two foes, not one.

^343:1 Rurun, desert, solitude.

^343:2 Tasquiy, to march; tasquina, promenade, path.

^343:3 Cusi Coyllur, while daylight lasted, was, in the eyes of Piqui Chaqui, like the sun. A change takes place at twilight, and at night she is like the moon.

^344:1 Fasting was a preparation for all great religious ceremonies. Victims for sacrifice underwent a previous fast, which was looked upon in the fight of purification before being offered to the Deity.

^344:2 They gave the attributes we usually assign to the fox to the puma.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 2

 A great hall in the Colcampata, then the palace of the Queen or Ccoya Anahuarqui. In the centre of the back scene a doorway, and seen through it gardens with the snowy peak of Vilcanota in the distance. Walls covered with golden slabs. On either side of the doorway three recesses, with household gods in the shape of maize-cobs and llamas, and gold vases in them. On R. a golden tiana or throne. On L. two lower seats covered with cushions of fine woollen cloth.

	 
		(ANAHUARQUI, the Queen or Ccoya (in blue chucu, white cotton bodice, and red mantle secured by a golden topu or pin, set with emeralds, and a blue skirt), and the princess CUSI COYLLUR (in a chucu, with feathers of the tunqui, white bodice and skirt, and grey mantle with topu, set with pearls) discovered seated.)
		
		   Anahuarqui. Since when art thou feeling so sad,
 Cusi Coyllur! great Inti's prunelle? [*1]
 Since when hast thou lost all thy joy,
 Thy smile and thy once merry laugh?

[p. 351]

Tears of grief now pour down my face,
 As I watch and mourn over my child;
 Thy grief makes me ready to die.
 Thy union filled thee with joy,
 Already you're really his wife.
 Is he not the man of thy choice?
 O daughter, devotedly loved,
 Why plunged in such terrible grief?

(Cusi Coyllur has had her face hidden in the pillows. She now rises to her feet, throwing up her arms.)

  Cusi Coyllur. O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
 How can my tears o'er cease to flow,
 How can my bitter sighs surcease,
 While the valiant Chief I worship
 For many days and sleepless nights,
 All heedless of my tender years,
 Seems quite to have forgotten me?
 He has turned his regard from his wife
 And no longer seeks for his love.
 O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
 O my husband so beloved!
 Since the day when I last saw my love
 The moon has been hidden from view;
 The sun shines no more as of old,
 In rising it rolls among mist;
 At night the stars are all dim,
 All nature seems sad and distressed
 The comet with fiery tail,
 Announces my sorrow and grief
 Surrounded by darkness and tears,
 Evil auguries fill me with fears.
 O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
 O my husband so beloved!

[p. 352]

  Anahuarqui. Compose thyself and dry thine eyes,
 The King, thy father, has arrived.
 Thou lovest Ollantay, my child?

	 
		(Enter the INCA PACHACUTI. On his head the mascapaycha, with the llautu or imperial fringe. A tunic of cotton embroidered with gold; on his breast the golden breastplate representing the sun, surrounded by the calendar of months. Round his waist the fourfold belt of tocapu. A crimson mantle of fine vicuna wool, fastened on his shoulders by golden puma's heads. Shoes of cloth of gold. He sits down on the golden tiana.)
		
		   Inca Pachacuti. Cusi Coyllur! Star of joy,
 Most lovely of my progeny!
 Thou symbol of parental love--
 Thy lips are like the huayruru. [*1]
 Rest upon thy father's breast,
 Repose, my child, within mine arms.

	 
		(Cusi Coyllur comes across. They embrace.)
		
		 Unwind thyself, my precious one,
 A thread of gold within the woof.
 All my happiness rests upon thee,
 Thou art my greatest delight.
 Thine eyes are lovely and bright,
 As the rays of my father the Sun.
 When thy lips are moving to speak,
 When thine eyelids are raised with a smile,
 The wide world is fairly entranced.
 Thy breathing embalms the fresh air;

[p. 353]

Without thee thy father would pine,
 Life to him would be dreary and waste.
 He seeks for thy happiness, child,
 Thy welfare is ever his care.

	 
		(Cusi Coyllur throws herself at his feet.)
		
		   Cusi Coyllur. O father, thy kindness to me
 I feel; and embracing thy knees
 All the grief of thy daughter will cease,
 At peace when protected by thee.
   Pachacuti. How is this! my daughter before me
 On knees at my feet, and in tears?
 I fear some evil is near--
 Such emotion must needs be explained.
   Cusi Coyllur. The star does weep before Inti,
 The limpid tears wash grief away.
   Pachacuti. Rise, my beloved, my star,
 Thy place is on thy dear father's knee.

	 
		(Cusi Coyllur rises and sits on a stool by her father. An attendant approaches.)
		
		   Attendant. O King! thy servants come to please thee.
   Pachacuti. Let them all enter.

	 
		(Boys and girls enter dancing. After the dance they sing a harvest song.)
		
		Thou must not feed,
		          O Tuyallay, [*1]
		 In Nusta's field,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 Thou must not rob,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 The harvest maize,
		          O Tuyallay.
		
		 

[p. 354]

	 
		The grains are white,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 So sweet for food,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 The fruit is sweet,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 The leaves are green
		          O Tuyallay;
		 But the trap is set,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 The lime is there,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 We'll cut thy claws,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 To seize thee quick,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 Ask Piscaca, [*1]
		          O Tuyallay,
		 Nailed on a branch,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 Where is her heart,
		          O Tuyallay?
		 Where her plumes,
		          O Tuyallay?
		 She is cut up,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 For stealing grain,
		          O Tuyallay.
		 See the fate,
		          O Tuyallay,
		 Of robber birds,
		          O Tuyallay.
		
		 

[p. 355]

  Pachacuti. Cusi Coyllur, remain thou here,
 Thy mother's palace is thy home
 Fail not to amuse thyself,
 Surrounded by thy maiden friends.

[Exeunt the Inca Pachacuti, the Ccoya Anahuarqui, and attendants.

  Cusi Coyllur. I should better like a sadder song.
 My dearest friends, the last you sang
 To me foreshadowed evil things; [*1]
 You who sang it leave me now.

[Exeunt boys and girls, except one girl who sings.

	 
		Two loving birds are in despair, [*2]
		   They moan, they weep, they sigh;
		 For snow has fallen on the pair,
		   To hollow tree they fly.
		
		But lo! one dove is left alone
		   And mourns her cruel fate;
		 She makes a sad and piteous moan,
		   Alone without a mate.
		
		She fears her friend is dead and gone--
		   Confirmed in her belief,
		 Her sorrow finds relief in song,
		   And thus she tells her grief.
		
		'Sweet mate! Alas, where art thou now?
		   I miss thine eyes so bright,
		 Thy feet upon the tender bough,
		   Thy breast so pure and bright.'
		
		 

[p. 356]

	 
		She wanders forth from stone to stone,
		   She seeks her mate in vain;
		 'My love! my love!' she makes her moan,
		   She falls, she dies in pain.
		
		   Cusi Coyllur. That yarahui is too sad,
 Leave me alone.

[Exit the girl who sang the yarahui.

Now my tears can freely flow.

Footnotes

^350:1 Intip llirpun, 'apple of the sun's eye.' There is no English equivalent that is suitable.

^352:1 Huayruru is the seed of a thorny bush, erythrina rubra, of a bright red colour. Zegarra has coral as the equivalent for huayruru.

^353:1 The tuya (coccoborus chrysogaster) is a small finch, and tuyallay means 'my little tuya.'

^354:1 The piscaca is a much larger bird than the tuya. These piscacas (coccoborus torridus) are nailed to trees as a warning to other birds. They are black, with white breasts.

^355:1 In the tuya she sees her husband Ollantay, while the poor princess herself is the forbidden grain.

^355:2 This is a yarahui or mournful elegy, of which there are so many in the Quichua language. The singers of them were known as yarahuec.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 3

 Great hall in the palace of Pachacuti. The INCA, as before, discovered seated on a golden tiana L. Enter to him R. OLLANTAY and RUMI-NAUI.

  Pachacuti. The time has arrived, O great Chiefs,
 To decide on the coming campaign.
 The spring is approaching us now,
 And our army must start for the war.
 To the province of Colla [*1] we march--
 There is news of Chayanta's [*2] advance.
 The enemies muster in strength,
 They sharpen their arrows and spears.
   Ollantay. O King, that wild rabble untaught
 Can never resist thine array;
 Cuzco alone with its height
 Is a barrier that cannot be stormed.
 Twenty four thousand of mine,
 With their champis [*3] selected with care,
 Impatiently wait for the sign,

[p. 357]

The sound of the beat of my drums, [*1]
 The strains of my clarion and fife.
 Pachacuti. Strive then to stir them to fight,
 Arouse them to join in the fray,
 Lest some should desire to yield,
 To escape the effusion of blood.
   Rumi-naui. The enemies gather in force,
 The Yuncas [*2] are called to their aid;
 They have put on their garbs for the war,
 And have stopped up the principal roads.
 All this is to hide their defects--
 The men of Chayanta are base.
 We hear they're destroying the roads,
 But we can force open the way;
 Our llamas are laden with food--
 We are ready to traverse the wilds.
 Pachacuti. Are you really ready to start
 To punish those angry snakes?
 But first you must give them a chance
 To surrender, retiring in peace,
 So that blood may not flow without cause,
 That no deaths of my soldiers befall.
   Ollantay. I am ready to march with my men,
 Every detail prepared and in place,
 But alas! I am heavy with care,
 Almost mad with anxious suspense.
   Pachacuti. Speak, Ollantay. Tell thy wish--
 'Tis granted, e'en my royal fringe.
   Ollantay. Hear me in secret, O King.
   Pachacuti (to Rumi-naui). Noble Chief of Colla, retire;
 Seek repose in thy house for a time.
 I will call thee before very long,

[p. 358]

Having need of thy valour and skill.
   Rumi-naui. With respect I obey thy command.

[Exit Rumi-naui.

	 
		  Ollantay. Thou knowest, O most gracious Lord,
		 That I have served thee from a youth,
		 Have worked with fortitude and truth,
		 Thy treasured praise was my reward. [*1]
		
		All dangers I have gladly met,
		 For thee I always watched by night,
		 For thee was forward in the fight,
		 My forehead ever bathed in sweat.
		
		For thee I've been a savage foe,
		 Urging my Antis [*2] not to spare,
		 But kill and fill the land with fear,
		 And make the blood of conquered flow.
		
		My name is as a dreaded rope, [*3]
		 I've made the hardy Yuncas [*4] yield,
		 By me the fate of Chancas [*5] sealed,
		 They are thy thralls without a hope.
		
		 

[p. 359]

	 
		'Twas I who struck the fatal blow,
		 When warlike Huancavilca [*1] rose,
		 Disturbing thy august repose,
		 And laid the mighty traitor low.
		
		Ollantay ever led the van,
		 Wherever men were doomed to die;
		 When stubborn foes were forced to fly,
		 Ollantay ever was the man.
		
		Now every tribe bows down to thee--
		 Some nations peacefully were led,
		 Those that resist their blood is shed--
		 But all, O King, was due to me.
		
		O Sovereign Inca, great and brave,
		 Rewards I know were also mine,
		 My gratitude and thanks are thine,
		 To me the golden axe you gave.
		
		Inca! thou gavest me command
		 And rule o'er all the Anti race,
		 To me they ever yield with grace,
		 And thine, great King, is all their land
		
		My deeds, my merits are thine own
		 To thee alone my work is due.
		 For one more favour I would sue,
		 My faithful service--thy renown.
		
		(Ollantay kneels before the Inca.)
		
		 

[p. 360]

	 
		Thy thrall: I bow to thy behest,
		 Thy fiat now will seal my fate.
		 O King, my services are great,
		 I pray thee grant one last request.
		
		I ask for Cusi Coyllur's hand
		 If the Nusta's [*1] love I've won.
		 O King! you'll have a faithful son,
		 Fearless, well tried, at thy command.
		
		   Pachacuti. Ollantay, thou dost now presume.
 Thou art a subject, nothing more.
 Remember, bold one, who thou art,
 And learn to keep thy proper place.
   Ollantay. Strike me to the heart.
   Pachacuti. 'Tis for me to see to that,
 And not for thee to choose.
 Thy presumption is absurd.
 Be gone!

[Ollantay rises and exit R.

Footnotes

^356:1 Colla-suyu, the basin of lake Titicaca.

^356:2 Chayanta, a tribe in the montana south of the Collas.

^356:3 Champi, a one-handed battle-axe.

^357:1 Huancar, a drum; pututu, fife.

^357:2 Yunca, inhabitant of warm valley. Here it refers to the wild tribes of the montana.

^358:1 In the original Quichua, Ollantay makes his appeal to the Inca in quatrains of octosyllabic verses, the first line rhyming with the last, and the second with the third. Garcilasso de la Vega and others testify to the proficiency of the Incas in this form of composition.

^358:2 Ollantay was Viceroy of Anti-suyu.

^358:3 Chahuar, a rope of aloe fibre. A curb or restraint.

^358:4 Raprancutan cuchurcani: literally, 'I have clipped their wings.' Rapra, a wing.

^358:5 The powerful nation of Chancas, with their chief, Huancavilca, inhabited the great valley of Andahuaylas and were formidable rivals of the Incas. But they were subdued by Pachacuti long before Ollantay can have been born. An allowable dramatic anachronism.

^359:1 Huancavilca was chief of the powerful nation of Chancas.

^360:1 Nusta, Princess.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 4

 A rocky height above Cuzco to the NE. Distant view of the city of Cuzco and of the Sacsahuaman hill, crowned by the fortress.

	 
		(Enter OLLANTAY armed.)
		
		   Ollantay. Alas, Ollantay! Ollantay!
 Thou master of so many lands,
 Insulted by him thou servedst well.
 O my thrice-beloved Coyllur,
 Thee too I shall lose for ever.

[p. 361]

O the void [*1] within my heart,
 O my princess! O precious dove!
 Cuzco! O thou beautiful city!
 Henceforth behold thine enemy.
 I'll bare thy breast to stab thy heart,
 And throw it as food for condors;
 Thy cruel Inca I will slay.
 I will call my men in thousands,
 The Antis will be assembled,
 Collected as with a lasso.
 All will be trained, all fully armed,
 I will guide them to Sacsahuaman.
 They will be as a cloud of curses,
 When flames rise to the heavens.
 Cuzco shall sleep on a bloody couch,
 The King shall perish in its fall;
 Then shall my insulter see
 How numerous are my followers.
 When thou, proud King, art at my feet,
 We then shall see if thou wilt say,
 'Thou art too base for Coyllur's hand.'
 Not then will I bow down and ask,
 For I, not thou, will be the King--
 Yet, until then, let prudence rule.

	 
		(Enter PIQUI CHAQUI from back, R.)
		
		 Piqui Chaqui, go back with speed,
 Tell the Princess I come to-night.
   Piqui Chaqui. I have only just come from there--
 The palace was deserted quite,
 No soul to tell me what had passed,
 Not even a dog [*2] was there.

[p. 362]

All the doors were closed and fastened,
 Except the principal doorway,
 And that was left without a guard.
   Ollantay. And the servants?
   Piqui Chaqui. Even the mice had fled and gone,
 For nothing had been left to eat.
 Only an owl was brooding there,
 Uttering its cry of evil omen.
   Ollantay. Perhaps then her father has taken her,
 To hide her in his palace bounds.
   Piqui Chaqui. The Inca may have strangled her;
 Her mother too has disappeared.
   Ollantay. Did no one ask for me
 Before you went away?
   Piqui Chaqui. Near a thousand men are seeking
 For you, and all are enemies,
 Armed with their miserable clubs.
   Ollantay. If they all arose against me,
 With this arm I'd fight them all
 No one yet has beat this hand,
 Wielding the champi sharp and true.
   Piqui Chaqui. I too would like to give a stroke
 At least, if my enemy was unarmed.
   Ollantay. To whom?
   Piqui Chaqui. I mean that Urco Huaranca chief,
 Who lately was in search of thee.
   Ollantay. Perhaps the Inca sends him here
 If so my anger is aroused.
   Piqui Chaqui. Not from the King, I am assured,
 He cometh of his own accord
 And yet he is an ignoble man.
   Ollantay. He has left Cuzco, I believe;

[p. 363]

My own heart tells me it is so
 I'm sure that owl announces it.
 We'll take to the hills, at once.
   Piqui Chaqui. But wilt thou abandon the Star?
   Ollantay. What can I do, alas!
 Since she has disappeared?
 Alas, my dove! my sweet princess.

	 
		(Music heard among the rocks.)
		
		   Piqui Chaqui. Listen to that yarahui,
 The sound comes from somewhere near.

(They sit on rocks.)

SONG

	 
		In a moment I lost my beloved,
		   She was gone, and I never knew where;
		 I sought her in fields and in woods,
		   Asking all if they 'd seen the Coyllur.
		
		Her face was so lovely and fair,
		   They called her the beautiful Star.
		 No one else can be taken for her,
		   With her beauty no girl can compare.
		
		Both the sun and the moon seem to shine,
		   Resplendent they shine from a height,
		 Their rays to her beauty resign
		   Their brilliant light with delight.
		
		Her hair is a soft raven black,
		   Her tresses are bound with gold thread,
		 They fall in long folds down her back,
		   And add charm to her beautiful head.
		
		Her eyelashes brighten her face,
		   Two rainbows less brilliant and fair,[p. 364]
		 Her eyes full of mercy and grace,
		   With nought but two, suns can compare.
		
		The eyelids with arrows concealed,
		   Gaily shoot their rays into the heart
		 They open, lo! beauty revealed,
		   Pierces through like a glittering dart.
		
		Her cheeks Achancara [*1] on snow,
		   Her face more fair than the dawn,
		 From her mouth the laughter doth flow,
		   Between pearls as bright as the morn.
		
		Smooth as crystal and spotlessly clear
		   Is her throat, like the corn in a sheaf
		 Her bosoms, which scarcely appear,
		   Like flowers concealed by a leaf.
		
		Her beautiful hand is a sight,
		   As it rests from all dangers secure,
		 Her fingers transparently white,
		   Like icicles spotless and pure.
		
		   Ollantay (rising). That singer, unseen and unknown,
 Has declared Coyllur's beauty and grace;
 He should fly hence, where grief overwhelms.
 O Princess! O loveliest Star,
 I alone am the cause of thy death,
 I also should die with my love.
   Piqui Chaqui. Perhaps thy star has passed away,
 For the heavens are sombre and grey.
   Ollantay. When they know that their Chief has fled,

[p. 365]

My people will rise at my call,
 They will leave the tyrant in crowds
 And he will be nearly alone.
   Piqui Chaqui. Thou hast love and affection from men,
 For thy kindness endears thee to all,
 For thy hand's always open with gifts,
 And is closely shut only to me.
   Ollantay. Of what hast thou need?
   Piqui Chaqui. What? the means to got this and that,
 To offer a gift to my girl,
 To let others see what I have,
 So that I may be held in esteem.
   Ollantay. Be as brave as thou art covetous,
 And all the world will fear thee.
   Piqui Chaqui. My face is not suited for that;
 Always gay and ready to laugh,
 My features are not shaped that way.
 To look brave! not becoming to me.
 What clarions sound on the hills?
 It quickly cometh near to us.

	 
		(Both look out at different sides.)
		
		   Ollantay. I doubt not those who seek me--come,
 Let us depart and quickly march.
   Piqui Chaqui. When flight is the word, I am here.

[Exeunt.

Footnotes

^361:1 Pisipachiyqui, to suffer from the void caused by absence. Pisipay, to regret the absence of, to miss any one.

^361:2 The Dominican text has misi, a cat, instead of allco, a dog. Von Tschudi thought that misi was a word of Spanish origin. [p. 362] Zegarra says that it is not. Before the Spaniards came, there was a small wild cat in the Andes called misi-puna. But the Justiniani text has allco, a dog.

^364:1 Achancara, a begonia. A red flower in the neighbourhood of Cuzco, according to Zegarra. One variety is red and white.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 5

 The great hall of the palace of Pachacuti. The INCA, as before, seated on the tiana. Enter to him RUMI-NAUI.

  Pachacuti. I ordered a search to be made,
 But Ollantay was not to be found.
 My rage I can scarcely control--
 Hast thou found this infamous wretch?

[p. 366]

  Rumi-naui. His fear makes him hide from thy wrath.
   Pachacuti. Take a thousand men fully armed,
 And at once commence the pursuit.
   Rumi-naui. Who can tell what direction to take?
 Three days have gone by since his flight,
 Perchance he 's concealed in some house,
 And till now he is there, safely hid.

	 
		(Enter a chasqui or messenger with quipus.)
		
		 Behold, O King, a messenger
 From Urubamba he has come.
   Chasqui. I was ordered to come to my King,
 Swift as the wind, and behold me.
   Pachacuti. What news bringest thou?
   Chasqui. This quipu will tell thee, O King.
   Pachacuti. Examine it, O Rumi-naui.
   Rumi-naui. Behold the llanta, and the knots [*1]
 Announce the number of his men.
   Pachacuti (to Chasqui). And thou, what hast thou seen?
   Chasqui. 'Tis said that all the Anti host
 Received Ollantay with acclaim;
 Many have seen, and they recount,
 Ollantay wears the royal fringe.
   Rumi-naui. The quipu record says the same.
   Pachacuti. Scarcely can I restrain my rage!
 Brave chief, commence thy march at once,
 Before the traitor gathers strength.
 If thy force is not enough,
 Add fifty thousand men of mine.
 Advance at once with lightning speed,
 And halt not till the foe is reached.
   Rumi-naui. To-morrow sees me on the route,

[p. 367]

I go to call the troops at once
 The rebels on the Colla road,
 I drive them flying down the rocks.
 Thine enemy I bring to thee,
 Dead or alive, Ollantay falls.
 Meanwhile, O Inca, mighty Lord,
 Rest and rely upon thy thrall.

[Exeunt.

END OF ACT I.

Footnotes

^366:1 The llanta is the main rope of the quipu, about a yard long. The small cords of llama wool, of various colours, denoting different subjects, each with various kinds of knots, recording numbers.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 368]

 

ACT II

 

SCENE 1

 Ollantay-tampu. Hall of the fortress-palace. Back scene seven immense stone, slabs, resting on them a monolith right across. Above masonry. At sides masonry with recesses; in the R. centre a great doorway. A golden tiana against the central slab.

	 
		(Enter OLLANTAY and URCO HUARANCA, both fully armed.)
		
		   Urco Huaranca. Ollantay, thou hast been proclaimed
 By all the Antis as their Lord.
 The women weep, as you will see--
 They lose their husbands and their sons,
 Ordered to the Chayanta war.
 When will there be a final stop
 To distant wars? Year after year
 They send us all to far-off lands,
 Where blood is made to flow like rain.
 The King himself is well supplied
 With coca and all kinds of food.
 What cares he that his people starve?
 Crossing the wilds our llamas die,
 Our feet are wounded by the thorns,
 And if we would not die of thirst
 We carry water on our backs.
   Ollantay. Gallant friends! Ye hear those words,
 Ye listen to the mountain chief.

[p. 369]

Filled with compassion for my men,
 I thus, with sore and heavy heart,
 Have spoken to the cruel king:
 'The Anti-suyu must have rest;
 All her best men shan't die for thee,
 By battle, fire, and disease--
 They die in numbers terrible.
 How many men have ne'er returned,
 How many chiefs have met their death
 For enterprises far away?'
 For this I left the Inca's court, [*1]
 Saying that we must rest in peace;
 Lot none of us forsake our hearths,
 And if the Inca still persists,
 Proclaim with him a mortal feud.

	 
		(Enter HANCO HUAYLLU, several chiefs, and a great crowd of soldiers and people.)
		
		   People. Long Eve our king, Ollantay
 Bring forth the standard and the fringe,
 Invest him with the crimson fringe
 In Tampu now the Inca reigns,
 He rises like the star of day.

	 
		(The chiefs, soldiers, and people range them selves round. Ollantay is seated on the tiana by Hanco Huayllu, an aged Auqui or Prince.)
		
		   Hanco Huayllu. Receive from me the royal fringe,
 'Tis given by the people's will.

[p. 370]

Uilcanota [*1] is a distant land,
 Yet, even now, her people come
 To range themselves beneath thy law.

	 
		(Ollantay is invested with the fringe. He rises.)
		
		   Ollantay. Urco Huaranca, thee I name
 Of Anti-suyu Chief and Lord;
 Receive the arrows and the plume,

(Gives them.)

Henceforth thou art our general.
   People. Long life to the Mountain Chief.
   Ollantay. Hanco Huayllu, [*2] of all my lords
 Thou art most venerable and wise,
 Being kin to the august High Priest,
 It is my wish that thou shouldst give
 The ring unto the Mountain Chief.

	 
		(Urco Huaranca kneels, and Hanco Huayllu addresses him.)
		
		   Hanco Huayllu. This ring around thy finger's placed
 That thou mayst feel, and ne'er forget,
 That when in fight thou art engaged,
 Clemency becomes a hero chief.
   Urco Huaranca. A thousand times, illustrious king,
 I bless thee for thy trust in me.
   Hanco Huayllu. Behold the valiant Mountain Chief,
 Now fully armed from head to foot,
 And bristling like the quiscahuan, [*3]
 Accoutred as becomes a knight.

[p. 371]

	 
		(Turning to Urco Huaranca.)
		
		 Ne'er let thine enemies take thee in rear
 Man of the Puna, [*1] it ne'er can be said
 You fled or trembled as a reed.
   Urco Huaranca. Hear me, warriors of the Andes!
 Already we have a valiant king,
 It might be he will be attacked;
 'Tis said th' old Inca sends a force,
 The men of Cuzco now advance.
 We have not a single day to lose;
 Call from the heights our Puna men,
 Prepare their arms without delay,
 Make Tampu strong with rampart walls,
 No outlet leave without a guard;
 On hill slopes gather pois'nous herbs
 To shoot our arrows, carrying death.
   Ollantay (to Urco Huaranca). Select the chiefs!
 Fix all the posts for different tribes;
 Our foes keep marching without sleep--
 Contrive to check them by surprise.
 The compi [*2] ruse may cause their flight.
   Urco Huaranca. Thirty thousand brave Antis are here,
 Amongst them no weakling is found;
 Apu Maruti, [*3] the mighty in war,
 From high Uilcapampa [*4] will come,
 On steep Tinquiqueru [*5] he'll stand

[p. 372]

To march when the signal appears;
 On the opposite side of the stream
 Prince Chara [*1] has mustered his force;
 In the gorge Charamuni [*2] I post
 Ten thousand armed Antis on watch;
 Another such force is in wait
 On the left, in the vale of Pachar. [*3]
 We are ready to meet our foes,
 We await them with resolute calm;
 They will march in their confident pride
 Until their retreat is out off,
 Then the trumpet of war shall resound,
 From the mountains the stones shall pour down,
 Great blocks will be hurled from above.
 The Huancas [*4] are crushed or dispersed,
 Then the knife shall do its fell work,
 All will perish by blows from our hands,
 Our arrows will follow their flight.
   People and soldiers. It is well! It is very well!

	 
		(Cheers and martial music.)
		
		 [Exeunt.

Footnotes

^369:1 This, as we have seen, was not the reason why Ollantay fled from Cuzco; but, from a leader's point of view, it was an excellent reason to give to the people of Anti-suyu. The great wars of the Incas were, to some extent, a heavy drain upon the people, but the recruiting was managed with such skill, and was so equally divided among a number of provinces, that it was not much felt.

^370:1 The snowy mountain far to the south, in sight from Cuzco. Uilca, sacred; unuta, water. Here is the source of the river Uilcamayu, which flows by Ollantay-tampu.

^370:2 The aged Hanco Huayllu as Auqui, or Prince of the Blood, and relation of the High Priest, gave eclat to these ceremonies.

^370:3 Quiscahuan. anything full of thorns.

^371:1 Puna, the loftier parts of the Andes.

^371:2 Compi, cloth or a cloak. This was an expression of the ancient Peruvians, perhaps equivalent to our 'hoodwinking.'

^371:3 Apu Maruti was the head of the ayllu of the Inca Yahuar Huaccac, grandfather of Pachacuti. It was called the ayllu Aucaylli Panaca.--Mesa, Anales del Cuzco, quoted by Zegarra.

^371:4 Uilcapampa, mass of mountains between the Uilcamayu and Apurimac.

^371:5 Tinqui Queru, between Urupampa and Tampu. The word means 'two vases coupled.' Here are two rounded hills connected by a saddle, three and a half miles from Tampu.

^372:1 Chara, was another descendant of Yahuar Huaccac.

^372:2 A ravine on the right bank of the Vilcamayu.

^372:3 Pachar is on the left bank of the Vilcamayu opposite Ollantay-tampu, with which it is connected by a rope bridge.

^372:4 Huancas, natives of the valley of Jauja--Inca recruits.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 2

 A wild place the mountains. Distant view of Ollantay-tampu.

	 
		(Enter Rumi-naui, torn and ragged, and covered with blood, with two attendants.)
		
		  Rumi-naui. Ah! Rumi-naui--Rumi-naui, [*5]
		
		 

[p. 373]

	 
		Thou art a fated rolling stone, [*1]
		 Escaped indeed, but quite alone,
		 And this is now thy yarahui.
		
		Ollantay posted on the height,
		 Thou couldst not either fight or see,
		 Thy men did quickly fall or flee;
		 No room was there to move or fight.
		
		Thou knowest now thy heart did beat
		 And flutter like a butterfly;
		 Thy skill thou couldst not then apply,
		 No course was left thee but retreat.
		
		They had recourse to a surprise,
		 Our warriors immolated quite.
		 Ah! that alone could turn thee white--
		 From shame like that, canst e'er arise?
		
		By thousands did thy warriors fall,
		 I hardly could alone escape,
		 With open mouth fell death did gape,
		 A great disaster did befall.
		
		Holding that traitor to be brave,
		 I sought to meet him face to face--
		 Rushing to seek him with my mace,
		 I nearly found a warrior's grave.
		
		My army then was near the hill,
		 When suddenly the massive stones
		 Came crashing down, with cries and moans,
		 While clarions sounded loud and shrill.
		
		 

[p. 374]

	 
		A rain of stones both great and small
		 Down on the crowd of warriors crashed,
		 On every side destruction flashed,
		 Thy heart the slaughter did appal.
		
		Like a strong flood the blood did flow,
		 Inundating the ravine;
		 So sad a sight thou ne'er hast seen--
		 No man survived to strike a blow.
		
		O thou who art by this disgraced,
		 What figure canst thou ever show
		 Before the king, who seeks to know
		 The truth, which must be faced?
		
		'Tis better far myself to kill,
		 Or losing every scrap of hope,
		 To hang my body with this rope.
		
		(Takes a sling off his cap--going.)
		
		Yet may it not be useful still?
		
		(Turns again.)
		
		When bold Ollantay's end has come. [*1]
		
		 [Exit.

Footnotes

^372:5 like Ollantay in his appeal to the Inca, Rumi-naui, in the [p. 373] original Quichua, has recourse to octosyllabic quatrains, the first and last lines rhyming, and the second and third.

^373:1 Rumi, a stone.

^374:1 Clearly, from Rumi-naui's own account, the strategy of Urco Huaranca had been a complete and brilliant success.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 375]

 

SCENE 3

 A garden in the house of the Virgins of the Sun. Chilca shrubs and mulli trees (Schinus Molle) with panicles of red berries. The walls of the house at the back, with a door. A gate (L.) opening on the street.

	 
		(YMA SUMAC discovered at the gate looking out. To her enters (R.) PITU SALLA. Both dressed in white with golden belts.)
		
		   Pitu Salla. Yma Sumac, do not approach
 So near that gate, and so often;
 It might arouse the Mother's wrath.
 Thy name, which is so dear to me,
 Will surely pass from mouth to mouth.
 Honour shall be shown to chosen ones, [*1]
 Who wish to close the outer gate.
 Amuse thyself within the walls,
 And no one then can say a word.
 Think well what you can find within--
 It gives you all you can desire,
 Of dresses, gold, and dainty food.
 Thou art beloved by every one,
 E'en Virgins of the royal blood.
 The Mothers love to carry thee,
 They give thee kisses and caress--
 You they prefer to all the rest.
 What more could any one desire,
 Than always to remain with them,

[p. 376]

Destined to be servant of the Sun?
 In contemplating Him there's peace.
   Yma Sumac. Pitu Salla, ever you repeat
 The same thing and the same advice;
 I will open to thee my whole heart,
 And say exactly what I think.
 Know that to me this court and house
 Are insupportable--no less;
 The place oppresses--frightens me--
 Each day I curse my destiny.
 The faces of all the Mama Cuna
 Fill me with hatred and disgust,
 And from the place they make me sit,
 Nothing else is visible.
 Around me there is nothing bright,
 All are weeping and ne'er cease
 If I could ever have my way,
 No person should remain within.
 I see the people pass outside,
 Laughing as they walk along.
 The reason it is plain to see--
 They are not mewed and cloistered here.
 Is it because I have no mother,
 That I am kept a prisoner?
 Or is it I 'm a rich novice?
 Then from to-day I would be poor.
 Last night I could not get to sleep,
 I wandered down a, garden walk;
 In the dead silence of the night,
 1 heard one mourn. A bitter cry,
 As one who sought and prayed for death.
 On every side I looked about,
 My hair almost on end with fright,
 Trembling, I cried, 'Who canst thou be?'
 Then the voice murmured these sad words:

[p. 377]

'O Sun, release me from this place!'
 And this. amidst such sighs and groans!
 I searched about, but nothing found--
 The grass was rustling in the wind.
 I joined my tears to that sad sound,
 My heart was torn with trembling fear.
 When now the recollection comes,
 I'm filled with sorrow and with dread.
 You know now why I hate this place.
 Speak no more, my dearest friend,
 Of reasons for remaining here.
   Pitu Salla. At least go in. The Mother may appear.
   Yma Sumac. But pleasant is the light of day.

[Exit, R.

	 
		(Enter MAMA CCACCA, L., in grey with black edges and belt.)
		
		   Mama Ccacca. Pitu Salla, hast thou spoken
 All I told thee to that child?
   Pitu Salla. I have said all to her.
   Mama Ccacca. And she, does she answer freely?
   Pitu Salla. She has wept and asked for pity,
 Refusing to comply at all.
 She will not take the virgin's oath.
   Mama Ccacca. And this in spite of thy advice?
   Pitu Salla. I showed her the dress she will wear,
 Telling her misfortune would befall
 If she refused to be a chosen one--
 That she would ever be an outcast,
 And for us a child accursed.
   Mama Ccacca. What can she imagine,
 Wretched child of an unknown father,
 A maid without a mother,
 Just a fluttering butterfly?
 Tell her plainly, very plainly,

[p. 378]

That these walls offer her a home,
 Suited for outcasts such as she,
 And here no light is seen.

[Exit, L.

  Pitu Salla. Ay, my Sumac! Yma Sumac!
 These walls will be cruel indeed,
 To hide thy surpassing beauty.

	 
		(Glancing to where Mama Ccacca went out.)
		
		 What a serpent! What a puma!

Footnotes

^375:1 Aclla Cuna, the selected ones, the Virgins of the Sun. They were under the supervision of so called Mothers--Mama Cuna. The novices were not obliged to take the oaths at the end of their novitiate.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 379]

 

ACT III

 

SCENE 1

 The Pampa Moroni, a street in Cuzco. Enter RUMI-NAUI (L.) [*1] in a long black cloak with a train, and PIQUI CHAQUI (R.), meeting each other.

  Rumi-naui. Whence, Piqui Chaqui, comest thou?
 Dost thou here seek Ollantay's fate?
   Piqui Chaqui. Cuzco, great lord, is my birthplace;
 I hasten back unto my home.
 I care not more to pass my days
 In dismal and profound ravines.
   Rumi-naui. Tell me, Ollantay--what does he?
   Piqui Chaqui. He is busy now entangling
 An already entangled skein.
   Rumi-naui. What skein?

[p. 380]

  Piqui Chaqui. Should you not give me some present
 If you want me to talk to you.
   Rumi-naui. With a stick will I give thee blows,
 With a rope I will hang thee.
   Piqui Chaqui. O, do not frighten me!
   Rumi-naui. Speak then.
   Piqui Chaqui. Ollantay. Is it Ollantay?
 I can remember no more.
   Rumi-naui. Piqui Chaqui! Take care!
   Piqui Chaqui. But you will not listen!
 I am turning blind,
 My ears are getting deaf,
 My grandmother is dead,
 My mother is left alone.
   Rumi-naui. Where is Ollantay? Tell me.
   Piqui Chaqui. I am in want of bread,
 And the Paccays [*1] are not ripe.
 I have a long journey to-day--
 The desert is very far off.
   Rumi-naui. If you continue to vex me
 I will take your life.
   Piqui Chaqui. Ollantay, is it? He is at work.
 Ollantay! He is building a wall,
 With very small stones indeed;
 They are brought by little dwarfs--
 So small that to be a man's size
 They have to climb on each other's backs.
 But tell me, O friend of the King, [*2]

[p. 381]

Why art thou in such long clothes,
 Trailing like the wings of a sick bird [*1]--
 As they are black it is better.
   Rumi-naui. Hast thou not seen already
 That Cuzco is plunged in grief?
 The great Inca Pachacuti [*2] is dead,
 All the people are in mourning,
 Every soul is shedding tears.
   Piqui Chaqui. Who, then, succeeds to the place
 Which Pachacuti has left vacant?
 If Tupac Yupanqui succeeds,
 That Prince is the youngest
 There are some others older. [*3]
   Rumi-naui. All Cuzco has elected him,
 For the late king chose him,
 Giving him the royal fringe;
 We could elect no other.
   Piqui Chaqui. I hasten to bring my bed here. [*4]

[Exit running.

Footnotes

^379:1 Rumi-naui is the interlocutor in the Justiniani text, in the Dominican text, and in the text of Spilsbury. Yet Zegarra would substitute the Uillac Uma or High Priest for Rumi-naui. His argument is that the interlocutor was of the blood-royal, and that the High Priest was always of the blood-royal, while Rumi-naui was not. But the text does not say that the interlocutor was of the royal blood. Zegarra also says that the interlocutor wore a black cloak with a long train, and that this was the dress of the High Priest. But it was not the dress of the High Priest as described by the best authorities. It was probably the general mourning dress. The threats addressed to Piqui Chaqui were likely enough to come from a soldier, but not from the High Priest as he is portrayed in this drama.

^380:1 Paccay (mimosa incana), a tree with large pods, having a snow-white woolly substance round the seeds, with sweet juice.

^380:2 The Zegarra and Spilsbury texts have Ccan Incacri, which Zegarra translates, 'relation of the Inca, of the royal family.' Spilsbury is more correct. He has 'partisan of the Inca.' The more authentic Justiniani text has Ccan Pana. The particle ri is one of emphasis or repetition. It does not mean a relation.

^381:1 The Zegarra and Spilsbury texts have hualpa, a game bird. The Justiniani text has anca, an eagle, which is the correct reading.

^381:2 The Inca Pachacuti does not appear to advantage in the drama. But he was the greatest man of his dynasty, indeed the greatest that the red race has produced. He was a hero in his youth, a most able administrator in mature age. As a very old man some needless cruelties are reported of him which annoyed his son.

^381:3 The eldest son was Amaru Tupac. He was passed over by his father with his own consent, and was ever faithful to his younger brother. He was an able general.

^381:4 This was exactly what Piqui Chaqui was sent to Cuzco to find out. The expression Apumusac pununayta, 'I go to fetch my bed,' is one of joy at any fortunate event, in Quichua.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 382]

 

SCENE 2

 Great hall of the palace of Tupac Yupanqui. The INCA seated on golden tiana (C.).

	 
		(Enter the HIGH PRIEST or UILLAC UMA, with priests and chosen Virgins of the Sun. The INCA dressed as his father. Uillac Uma in full dress, wearing the huampar chucu. Virgins in white with gold belts and diadems. They range themselves by the throne (L.). Then enter RUMI-NAUI and a crowd of chiefs, all in full dress, ranging themselves by the throne (R.).)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. This day, O Councillors and Chiefs,
 Let all receive my benison;
 You Holy Virgins of the Sun [*1]
 Receive our father's tenderest care.
 The realm, rejoicing, hails me king;
 From deep recesses of my heart
 I swear to seek the good of all.
   Uillac Uma. To-day the smoke of many beasts
 Ascends on high towards the sun,
 The Deity with joy accepts
 The sacrifice of prayer and praise.

[p. 383]

We found in ashes of the birds
 Our only Inca, King, and Lord,
 In the great llama sacrifice;
 All there beheld an eagle's form,
 We opened it for augury,
 But lo! the heart and entrails gone.
 The eagle Anti-suyu means--
 To thy allegiance they return.

	 
		(Bowing to the Inca.)
		
		 Thus I, thy augur, prophesy.

(Acclamation.) [Exeunt all but Uillac Uma and Rumi-naui.

  Tupac Yupanqui (turning to Rumi-naui). Behold the Hanan-suyu Chief
 Who let the enemy escape,
 Who led to almost certain death
 So many thousands of my men.
   Rumi-naui. Before his death thy father knew
 Disaster had befallen me;
 'Tis true, O King, it was my fault,
 Like a stone [*1] I gave my orders,
 And volleying stones soon beat me down;
 It was with stones I had to fight,
 And in the end they crushed my men.
 Oh! grant me, Lord, a single chance,
 Give perfect freedom to my plans,
 Myself will to the fortress march,
 And I will leave it desolate.
   Tupac Yupanqui. For thee to strive with all thy might,
 For thee thine honour to regain,
 For thou shalt ne'er command my men
 Unless thy worthiness is proved.

[p. 384]

  Uillac Uma. Not many days shall pass, O King,
 E'er all the Antis are subdued.
 I've seen it in the quipu roll,
 Haste! Haste! thou Rumi Tunqui. [*1]

[Exeunt.

Footnotes

^382:1 Intic Huamin Caccunan (Intic Huarminca Caycuna, correct), 'Ye women of the Sun.' Zegarra thought, on the authority of Garcilasso de la Vega, that these could not be select Virgins of the Sun, because the virgins were never allowed outside their convent, and not even women might enter. He is clearly wrong. Much higher authorities than Garcilasso, as regards this point, especially Valera, tell us that the virgins were treated with the greatest honour and respect. They took part in great receptions and festivals, and when they passed along the streets they had a guard of honour.

^383:1 Rumi. He keeps playing upon his name.

^384:1 Again playing upon the name of Rumi-naui. The High Priest calls for haste, so he substitutes Tunqui for Naui (eye), the tunqui (Rupicola Peruviana) being one of the most beautiful birds in the forests.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

SCENE 3

 The great terrace entrance to Ollantay-tampu. On R. a long masonry wall with recesses at intervals. At back a great entrance doorway. On L. terraces descend, with view of valley and mountains.

(Guards discovered at entrance doorway. To them enter RUMI-NAUI in rags, his face cut and slashed with wounds, and covered with blood.)

  Rumi-naui. Will no one here have pity on me?
   One of the Guards. Who art thou, man?
 Who has ill-treated thee?
 Thou comest in a frightful state,
 Covered with blood and gaping wounds.
   Rumi-naui. Go quickly to thy king and say
 That one he loves has come to him.
   One of the Guards. Thy name?
   Rumi-naui. There is no need to give a name.
   One of the Guards. Wait here.

[Exit one of the guards.

[p. 385]

	 
		(Enter OLLANTAY with guards, R. front.)
		
		   Rumi-naui. A thousand times I thee salute,
 Ollantay, great and puissant king!
 Have pity on a fugitive
 Who seeks a refuge here with thee.
   Ollantay. Who art thou, man? Approach nearer.
 Who has thus ill-treated thee?
 Were such deep and fearful wounds
 Caused by a fall, or what mishap?
   Rumi-naui. Thou knowest me, O mighty chief.
 I am that stone that fell down once,
 But now I fall before thy feet;
 O Inca! mercy! Raise me up!

	 
		(Kneels.)
		
		   Ollantay. Art thou the noble Rumi-naui,
 Great Chief and Lord of Hanan-suyu?
   Rumi-naui. Yes, I was that well-known Chief--
 A bleeding fugitive to-day.
   Ollantay. Rise, comrade mine. Let us embrace.

	 
		(Rises.)
		
		 Who has dared to treat thee thus,
 And who has brought thee here to me
 Within my fortress, on my hearth?

	 
		(To attendants.)
		
		 Bring new clothes for my oldest friend.

[Exit an attendant.

How is it that thou art alone?
 Camest thou not fearing death?
   Rumi-naui. A new king reigns in Cuzco now--
 Tupac Yupanqui is installed.
 Against the universal wish,
 He rose upon a wave of blood;
 Safety he sees in headless trunks,

[p. 386]

The sunchu [*1] and the nucchu [*2] red
 Are sent to all he would destroy.
 Doubtless you have not forgot
 That I was Hanan-suyu's Chief.
 Yupanqui ordered me to come;
 Arrived, I came before the king,
 And as he has a cruel heart,
 He had me wounded as you see;
 And now thou knowest, king and friend,
 How this new Inca treated me.
   Ollantay. Grieve not, old friend Rumi-naui,
 Thy wounds before all must be cured;
 I see in thee th' avenging knife,
 To use against the tyrant's heart.
 At Tampu now we celebrate
 The Sun's great Raymi festival;
 On that day all who love my name,
 Throughout my realms hold festival.
   Rumi-naui. Those three days of festival
 To me will be a time of joy,
 Perhaps I may be healed by then,
 So that my heart may pleasure seek.
   Ollantay. It will be so. For three whole nights
 We drink and feast, to praise the Sun,
 The better to cast all care aside
 We shall be shut in Tampu fort.
   Rumi-naui. The youths, as is their wont, will find
 Their great delight in those three nights,
 Then will they rest from all their toils,
 And carry off the willing girls.

Footnotes

^386:1 Sunchu, a very large composita with a yellow flower, growing round Cuzco. It was one of those which were used on sacred festivals.

^386:2 Nucchu is a salvia, also considered sacred. A red flower. Perhaps these flowers were sent as a summons from the Inca, but I have not seen the custom mentioned elsewhere.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 387]

 

SCENE 4

 A corridor in the palace of Chosen Virgins.

	 
		(Enter YMA SUMAC and PITU SALLA.)
		
		   Yma Sumac. Pitu Salla, beloved friend,
 How long wilt thou conceal from me
 The secret that I long to know?
 Think, dearest, of my anxious heart,
 How I shall be in constant grief
 Until you tell the truth to me.
 Within these hard and cruel bounds
 Does some one suffer for my sins?
 My sweet companion, do not hide
 From me, who 'tis that mourns and weeps
 Somewhere within the garden walls.
 How is it she is so concealed
 That I can never find the place?
   Pitu Salla. My Sumac, now I'll tell thee all--
 Only concerning what you hear,
 And still more surely what you see,
 You must be dumb as any stone;
 And you too must be well prepared
 For a most sad heart-rending sight--
 'Twill make thee weep for many days.
   Yma Sumac. I will not tell a living soul
 What you divulge. But tell me all,
 I'll shut it closely in my heart.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 388]

 

SCENE 5

 A secluded part of the gardens of the Virgins, (L.) flowers, (R.) a thicket of mulli [*1] and chilca, [*2] concealing a stone door.

	 
		(PITU SALLA and YMA SUMAC.)
		
		   Pitu Salla. In this garden is a door of stone,
 But wait until the Mothers sleep,
 The night comes on. Wait here for me.

[Exit.

	 
		(Yma Sumac reclines on a bank and sleeps. Night comes on, Yma Sumac awakes.)
		
		   Yma Sumac. A thousand strange presentiments
 Crowd on me now, I scarce know what--
 Perhaps I shall see that mournful one
 Whose fate already breaks my heart.

	 
		(Pitu Salla returns with a cup of water, a small covered vase containing food, and a torch which she gives to Yma Sumac. She leads Yma Sumac through bushes to the stone door, fixes the torch, presses something, and the door swings round.)
		
		(CUSI COYLLUR is discovered senseless, extended on the ground, a snake twining itself round her waist.)
		
		   Pitu Salla. Behold the princess for whom you seek.
 Well! is thy heart now satisfied?

[p. 389]

  Yma Sumac. Oh, my friend, what do I behold?
 Is it a corpse that I must see?
 Oh, horror! A dungeon for the dead!

	 
		(She faints.)
		
		   Pitu Salla. What misfortune has now arrived?
 O my Sumac, my dearest love,
 O come to thyself without delay!
 Arouse thee. Arise, my lovely flower.

	 
		(Yma Sumac revives.)
		
		 Fear not, my dove, my lovely friend,
 'Tis not a corpse. The princess lives,
 Unhappy, forlorn, she lingers here.
   Yma Sumac. Is she, then, still a living being?
   Pitu Salla. Approach nearer, and you can help.
 She lives indeed. Look. Watch her now.
 Give me the water and the food.

	 
		(To Cusi Coyllur, while helping her to sit up.)
		
		 O fair princess, I bring thee food
 And cooling water to refresh.
 Try to sit up. I come with help.
   Yma Sumac. Who art thou, my sweetest dove?
 Why art thou shut in such a place?
   Pitu Salla. Take a little food, we pray.
 Perchance without it You may die.
   Cusi Coyllur. How happy am I now to see,
 After these long and dismal years,
 The new and lovely face of one
 Who comes with thee and gives me joy.
   Yma Sumac. O my princess, my sister dear,
 Sweet bird, with bosom of pure gold,
 What crime can they accuse thee of,
 That they can make thee suffer thus?
 What cruel fate has placed thee here
 With death on watch in serpent's form?

[p. 390]

  Cusi Coyllur. O charming child, the seed of love,
 Sweet flower for my broken heart,
 I have been thrust in this abyss.
 I once was joined to a man
 As pupil is part of the eye;
 But alas! has he forgotten me?
 The King know not that we were joined
 By such indissoluble bonds,
 And when he came to ask my hand,
 That King dismissed him in a rage,
 And cruelly confined me here.
 Many years have passed since then,
 Yet, as you see, I'm still alive;
 No single soul have I beheld
 For all those sad and dismal years,
 Nor have I found relief nor hope.
 But who art thou, my dear, my love,
 So young, so fresh, so pitiful?
   Yma Sumac. I too, like thee, am full of grief,
 For long I've wished to see and love,
 My poor forlorn and sad princess.
 No father, no mother are mine,
 And there are none to care for me.
   Cusi Coyllur. What age art thou?
   Yma Sumac. I ought to number many years,
 For I detest this dreadful house,
 And as it is a dreary place,
 The time in it seems very long.
   Pitu Salla. She ought to number just ten years
 According to the account I've kept.
   Cusi Coyllur. And what is thy name?
   Yma Sumac. They call me Yma Sumac now,
 But to give it me is a mistake.
   Cusi Coyllur. O my daughter! O my lost love,

[p. 391]

Come to thy mother's yearning heart.

	 
		(Embraces Yma Sumac.)
		
		 Thou art all my happiness,
 My daughter, come, O come to me;
 This joy quite inundates my soul,
 It is the name I gave to thee.
   Yma Sumac. O my mother, to find thee thus!
 We must be parted never more.
 Do not abandon me in grief.
 To whom can I turn to free thee,
 To whom can I appeal for right?
   Pitu Salla. Make no noise, my dearest friend.:
 To find us thus would ruin me.
 Let us go. I fear the Mothers.
   Yma Sumac (to Cusi Coyllur). Suffer a short time longer here,
 Until I come to take thee hence,
 Patience for a few more days.
 Alas! my mother dear! I go,
 But full of love, to seek for help.

[Exeunt closing the stone door, all but Cusi Coyllur. They extinguish the torch.

Footnotes

^388:1 Schineus Molle, a tree with pinnate leaves, and panicles of red berries, well known in the Mediterranean countries, into which it was introduced from Peru. Called by the English 'pepper tree.'

^388:2 Several bushes are called chilca in Peru. Eupatorium chilca (R. P.), baccharis scandens, and molina latifolia. Stereoxylon pendulum is called puna chilca.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

 

Scene 6

	 
		  Great hall in the palace of Tupac Yupanqui.
		
		(The INCA discovered seated on the tiana. To him enter the UILLAC UMA, in full dress.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. I greet thee, great and noble Priest!
 Hast thou no news of Rumi-naui.
   Uillac Uma. Last night, with guards, I wandered out
 On heights towards Uilcanuta.

[p. 392]

Far off I saw a crowd in chains,
 No doubt the Anti prisoners,
 For they are all defeated quite.
 The cacti [*1] on the mountains smoke,
 E'en now the fortress is in flames.
   Tupac Yupanqui. And Ollantay, is he taken?
 Perhaps--I hope his life is saved.
   Uillac Uma. Ollantay was among the flames,
 'Tis said that no one has escaped.
   Tupac Yupanqui. The Sun, my Father, is my shield,
 I am my father's chosen child.
 We must subdue the rebel host,
 For that I am appointed here.

(Enter a CHASQUI with a quipu in his hand.)

  The Chasqui. This morning at the dawn of day,
 Rumi-naui despatched this quipu.
   Tupac Yupanqui (to the Uillac Uma). See what it says.
   Uillac Uma. This knot, coloured burnt ahuarancu,
 Tells us that Tampu too is burnt;
 This triple knot to which is hung
 Another which is quintuple,
 In all of quintuples are three,
 Denotes that Anti-suyu's thine,
 Its ruler prisoner of war.
   Tupac Yupanqui (to the Chasqui). And thou. Where wert thou?
   The Chasqui. Sole King and Lord! Child of the Sun!
 I am the first to bring the news,
 That thou mayst trample on the foe,
 And in thine anger drink their blood.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Did I not reiterate commands

[p. 393]

To spare and not to shed their blood--
 Not anger but pity is my rule.
   The Chasqui. O Lord, we have not shed their blood;
 They were all captured in the night,
 Unable to resist our force.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Recount to me in full detail
 The circumstances of the war.

	 
		  The Chasqui. For a signal thy warriors wait.
		 The nights passed at Tinquiqueru, [*1]
		 Concealed in the cavern below,
		 Yanahuara [*2] men joining us late.
		
		We waited within the large cave,
		 Thy men always ready to fight,
		 Behind foliage well out of sight,
		 Thy warriors patient and brave.
		
		But for three long days and dark nights,
		 No food for the zealous and bold;
		 Feeling hungry, thirsty, and cold,
		 We waited and watched for the lights. [*3]
		
		Rumi-naui sent orders at length,
		 When the Raymi [*4] they carelessly keep,
		 And all of them drunk or asleep,
		 We were then to rush on with our strength.
		
		Word came to surprise our foes,
		 Rumi-naui had opened the gate,
		 As cautious and silent as fate--
		 We were masters with none to oppose.
		
		 

[p. 394]

	 
		Those rebels fell into the trap,
		 The arrows came on them like rain,
		 Most died in their sleep without pain,
		 Not knowing their fatal mishap.
		
		Ollantay, still trusting, was ta'en,
		 The same Urco Huaranca befell;
		 Hanco Huayllu is captive as well,
		 We thy rebels in fetters detain.
		
		The Antis by thousands are slain,
		 A fearful example is made,
		 They are beaten, crushed, and betrayed,
		 Their women in sorrow and pain.
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. As witness of what has occurred,
 On Vilcamayu's storied banks,
 No doubt thou hast told me the truth.
 It was a well designed attack.

	 
		(Enter RUMI-NAUI followed by several chiefs.)
		
		   Rumi-naui. Great Inca, I kneel at thy feet,
 This time You will hear my report,
 I beseech thee to deign to restore
 The trust that I forfeited once.

	 
		(Kneels.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. Rise, great Chief, receive my regard,
 I accept thy great service with joy;
 Thou didst cast o'er the waters. thy net,
 And hast captured a marvellous fish.
   Rumi-naui. Our enemies perished in crowds,
 Their chiefs were captured and bound,
 Overwhelmed by my terrible force,
 Like a rook detached from the heights.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Was much blood shed in the assault?

[p. 395]

  Rumi-naui. No, Lord, not a drop has been shed,
 To thine orders I strictly adhered.
 Those Antis were strangled in sleep,
 But the fort is entirely razed.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Where are the rebels?
   Rumi-naui. They are waiting with agonised fear,
 For their fate, to perish by cords.
 The people are sending up cries,
 Demanding their deaths without fail.
 Their women are now in their midst,
 The children raise hideous cries;
 It is well that thine order should pass
 To finish their traitorous lives.
   Tupac Yupanqui. It must be so without any doubt,
 That the orphans may not be alone,
 Let all perish, not sparing one,
 Thus Cuzco recovers her peace,
 Let the traitors be brought before me.
 In my presence the sentence they'll hear.

	 
		(Exit Rumi-naui, and re-enter followed by guards in charge of OLLANTAY, URCO HUARANCA, and HANCO HAUYLLU, bound and blindfold, followed by guards with PIQUI CHAQUI bound.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. Take the bands off the eyes of those men.
 And now, Ollantay, where art thou?
 And where art thou, O Mountain Chief?
 Soon thou wilt roll down from the heights.

	 
		(To the soldiers who bring in Piqui Chaqui.)
		
		 Whom have we here?
   Piqui Chaqui. Many fleas in the Yuncas abound,
 And torment the people full sore,
 With boiling water they are killed,

[p. 396]

And I, poor flea, [*1] must also die.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Tell me, Hanco Huayllu, tell me,
 Why art thou Ollantay's man?
 Did not my father honour thee?
 Did he not grant thy requests?
 Did he ever have a secret from thee?
 Speak also, you, the other rebels,
 Ollantay and the Mountain Chief.
   Ollantay. O father, we have nought to say,
 Our crimes are overwhelming us.
   Tupac Yupanqui (to the Uillac Uma). Pronounce
 their sentence, great High Priest.
   Uillac Uma. The light that fills me from the Sun
 Brings mercy and pardon to my heart.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Now thy sentence, Rumi-naui.
   Rumi-naui. For crimes enormous such as these
 Death should ever be the doom
 It is the only way, O King!
 To warn all others from such guilt.
 To stout tocarpus [*2] they should be
 Secured and bound with toughest rope,
 Then should the warriors freely shoot
 Their arrows until death is caused.
   Piqui Chaqui. Must it be that evermore
 The Antis must all perish thus?
 Alas! then let the branches burn
 What pouring out of blood is here. [*3]
   Rumi-naui. Silence, rash man, nor dare to speak,

[p. 397]

	 
		(General lamentation outside.)
		
		 Having been rolled just like a stone,
 My heart has now become a stone. [*1]
   Tupac Yupanqui. Know that tocarpus are prepared.
 Remove those traitors from my sight,
 Let them all perish, and at once.
   Rumi-naui. Take these three men without delay
 To the dreaded execution stakes;
 Secure them with unyielding ropes,
 And hurl them from the lofty rocks.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Stop! Cast off their bonds.

	 
		(The guards unbind them. They all kneel.)
		
		 (To Ollantay, kneeling). Rise from thy knees; come to my side.

	 
		(Rises.)
		
		 Now thou hast seen death very near,
 You that have shown ingratitude,
 Learn how mercy flows from my heart;
 I will raise thee higher than before.
 Thou wert Chief of Anti-suyu,
 Now see how far my love will go;
 I make thee Chief in permanence.
 Receive this plume [*2] as general,
 This arrow [*2] emblem of command. [*3]

[p. 398]

  Tupac Yupanqui (to the Uillac Uma). Thou mighty Pontiff of the Sun,
 Robe him in the regal dress.
 Raise up the others from their knees,
 And free them from the doom of death.

	 
		(Urco Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, and Piqui Chaqui rise, the latter looking much relieved. The Uillac Uma places the robe on Ollantay's shoulders.)
		
		   Uillac Uma. Ollantay, learn to recognise
 Tupac Yupanqui's generous mind;
 From this day forth be thou his friend,
 And bless his magnanimity.
 This ring contains my potent charm,
 For this I place it on thy hand.

	 
		(Gives him a ring, or bracelet.)
		
		 This mace receive, 'tis from the king,

	 
		(Gives him a mace (champi).)
		
		 It is his gracious gift to thee.
   Ollantay. With tears I shall nearly consume
 That mace thus presented to me;
 I am tenfold the great Inca's slave,
 In this world no. equal is found,
 My heart's fibres his latchets shall be;
 From this moment my body and soul
 To his service alone shall belong.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Now, Mountain Chief! come near to me,
 Ollantay is given the arrow and plume,
 Though to me he gave fury and war.
 Notwithstanding all that has passed
 He continues the Andean chief,
 And will lead his rebels to peace;
 Thee also I choose for the plume;

[p. 399]

From this day thou art a great chief,
 And never forget in thy thoughts,
 I saved thee from death and disgrace.
   Urco Huaranca. Great King and most merciful Lord,
 But now, expecting my death,
 I am ever thy most faithful slave.

(Uillac Uma gives him the plume and arrow.)

  Uillac Uma. O Urco, the Inca has made
 A great and a powerful chief,
 And grants thee with marvellous grace
 The arrow and also the plume.
   Rumi-naui. Illustrious King, I venture to ask,
 Will Anti-suyu have two chiefs.
   Tupac Yupanqui. There will not be two, O Rumi-naui
 The Mountain Chief will rule the Antis;
 In Cuzco Ollantay will reign--
 As Viceroy deputed by me
 His duties will call him to act
 As ruler throughout the whole realm.
   Ollantay. O King! thou dost raise me too high,
 A man without service or claim;
 I am thy obedient slave--
 Mayst thou live for a thousand years.
   Tupac Yupanqui. The mascapaycha now bring forth,
 And to it the llautu attach.
 Uillac Uma, adorn him with these,
 And proclaim his state to the world.
 Yes, Ollantay shall stand in my place,
 Raised up like the star of the morn,
 For Colla this month I shall start;
 All preparations are made.
 In Cuzco Ollantay will stay,
 My Ranti [*1] and Viceroy and friend.

[p. 400]

  Ollantay. I would fain, O magnanimous King,
 Follow thee in the Chayanta war;
 Thou knowest my love for such work.
 Peaceful Cuzco is not to my taste,
 I prefer to be thy Canari, [*1]
 To march in the van of thy force,
 And not to be left in the rear.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Thou shouldst find the wife of thy choice,
 And with her reign happily here
 In Cuzco; repose without care;
 Rest here while I'm absent in war.
   Ollantay. Great King, thy sorrowful slave
 Already had chosen a wife.
   Tupac Yupanqui. How is it I know not of this?
 It should be reported to me.
 I will load her with suitable gifts;
 Why was this concealed from my eyes?
   Ollantay. In Cuzco itself disappeared
 That sweet and adorable dove;
 One day she did rest in my arms,
 And the next no more to be seen.
 In grief I made search far and near,
 Earth seemed to have swallowed her up,
 To have buried her far from my sight;
 O such, mighty King, is my grief.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Ollantay! afflict not thyself,
 For now thou must take up thy place
 Without turning thy eyes from thy work.

	 
		(To Uillac Uma.)
		
		 High priest, obey my command.

[p. 401]

	 
		(The Uillac Uma goes to the wings (R.) and addresses the people outside.)
		
		   Uillac Uma. O people, hear what I say:
 The Inca, our King and our Lord,
 Thus declares his imperial will:
 Ollantay shall reign in his place.
   People outside. Ollantay Ranti! Ollantay Ranti!

(Shouts and acclamations.)

  Tupac Yupanqui (to Rumi-naui and other chiefs.) You also render him homage.
   Rumi-naui. Prince Ollantay! Incap Ranti!
 Thy promotion gives me joy.
 All the Antis now released,
 Return rejoicing to their homes.

(He and all the Chiefs bow to Ollantay.)

  Guards without. You cannot pass. Go back! go back!
   Voice without. Why, is this a festive day?
 Let me pass. I must see the king;
 I pray you do not stop me,
 Do not drive me from the door;
 If you stop me I shall die.
 Have a care. You will kill me.
   Tupac Yupanqui. What noise is that without?
   Guard. It is a young girl who comes weeping
 And insists upon seeing the king.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Let her come in.

(Enter Yma Sumac.)

  Yma Sumac. Which is the Inca, my lord,
 That I may kneel down at his feet?
   Uillac Uma. Who art thou, charming maid?
 Behold the King.

(Yma Sumac throws herself at the King's feet.)

  Yma Sumac. O my King! be thou my father,

[p. 402]

Snatch from evil thy poor servant.
 Extend thy royal hand to me.
 O merciful child of the Sun,
 My mother is dying at this hour
 In a foul and loathsome cave;
 She is killed in cruel martyrdom--
 Alas I she is bathed in her own blood.
   Tupac Yupanqui. What inhumanity, poor child!
 Ollantay, take this case in hand.
   Ollantay. Young maiden, take me quickly there;
 We will see who it is that suffers.
   Yma Sumac. No, sir. Not so. It is the King himself
 Should go with me.
 Perhaps he may recognise her;

	 
		(To Ollantay.)
		
		 For you, I know not who you are.
 O King, arise, do not delay,
 I fear my mother breathes her last,
 At least may be in mortal pain;
 O Inca! Father! grant my prayer.
   Uillac Uma. Illustrious King, thou wilt consent;
 Let us all seek this luckless one--
 Thou canst release from cruel bonds.
 Lot us go, O King!
   Tupac Yupanqui (rising). Come all! Come all!
 In midst of reconciliations
 This young maid assaults my heart.

[Exeunt.

Footnotes

^392:1 A kind of cactus, of which they make needles, grows abundantly on the mountains round Ollantay-tampu. It is called ahuarancu. They set fire to the cacti as a war signal. Zegarra calls it a thistle. The word in the Justiniani text is ahuarancu.

^393:1 See note, <page 371>.

^393:2 Yanahuara, a ravine near Urubamba, where some of the troops of Rumi-naui had been posted.

^393:3 Signal lights.

^393:4 Ccapac Raymi, the great festival of the Sun. December 22.

^396:1 Piqui Chaqui is literally 'flea foot.' He is punning on his name.

^396:2 Tocarpu, a pole or stake used at executions. Condemned prisoners were fastened to a tocarpu before being hurled over a precipice.

^396:3 Piqui Chaqui had an inkling that the Inca had expressed dislike at the shedding of blood. He ventured to say these words in the faint hope that they might remind the Inca of this dislike.

^397:1 Rumi-naui at it again: for ever ringing changes on his name rumi, a stone.

^397:2 The plume and the arrow were the insignia of a general.

^397:3 Rather a staggerer for Rumi-naui! Perhaps, too, the change is too sudden, and infringes the probabilities. Tupac Yupanqui may have thought that his father had been unjust and that there were excuses. It is known that the young Inca was indignant at some other cruelties of his father. As a magnanimous warrior he may have despised the treacherous methods of Rumi-naui. He may have valued Ollantay's known valour and ability, and have been loth to lose his services. All these considerations may have influenced him more or less. The rebels were the best men he had.

^399:1 Ranti, a deputy.

^400:1 Canari, a warlike tribe of Indians, in the south part of the kingdom of Quito. They were first conquered by Tupac Yupanqui, and they became devoted to him.

Apu Ollantay, by Clements Markham, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 403]

 

SCENE 7

	 
		The garden in the palace of Virgins of the Sun (same scene as Act III, Scene 5). Stone door more visible. (Enter the INCA TUPAC YUPANQUI with YMA SUMAC, OLLANTAY, UILLAC UMA and RUMI NAUI; URCO HUARANCA, HANCO HUAYLLU and PIQUI CHAQUI in the background.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. But this is the Aclla Huasi; [*1]
 My child, art thou not mistaken?
 Where is thy imprisoned mother?
   Yma Sumac. In a dungeon within these bounds
 My mother has suffered for years,
 Perhaps even now she is dead.

	 
		(She points to the stone door.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. What door is this?

	 
		(Enter MAMA CCACCA and PITU SALLA. Mama Ccacca kneels and kisses the Inca's hand.)
		
		   Mama Ccacca. Is it a dream or reality,
 That I behold my sovereign?
   Tupac Yupanqui. Open that door.

	 
		(Mama Ccacca opens the door.)
		
		(CUSI COYLLUR discovered chained and fainting, with a puma and a snake, one on each side of her.)
		
		   Yma Sumac. O my mother, I feared to find
 That you had already passed away;
 Pitu Salla! Haste. Bring water.
 Perhaps my dove may still revive.

[Exit Pitu Salla.

[p. 404]

  Tupac Yupanqui. What horrid cavern do I see?
 Who is this woman? what means it?
 What cruel wretch thus tortures her?
 What means that chain bound around her?
 Mama Ccacca, come near to me
 What hast thou to say to this?
 Is it the effect of malice
 That this poor creature lingers here?
   Mama Ccacca. It was thy father's dread command;
 A punishment for lawless love.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Begone! begone! harder than rock. [*1]
 Turn out that puma and the snake, [*2]
 Break down that door of carved stone.
 (To Mama Ccacca.) Let me not see thy face again.
 A woman living as a bat;
 This child has brought it all to light.

	 
		(Enter Pitu Salla with water. She sprinkles it over Cusi Coyllur, who revives.)
		
		   Cusi Coyllur. Where am I? who are these people?
 Yma Sumac, my beloved child,
 Come to me, my most precious dove.
 Who are all these men before me?

	 
		(She begins to faint again and is restored by water.)
		
		   Yma Sumac. Fear not, my mother, 'tis the King;
 The King himself comes to see you.

[p. 405]

The great Yupanqui is now here.
 Speak to him. Awake from thy trance.
   Tupac Yupanqui. My heart is torn and sorrowful
 At sight of so much misery.
 Who art thou, my poor sufferer?
 Child, tell me now thy mother's name?
   Yma Sumac. Father! Inca! Clement Prince!
 Have those cruel bonds removed.
   The Uillac Uma. It is for me to remove them,
 And to relieve this sore distress.

	 
		(Cuts the rope fastening Cusi Coyllur to the wall.)
		
		   Ollantay (to Yma Sumac). What is thy mother's name?
   Yma Sumac. Her name was once Cusi Coyllur,
 But it seems a mistake. Her joy
 Was gone when she was prisoned here.
   Ollantay. O renowned King, great Yupanqui,
 In her you see my long lost wife.

	 
		(Prostrates himself before the Inca.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. It all appears a dream to me.
 The 'Star'! my sister! [*1] and thy wife.
 O sister! what newly found joy.
 O Cusi Coyllur, my sister,
 Come here to me, and embrace me,
 Now thou art delivered from woe.

	 
		(Music.)
		
		 Thou hast found thy loving brother;
 Joy calms the anguish of my heart.

	 
		(Embraces Cusi Coyllur.)
		
		   Cusi Coyllur. Alas! my brother, now you know
 The cruel tortures I endured

[p. 406]

During those years of agony;
 Thy compassion now has saved me.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Who art thou, dove, that hast suffered?
 For what sin were you prisoned here?
 Thou mightest have lost thy reason.
 Thy face is worn, thy beauty gone,
 Thy looks as one risen from death.
   Ollantay. Cusi Coyllur, I had lost thee,
 Thou wast quite hidden from my sight,
 But thou art brought again to life--
 Thy father should have killed us both.
 My whole heart is torn with sorrow.
 Star of joy, where is now thy joy?
 Where now thy beauty as a star?
 Art thou under thy father's curse?
   Cusi Coyllur. Ollantay, for ten dreary years
 That dungeon has kept us apart;
 But now, united for new life,
 Some happiness may yet be ours.
 Yupanqui makes joy succeed grief,
 He may well count [*1] for many years.
   Uillac Uma. Bring new robes to dress the princess.

	 
		(They put on her royal robes. The High Priest kisses her hand.)
		
		   Tupac Yupanqui. Ollantay, behold thy royal wife,
 Honour and cherish her henceforth.
 And thou, Yma Sumac, come to me,
 I enlace you in the thread of love;
 Thou art the pure essence of Coyllur.

	 
		(Embraces her.)
		
		 

[p. 407]

  Ollantay. Thou art our protector, great King,
 Thy noble hands disperse our grief;
 Thou art our faith and only hope--
 Thou workest by virtue's force.
   Tupac Yupanqui. Thy wife is now in thy arms;
 All sorrow now should disappear,
 Joy, new born, shall take its place.

	 
		
		
		Footnotes
		
		^403:1 Aclla, chosen; Huasi, house: palace of the Virgins of the sun.
		
		^404:1 Ccacca means a rock.
		
		^404:2 My former translation, and those of Barranca and Tschudi, treated puma and amaru (snake) as epithets applied to Mama Ccacca. Zegarra considers that the puma and snake were intended to be actually in the dungeon, and I believe he is right. The puma would not have hurt his fellow-prisoner. Unpleasant animals were occasionally put into the prisons of criminals. The Incas kept pumas as pets.
		
		^405:1 The early Incas never married their sisters or relations. Pachacuti's mother was daughter of the chief of Anta. His wife, Anahuarqui, was no relation. But the wife of Tupac Yupanqui was his sister Mama Ocllo.
		
		^406:1 A play upon the word yupanqui, which means literally, 'you will count.' The word was a title of the Incas, meaning, 'you will count as virtuous, brave,' &c.
		
		(Acclamations from the Chiefs, and Piqui Chaqui. Music: huancars (drums), pincullus (flutes), and pututus (clarions).)
		
		  


===== BOOK: omy.txt =====


    
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

ORIENTAL MYSTICISM

  

A TREATISE ON

  

Sufiistic and Unitarian Theosophy
 of the Persians

  

COMPILED FROM NATIVE SOURCES

  

BY

  

E. H. PALMER

  

Cambridge: Deighton, Bell, and Co.; London: Bell and Daldy

  

[1867]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, August 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Copytext edition:

Published by

FRANK CASS AND COMPANY LIMITED

67 Great Russell Street, London WC1

First published 1867

Reprint with a new introduction 1938 --by A. J. Arberry [Not included in this etext]

Reprint of the First edition 1969 [This etext.]

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

TO

HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY,

THE EMPEROR OF THE FRENCH.

Click to enlarge

[p. vi]

Click to enlarge

[p. vii]

Click to enlarge

E. H. PALMER,           
 St John's College,       
 Cambridge.    

Click to enlarge

TRANSLATION.

SIRE,

From a feeling of profound admiration for the munificent encouragement given to Oriental studies throughout YOUR MAJESTY'S Empire, I have solicited the honour of dedicating to YOUR MAJESTY this attempt to contribute towards a better understanding of the Philosopher Poets of the East. The noble Institutions of France for the promotion of

[p. viii]

those studies (some of which it has been my privilege to attend), and the Illustrious Names that adorn them, will make YOUR MAJESTY'S reign long remembered as the brightest Era in European Orientalism.

I have the honour to remain,

SIRE,

YOUR MAJESTY'S

most obedient and humble Servant,

E. H. PALMER.

Dated RAMAZAN, 1283 A.H.
      (January, 1867, A.D.)

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

PREFACE.

THE following work is founded upon a Persian MS. treatise by 'Aziz bin Mohammed Nafasi [*1], but I have endeavoured to give a clearer and more succinct account of the system than would have been afforded by a mere translation. The term Sufi is derived from the Arabic word suf "wool," in allusion to the dress adopted by the Dervishes, who are the master and teachers of the sect; the similarity to the Greek sofos appears to be merely accidental. The system of the Sufis consists in endeavouring

[p. x]

to reconcile Philosophy with Revealed Religion, and in assigning a mystical and allegorical interpretation to all religious doctrines and precepts. These tenets are found principally among the Shi'ites, or followers of 'Ali, and appear to have existed in Islamism from its very foundation; indeed the expression of the Coran, "I am the Truth" (Hacc), is the first principle of the system. They may be considered as forming the esoteric doctrine of that creed [*1]. Steering a mid course between the pantheism of India on the one hand and the deism of the Coran on the other, the Sufis' cult is the religion of beauty, where heavenly perfection is considered under the imperfect type of earthly loveliness. Their principal writers are the lyric poets, whose aim is to elevate mankind to the contemplation of spiritual things, through the medium of their most impressionable feelings. This habit of contemplation, which is so constantly inculcated by them, requiring as it does retirement and seclusion for its due exercise, inclines the followers of the system somewhat towards asceticism, but in countries where luxury is the idol of the many, we may not unnaturally look

[p. xi]

for a protest against it in the tendencies of the few. My present intention is merely to give an exposition of the system; its origin and history I reserve for a future work, in which I hope to prove that Sufiism is really the development of the Primaeval Religion of the Aryan race. The Ahl i wahdat form a branch of Sufiism, rather than a separate sect of Theosophists; they insist upon the Universality and Unity of God. I have translated the title "Unitarian," although I am sensible that misapprehension may arise in consequence of its current application to the professors of a particular form of modern belief. I should have preferred the use of some such term as Monopantachists had I possessed sufficient courage or position to warrant me in coining so formidable an epithet. The term may be generally understood of those Mussulmans, who, though pursuing philosophical enquiry, refuse to subscribe unreservedly to all the metaphysical doctrines of the Sufis.

The expression zat i Khuda, "the Nature of God," by which the Persians designate the very essence and being of the Deity, would, perhaps (according to the general use of the word zat in construction with a proper name), be more idiomatically rendered "God Himself;" but as this treatise

[p. xii]

professes to deal in exactitudes investigated from an Oriental point of view, I have preferred keeping to the original idiom as more definitely expressing the idea.

In conclusion, I have only to acknowledge my obligation to Mr C. A. Hope, of St John's College, for his valuable assistance afforded me in preparing this book for the press.

E. H. PALMER.

ST JOHN'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

Footnotes

^ix:1 The Maksad i Aksa or "Remotest Aim." Vide Hajji Khalfa, ed. Flugel, Vol. VI. p. 90. This work was originally written in Turkish and translated into Persian by Khwarazim Shah. Some fragments of it were edited in Turkish and Latin by A. Muller, Brandenburg, 1663. The copy I have made use of forms part of a volume containing miscellaneous Persian and Turkish treatises on Philosophical and Religious subjects, presented by Adam Bowen to the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge. It is marked R. 13. 32. in the Catalogue.

^x:1 Cf. La Poesie philosophique et religieuse chez les Persans, par M. Garcin de Tassy, p. 3.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

CONTENTS.

           

        

        

       PAGE

     
      DEDICATION (by   special permission of His Majesty the Emperor of the French)

       <page v>

     
      PREFACE

       <page ix>

     
      INTRODUCTION

       <page 1>

     
       

        

       
   PART I.

        

     
      CHAP.

       I.

       Of the   Traveller, the Goal, the Stages, and the Road

       <page 4>

     
      "

       II.

       Of Law,   Doctrine, and Truth

       <page 7>

     
      "

       III.

       Concerning the Perfect   Man, and the Perfectly Free Man

       <page 11>

     
      "

       IV.

       Concerning   Fellowship, and Renunciation

       <page 14>

     
      "

       V.

       Concerning   Attraction, and Devotion

       <page 19>

     
      "

       VI.

       Concerning   Counsel

       <page 21>

     
       

        

       
   PART II.

        

     
      CHAP.

       I.

       Concerning the   Nature of God

       <page 22>

     
      "

       II.

       Concerning the   Attributes of God

       <page 27>

     
      "

       III.

       Concerning the   Works of God, physically considered

       <page 29>

     
      "

       IV.

       Concerning the   Works of God, metaphysically considered

       <page 33>

     
      "

       V.

       Of the four   Universal Sources

       <page 38>

     
       

        

       
   PART III.

        

     
      CHAP.

       I.

       The Saintly and   Prophetic Offices defined

       <page 43>

     
       

        

       [p. xiv]

        

     
       

        

       
   PART IV.

        

     
       

        

        

       PAGE

     
      CHAP.

       I.

       On the Influence   of Early Prejudice upon Belief

       <page 45>

     
       

        

       
   PART V.

        

     
       

        

       THE STUDY OF MAN.

        

     
      CHAP.

       I.

       Grounds for the   Discussion

       <page 50>

     
      "

       II.

       Of the Origin   and Animal Development of Man

       <page 51>

     
      "

       III.

       Of the Intellectual   and Spiritual Development of Man

       <page 55>

     
      "

       IV.

       Of the Upward   Progress or Ascent of Man

       <page 58>

     
      "

       V.

       Conclusion

       <page 64>

     
      APPENDIX.

       Glossary of   Technical and Allegorical Terms in use among the Sufi Poets

       <page 69>

     
      INDEX

       <page 82>

     
   
     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

ORIENTAL MYSTICISM.

          Thy prayer-mat   stain with wine, if so
     The Magian's favour thou canst win,
   For travellers in the land should know
     The ways and customs of the inn.
                                       HAFIZ.

     
   THE verse above quoted, like most Oriental poetic  writings, is susceptible of a mystical and much higher interpretation than appears from a merely superficial perusal. It is peculiarly illustrative of the allegorical form under which the intellectual life of the Religious Philosopher is treated by the Persians, namely that of a journey, the ultimate object of which is the knowledge of the Infinite Majesty of God; a plan similar to that adopted with reference to the moral life by our own John Bunyan in the Pilgrim's Progress. At the outset of their treatises the term Traveller is applied to the intellectual man only, but the word is afterwards used in a more

[p. 2]

general sense, just as in Christian writings man is not unfrequently called a Wayfarer; it becomes often identical with Disciple. M. Garcia de Tassy, in a work already referred to in the preface, has very appropriately quoted a verse of St Thomas illustrating this point:

Ecce panis angelorum
 Factus cibus viatorum.

[paragraph continues] To an elucidation of this system, and the technical terms employed therein, the following pages are devoted; but to avoid breaking the continuity of the account, I have endeavoured to present an epitome of the Oriental Mystic Philosophy from the point of view taken by the Mohammedan writers, from whom my information is chiefly derived. I must therefore premise that any dogmatical statements that may occur in the course of the work are not to be considered as enunciations of my own opinion, but as an exposition of the views of those whose system I am attempting to expound.

The first part will contain an explanation of, 1, The terms Traveller, Road, Inns or Stages, and Goal. 2, The words Law, Doctrine, Truth, and the Perfect Man, according to the Oriental definition of them. 3, What is meant by Fellowship, Renunciation, Attraction and Devotion.

[p. 3]

The second, the Sufiistic account of, 1, The Nature; 2, The Attributes; 3, The Works of God; 4, The Four Universal Sources.

The third, a definition of, 1, The Saintly; 2, The Prophetic Office.

The fourth, a dissertation on the Influence of Early Prejudice upon Belief.

The fifth, the Study of Man.

For the benefit of those who study oriental poetry I have added an Appendix, containing a glossary of allegorical and technical terms in use among the Sufiistic writers.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

PART I.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

OF THE TRAVELLER, THE GOAL, THE STAGES, AND THE ROAD.

THE Traveller in the path of mystic philosophy is the Perceptive Sense, which as it becomes further developed results in Intelligence, not however the intelligence of life, but such as is described in the words of Mohammed, "Intelligence is light in the heart, distinguishing between truth and vanity, not the intelligence of life." After a time our traveller merges into Divine Light, but of the thousands who start upon the road scarcely one attains thereunto.  The Goal is the Knowledge of God, and the acquisition of this knowledge is the work of Divine Light alone, Perception or worldly intelligence having no lot or portion therein. The latter is represented as the sovereign of this world, and the perceptive faculties are the executive officers of his rule, to whom both the cultivation and devastation of the face of the earth is due. The idea is suggested by the following passage of the Coran: "When God said to the angels, I am about to place a vicegerent

[p. 5]

in the earth, they said, Wilt thou place therein one who shall commit abomination and shed blood? Nay; we celebrate Thy praise and holiness. God answered them, Verily I know what ye wot not of." (Cor. cap. 2, v. 28.) Which answer implies that God knew that although such might even be the conduct of the bulk of mankind, there would still be some who should receive the Divine Light and attain to a knowledge of Him; so that it is clear that the object  of the creation of existent beings was that God should be known. Existence was made for man, and man for the knowledge of God. To the same purport is the answer given to David, "David enquired and said, Oh Lord! why hast thou created mankind? God said, I am a hidden treasure, and I would fain become known [*1]." The business of the Traveller then is to exert himself and strive to attain to the Divine light, and so to the knowledge of God; and this is to be achieved by associating with the wise. The received notion of the "stages" in the "road," involves  a paradox, the disciple who asks concerning them being told that there is not even a single stage, nay more, not even a road at all. This statement is differently explained by two sects, the Sufis and the Ahl i Wahdat, whom I shall call the Unitarians. The Sufis say that there is no road from man to God, because the nature of God is illimitable and infinite, without beginning or end or even direction. There is not a single atom of existent things with which

[p. 6]

[paragraph continues] God is not and which God does not comprise: "Are they not in doubt concerning the union with their Lord? doth he not comprise everything?" (Cor. cap. 42, v. 54.) Nor is there aught that he does not comprehend with his knowledge: "Verily God comprehendeth all things with his knowledge." (Cor. cap. 42, v. 54.) The Traveller who has not attained to this Divine Light can have no lot or portion with God, but those who have reached it gaze always upon His face; they go not forth by day and retire not to rest at night without an abashed consciousness that God is present every where; for with Him they live, and in Him they act.

The whole universe compared with the majesty of God is as a drop in the ocean, nay infinitely less than this. But Perception or Intelligence can never lead to this conviction, or reveal this glorious mystery; that is the province of the Divine Light alone. Such is the Sufiistic explanation of the proposition, "There is no road from man to God."

 The Unitarians interpret it as follows. They hold that existence is not independent, but is of God; that besides the existence of God there is no real existence, nor can there possibly be: for that which exists not, cannot exist of itself, but that which does exist, exists of itself, and that which is self-existent is God.

When man imagines that be has an existence other than the existence of God he falls into a grievous error and sin; yet this error and sin is the only road from man to God; for until the Traveller has

[p. 7]

passed over this he cannot reach God. A certain Sufi poet has said,

Plant one foot on the neck of self,
   The other in thy Friend's domain;
 In everything His presence see,
   For other vision is in vain.

[paragraph continues] That is, whilst you are looking up to self you cannot see God, but when you are not looking up to self all that you see is God. Such is the Unitarian solution of the proposition that "there is no road from man to God," namely that the error of imagining an existence separate from God is the only road to Him; the stages on this road are innumerable, and some philosophers even assert that it has no end.

Footnotes

^5:1 Cf. Sale's Coran, Preliminary Discourse, p. 97.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

  

OF LAW, DOCTRINE AND TRUTH.

THE Law is the word of the Prophet, the Doctrine  is the example of the Prophet, and the Truth is the vision of the Prophet. This follows from the Hadis [*1], "My words are Law, my example is Doctrine, my state is Truth." The Traveller must first learn the theory of the Law, and act up to the practice of the Doctrine, by which means the Truth will become manifest in him. Those who possess all these three things are the Perfect, and these are the leaders of the people; but those who are deficient in all are lower than the brutes; these are the wretches

[p. 8]

referred to in the Coran: "Verily we have created for Hell many of mankind and of the genii; hearts have they and understand not, eyes have they and see not, ears have they and hear not; they are like unto the beasts of the field, nay more perverse, for they are the negligent." (Cor. cap. 7, v. 178.) From this we learn that each is bound to fulfil his duty in his allotted sphere.

The superficial has no credit without the real. Mankind in reality is man; the animal kingdom in reality is animal. By reality is meant the possession and employment of the qualities naturally appertaining to the order to which the individual belongs. Thus the wise man knows all, sees all, and works with all; for otherwise the business of the world would not go on. Teachers also work in their way for the same reason. But Rulers work not, or otherwise the harmony of the world would be disturbed.

The final object of Law, Doctrine and Truth is that mankind should speak aright, act aright, and think aright, or, in other words, become wise and good. The object is threefold: first, that man may not become like the brute he should receive the command and prohibition of Scripture, and obey the same. This he must confirm in his heart and confess with his tongue. Secondly, that he may be adorned with grace and piety he should associate with the wise, and strive earnestly to know and understand the unity of God. Thirdly, that he may become accomplished he should, after the knowledge of God, learn the nature and properties of material objects.

[p. 9]

[paragraph continues] When thus accomplished the Traveller may be considered as adorned with Law, Doctrine and Truth.

But all the foregoing theory is useless without  practice; the Traveller cannot arrive at the goal unless he combines theory with practice, superficiality with reality; for the Coran says, "and righteous actions shall raise him." (Cor. cap. 35, v. 11.) Now the actions constituting this practice are ten in number. 1. Search after God, which is the object of all striving and conflict. 2. Search after Wisdom, the guide without whom it is impossible to find the road. 3. Inclination towards the wise; that is, the Traveller should frequent the society of the wise and sit as a disciple at their feet. This inclination is the strong steed that bears him on his way. 4. Obedience. The Traveller should in everything be obedient and submissive to the wise, both in reference to the affairs of this world and the next. 5. Renunciation. He must renounce trifling, and at the bidding of the elder even give up all that he has to his care, forsaking his most favourite pursuits, unless they meet with the approbation of his superior. 6. Piety. He must be pious and continent, in word and deed and mode of life, complying with the dictates of the Law and the Scriptures. 7. Submission. The serenity of the Traveller's path is the result of submission to the Law. 8. Reticence. To speak little. 9. Vigilance. To sleep little. 10. Temperance. To eat little. These are the marks which determine the practice of the followers of the Doctrine, ten fierce dragons in the Traveller's path to keep him from

[p. 10]

swerving in the direction of sin. If he assiduously follow them under the direction of the wise he ultimately reaches his Goal, and the Truth is made manifest in him; but if he be deficient in one only he can never arrive at his destination.

There are also ten marks which determine the practice of the followers of Truth. 1. That the Traveller should know God first, and subsequently the nature and properties of material objects. 2. That he should be at peace with all the world, and refrain from all contradiction and opposition. According to the mother from whom he is born into the community each receives a different patronymic; thus one is called a Hanefite, one a Shafiite [*1], one a Pagan, one a Jew, and another a Mussulman; but the true philosopher recognises in each a weak and helpless being like himself, he sees in each a fellow-searcher after God. 3. Charity towards all. Charity is that course of action and teaching which benefits our fellows both temporally and spiritually. Now real charity consists in the employment of counsel and discipline. Teachers should employ counsel that men may be improved; rulers should employ discipline for the

[p. 11]

regulation and well-being of society. 4. Humility; this consists in paying due respect to others. 5. Submission and resignation. 6. Trust in God, patience, endurance and perseverance. 7. Freedom from avarice; for avarice is the mother of vice. 8. Contentment. 9. Inoffensiveness. 10. Conviction; for the Truth brings conviction with it.

Such are the marks, and such is the practice of the followers of Truth; and until the Traveller shall have thoroughly penetrated the inmost depths of wisdom, and shall have completed the journey to and in God, these marks and qualities will not be made manifest in him.

Footnotes

^7:1 The sayings of Mohammed are so called.

^10:1 The Hanefites are the followers of Abu Hanifa, one of the principal authorities for the traditional law. His doctrines are esteemed chiefly among the Turks.

The Shafiites are those who follow the tenets taught by Abu Abdallah Mohammed ben Idris, al Shafi'i, who was descended from the family of Mohammed. Salah-uddin (Saladin) founded a college for the exclusive propagation of his doctrines at Cairo. A beautiful mosque to his memory also exists at Herat, in Khorassan. Both sects are considered perfectly orthodox by the Mussulmans.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

  

CONCERNING THE PERFECT MAN, AND THE PERFECTLY FREE MAN.

THE Perfect Man is he who has fully comprehended  the Law, the Doctrine and the Truth; or, in other words, he who is endued with four things in perfection; viz. 1. Good words; 2. Good deeds; 3. Good principles; 4. The sciences. It is the business of the Traveller to provide himself with these things in perfection, and by so doing he will provide himself with perfection.

The Perfect Man has had various other names  assigned to him, all equally applicable, viz. Elder, Leader, Guide, Inspired Teacher, Wise, Virtuous, Perfect, Perfecter,  [*1]Beacon and Mirror of the world,

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Powerful Antidote, Mighty Elixir, 'Isa the Raiser of the Dead, Khizar the Discoverer of the Water of Life, and Solomon who knew the language of Birds.

The Universe has been likened to a single person, of whom the Perfect Man is the Soul; and again, to a tree, of which mankind is the fruit, and the Perfect Man the pith and essence. Nothing is hidden from the Perfect Man; for after arriving at the knowledge of God, he has attained to that of the nature and properties of material objects, and can henceforth find no better employment than acting  mercifully towards mankind. Now there is no mercy better than to devote oneself to the perfection and improvement of others, both by precept and example. Thus the Prophet is called in the Coran "a mercy to the Universe." (Cor. cap. 21, v. 107.) But with all his perfection the Perfect Man cannot compass his desires, but passes his life in consistent and unavoidable self-denial: he is perfect in knowledge and principle, but imperfect in faculty and power.

There have indeed been Perfect Men possessed of power; such power as that which resides in kings and rulers; yet a careful consideration of the poor extent of man's capacities will shew that his weakness is preferable to his power, his want of faculty preferable to his possession of it. Prophets and saints, kings and sultans, have desired many things, and failed to obtain them; they have wished to avoid

[p. 13]

many things, and have had them forced upon them. Mankind is made up of the Perfect and the Imperfect, of the Wise and the Foolish, of Kings and Subjects, but all are alike weak and helpless, all pass their lives in a manner contrary to their desires; this the Perfect Man recognises and acts upon, and, knowing that nothing is better for man than renunciation, forsakes all and becomes free and at leisure. As before he renounced wealth and dignity, so now he foregoes eldership and teachership, esteeming freedom and rest above everything: the fact is, that though the motive alleged for education and care of others is a feeling of compassion and a regard for discipline, yet the real instigation is the love of dignity: as the Prophet says, "The last thing that is removed from the chiefs of the righteous is love of dignity." I have said that the Perfect Man should  be endued with four things in perfection: now the Perfectly Free Man should have four additional characteristics, viz. renunciation, retirement, contentment, and leisure. He who has the first four is virtuous, but not free: he who has the whole eight is perfect, liberal, virtuous, and free. Furthermore, there are two grades of the Perfectly Free--those  who have renounced wealth and dignity only, and those who have further renounced eldership and teachership, thus becoming free and at leisure. These again are subdivided into two classes; those who, after renunciation, retirement and contentment, make choice of obscurity, and those who, after renunciation, make choice of submission, contemplation and resignation;

[p. 14]

but the object of both is the same. Some writers assert that freedom and leisure consists in the former course, while others maintain that it is only to be found in the latter.

Those who make choice of obscurity are actuated by the knowledge that annoyance and distraction of thought are the invariable concomitants of society; they therefore avoid receiving visits and presents, and fear them as they would venomous beasts. The other class, who adopt submission, resignation and contemplation, do so because they perceive that mankind for the most part are ignorant of what is good for them, being dissatisfied with what is beneficial, and delighted with circumstances that are harmful to them; as the Coran says, "Perchance ye may dislike what is good for you, and like what is hurtful to you." (Cor. cap. 2, v. 213.) For this reason they retire from society equally with the other class, caring little what the world may think of them. The eminent Sufis are divided in opinion as to which of these two courses is to be preferred.

Footnotes

^11:1 In Persian Jam i Jehan numa, the fabled cup of Jemshid, in [p. 12] which were reflected all passing events; and 'Aina e Jehan-numa, the mirror of Alexander the Great, said to have possessed the same singular properties.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

CONCERNING FELLOWSHIP AND RENUNCIATION.

FELLOWSHIP has many qualities and effects both of good and evil. The fellowship of the wise is the only thing that can conduct the Traveller safely to the Goal; therefore all the submission, earnestness and discipline that have been hitherto inculcated are merely in order to render him worthy of such

[p. 15]

fellowship. Provided he have the capacity, a single day, nay, a single hour, in the society of the wise, tends more to his improvement than years of self-discipline without it. "Verily one day with thy Lord is better than a thousand years." (Cor. cap. 22, v. 46.)

It is however possible to frequent the society of the wise without receiving any benefit therefrom, but this must proceed either from want of capacity or want of will. In order then to avoid such a result, the Sufis have laid down the following rules for the conduct of the disciple when in the presence of his teachers.

 

Hear, attend, but speak little. 

Never answer a question not addressed to you; but if asked, answer promptly and concisely, never feeling ashamed to say, "I know not."

Do not dispute for disputation's sake.

Never boast before your elders.

Never seek the highest place, nor even accept it if it be offered to you.

Do not be over-ceremonious, for this will compel your elders to act in the same manner towards you, and give them needless annoyance.

Observe in all cases the etiquette appropriate to the time, place and persons present.

In indifferent matters, that is, matters involving no breach of duty by their omission or commission, conform to the practice and wishes of those with whom you are associating.

[p. 16]

Do not make a practice of anything which is not either a duty or calculated to increase the comfort of your associates; otherwise it will become an idol to you; and it is incumbent on every one to break his idols and renounce his habits.

This leads us to the subject of Renunciation, which is of two kinds, external and internal. The former is the renunciation of worldly wealth; the latter, the renunciation of worldly desires. Everything that hinders or veils the Traveller's path must be renounced, whether it relate to this world or the next. Wealth and dignity are great hindrances; but too much praying and fasting are often hindrances too. The one is a shroud of darkness, the other a veil of light. The Traveller must renounce idolatry, if he desire to reach the Goal, and everything that bars his progress is an idol. All men have some idol, which they worship; with one it is wealth and dignity, with another overmuch prayer and fasting. If a man sit always upon his prayer-carpet his prayer-carpet becomes his idol. And so on with a great number of instances.

 Renunciation must not be performed without the advice and permission of an elder. It should be the renunciation of trifles, not of necessaries, such as food, clothing and dwelling place which are indispensable to man; for without them he would be obliged to rely on the aid of others, and this would beget avarice, which is "the mother of vice." The renunciation of necessaries produces as corrupting

[p. 17]

an influence upon the mind as the possession of too much wealth. The greatest of blessings is to have a sufficiency, but to over-step this limit is to gain nought but additional trouble.

Renunciation is the practice of those who know  God, and the characteristic mark of the wise. Every individual fancies that he alone possesses this knowledge, but knowledge is an attribute of the mind, and there is no approach from unaided sense to the attributes of the mind, by which we can discover who is, or who is not, possessed of this knowledge. Qualities however are the sources of action; therefore a man's practice is an infallible indication of the qualities he possesses; if, for instance, a man asserts that he is a baker, a carpenter, or a blacksmith, we can judge at once if he possesses skill in these crafts by the perfection of his handiwork. In a word, theory is internal, and practice external, the presence of the practice, therefore, is a proof that the theory too is there.

Renunciation is necessary to the real confession  of faith; for the formula "There is no God but God," involves two things, negation and proof. Negation is the renunciation of other Gods, and proof is the knowledge of God. Wealth and dignity have led many from the right path, they are the gods the people worship; if then you see that one has renounced these, you may be sure that he has expelled the love of this world from his heart, and completed the negation; and whosoever has attained to the knowledge of God has completed the proofs.

[p. 18]

This is really confessing that "there is no God but God;" and he who has not attained to the knowledge of God, has never really repeated the confession of faith. Early prejudices are a great stumblingblock to many people; for the first principles of Monotheism are contained in the words of the Hadis: "Every one is born with a disposition [for the true faith], but his parents make him a Jew, a Christian, or a Magian." The Unitarians also say, that the real confession of faith consists in negation and proof; but they explain negation by renunciation of self, and proof by acknowledgement of God.

Thus, according to the Sufis, confession of faith, prayer and fasting contain two distinct features, namely, form and truth; the former being entirely inefficacious without the latter. Renunciation and the knowledge of God are like a tree; the knowledge of God is the root, renunciation the branches, and all good principles and qualities are the fruit.-To sum up, the lesson to be learnt is that in repeating the formula the Traveller must acknowledge in his heart that God only always was, God only always will be. This world and the next, nay, the very existence of the Traveller, may vanish, but God alone remains. This is the true confession of faith; and although the Traveller before was blind, the moment he is assured of this his eyes are opened, and he seeth.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

CONCERNING ATTRACTION AND DEVOTION.

THE Sufis hold that there are three aids necessary to conduct the Traveller on his path.

1. Attraction; 2. Devotion; 3. Elevation.

Attraction is the act of God, who draws man  towards Himself. Man sets his face towards this world, and is entangled in the love of wealth and dignity, until the grace of God steps in and turns his heart towards God. The tendency proceeding from God is called Attraction; that which proceeds from man is called Inclination, Desire and Love. As the inclination increases, its name changes, and  it causes the Traveller to renounce everything else becoming a Kiblah, to set his face towards God; when it has become his Kiblah, and made him forget everything but God, it is developed into Love.

Most men when they have attained this stage are content to pass their lives therein, and leave the world without making further progress. Such a person the Sufis call Attracted ()

Others, however, proceed from this to self-examination, and pass the rest of their lives in devotion. They are then called Devoutly Attracted (). If devotion be first practised, and the attraction of God then step in, such a person is called an Attracted Devotee (). If he practise and complete devotion, but is not

[p. 20]

influenced by the attraction of God, he is called a Devotee ().

Sheikh Shehab-uddin [*1], in his work entitled 'Awarif al Ma'arif, says that an elder or teacher should be selected from the second class alone; for although many may be estimable and righteous, it is but few who are fit for such offices, or for the education of disciples [*2].

Devotion is the prosecution of the journey, and that in two ways, to God and in God. The first, the Sufis say, has a limit; the second is boundless; the journey to God is completed when the Traveller has attained to the knowledge of God; and then commences the journey in God, which has for its object the knowledge of the Nature and Attributes of God; a task which they confess is not to be accomplished in so short a space as the lifetime of man.

The knowledge wisest men have shared
   Of Thy great power and Thee
 Is less, when with Thyself compared,
   Than one drop in a sea.

The Unitarians maintain that the journey to God is completed when the Traveller has acknowledged that there is no existence save that of God; the journey in God they explain to be a subsequent inquiry into the mysteries of nature.

[p. 21]

The term Elevation or ascent () is almost  synonymous with Progress, and will be explained in that part of the work which treats of the study of Man.

Footnotes

^20:1 Shihab-ud-din Abu Hafs Omar bin Mohammed bin Abdallah, Soharawerdi, died A.D. 1106. See Hajji Khalfa, Vol. IV. p. 275.

^20:2  murid is properly one who possesses the Inclination  before mentioned.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

CONCERNING COUNSEL.

ALL counsel may be summed up in the simple  words, My friend, rely not on life, health, or riches. Nothing over which the firmament of heaven revolves maintains an unchanged existence, but every hour assumes some new form. Every moment a fresh picture is presented to the view; and one appearance is scarce complete ere another supervenes, obliterating all traces of the first, as wave follows wave upon the shore. No wise man would seek to build his house upon the waves, or hope to find a foundation for it there. To quote the words of Hafiz:

In hope's unstable palace no foundations shalt thou find,
 Then seize the passing hour, for life but rests upon the wind.

The wisest of mankind are those who have renounced all worldly desires, and chosen the calm and peaceful lot of a recluse's life. Behind every pleasure lurk twenty pains; far better is it then to forego one fleeting joy and spare oneself a lifetime of regret. Life, health, riches, and happiness, may be our portion to-day; but God alone knows what the morrow may bring forth.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

PART II.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

CONCERNING THE NATURE OF GOD.

THE Sufis consider it an axiom that the world must have had a Creator. They affirm that He is One, Ancient, First and Last, the End and Limit of all things, Incomparable, Unchangeable, Indivisible, and Immaterial, not subject to the laws of time, place or direction; possessing the attributes of holiness, and exempt from all opposite qualities. In this  their account agrees with the opinion of the Oriental thinking world in general; but they further assert that He is Infinite and Illimitable, by which they mean not only without beginning or end, but also without determinate position of time, place, or direction. The Nature of God, according to them, is an infinite and illimitable light, a boundless and fathomless Ocean, compared with which the entire universe is more insignificant than a drop of water  in the sea. There is no single atom of existent beings which God does not pervade, comprise and comprehend. God is always near to man, but man

[p. 23]

is always far from God, because he is not aware of His proximity. The proximity of God to all created  beings is the same, for the highest and lowest are alike in His sight. The light of God is the only thing that can reveal this proximity to the Traveller.

There are three grades of proximity to God which are out of the reach of human Intelligence: the proximity of Time, Place and Attributes. We can say, for instance, that Mohammed was nearer our own time than Christ; that the moon is nearer to the earth than the planet Jupiter; that Bayazid Bistami [*1] more closely resembled Mohammed in qualities than did any even of the Prophet's contemporaries; but we cannot predicate this proximity of God. The verse of the Coran, "He is with you wherever you are" (Cor. cap. 57, v. 4), alludes to this mysterious proximity. Intelligence has no road to the discovery  of it, but when its majesty has overshadowed the Illuminati, they perceive that in the sight of God Saints and Prophets, unbelievers and heretics, the loftiest of mankind and the meanest of brutes, are alike compared with Him. This is their explanation of the passage "Thou wilt see no distinction in the Creation of the Merciful One" (Cor. cap. 67, v. 3), and "God's is the East and the West, and wherever you turn your faces God is there." (Cor. cap. 2, v. 109.)

The Traveller who has discovered this proximity possesses the one thing needful, and has completed the journey to God, but until he shall have overcome

[p. 24]

the restraints of time and place his steps can never border on the threshold of Eternity. Eternity,  in the Sufiistic sense, is the primal element of Cosmos, and takes in at one glance both past and future time. This idea is contained in the words of the Hadis: "There is no morning or evening with thy Lord." The passage in the Coran "Oh assembly of genii and men! if ye are able to pass out of the confines of Heaven, then pass out of them; but ye will do so only by the authority which God giveth you," (Cor. cap. 55, v. 33), points to the Majesty of Him of whose proximity we are speaking.

Solution of Questions arising out of the Sufi account.This Sufiistic account of the nature and proximity of God gives rise to many questions amongst their disciples. For instance, "In what way is the nature of God infinite and illimitable, in reference to the sensible and invisible world separately considered?" The answer, however, follows plainly from the previous statements. For since the nature of God is infinite and illimitable, and no notion of time, place, or direction attaches to it, it is equally above the highest conception of the invisible world, and below the lowest material object of the sensible world. Again, their statement concerning the proximity of God to all things alike, and His comprising and comprehending all things, seems irreconcileable with any conception that human intelligence can form of His Nature. This objection they meet by the following physical illustration.

 Earth is dense, water compared with earth is subtle, air is more subtle than water, fire is more

[p. 25]

subtle than air; and the subtle occupies a higher  position in the scale of creation than the dense. Now although each of these four elements occupies a distinct position in nature they are susceptible of commixture, and are determined the one by the other. If, for instance, a vessel be completely filled with earth there will still be space for water, and when it will contain no more water it will still admit of the introduction of air, and when it will contain no more air it will still admit of the introduction of fire; the comprehensive and penetrating capacities of each being in proportion to their relative densities. It will now be observed that there is no particle of the earth in the vessel but is commingled with the water, and so on of the other three elements, each occupying its distinct and proper position according to its density. It is from the proper gradation and arrangement of these four elements in the world that the phenomena of nature arise; but they are nevertheless susceptible of commixture and conjunction. This again may be proved by experiment. If one thrust his hand into water it is moistened and not burnt, if into fire it is burnt and not moistened, but if he thrust it into boiling water it is both moistened and burnt, thereby proving that these two elements are susceptible of commixture and conjunction. That the four elements do occupy their distinct and proper positions in nature, is evident from the premises concerning their relative densities, for the denser cannot disturb or confine the more subtle. If all this be possible then in the case of material elements, how much

[p. 26]

more possible is it in the case of the nature of God, which is immaterial and indivisible!

Another and closer illustration is that taken from the connection of the human soul with the body. The soul is conjoined with the body, and does not merely reside in it; so that there is no atom of the corporeal frame distinct from or not pervaded, comprised and comprehended by it. The limbs may be separated one by one, and the body itself even cut into pieces without any wound or hurt accruing to the soul; for the body, which is the denser of the two, cannot disturb or confine the soul, which is the more subtle. In like manner the Nature of God pervades, comprises and comprehends everything, and is incapable of being disturbed or confined by anything.

Again, since the Nature of God is infinitely subtle, nothing can ever veil or conceal it; for the more subtle a thing is the greater is its capacity for penetration. Thus the Sufis explain the expression of the Coran, "He is the Subtle the Wise [*1]," with reference to the Nature of God, as the only truly subtle nature. They say that this sentence would convince every one of the truth of the Mohammedan creed if they could but understand that this is the right interpretation of it. This proximity of God is implied in the

[p. 27]

verses, "He is with you wherever you are; God seeth all that ye do" (Cor. cap. 57, v. 4). "I am nearer to him than his jugular vein" (Cor. cap. 50, v. 15). And many similar passages both of the Coran and the Hadis.

The foregoing arguments are intended specially to confute the opinion that God is nearer to some men than others, namely, that the Wise approach nearer to Him than the Ignorant. Their great object, however, is the inculcation of the beautiful truth, that He is ever near to those who seek Him, whilst those only are far from Him who by their actions fail to acknowledge that He is Omnipresent and Omniscient, knowing and seeing all they do.

Footnotes

^23:1 An eminent Sufi philosopher and poet. See Sprenger, Journal As. S. of Bengal, 1856, p. 134.

^26:1  (Cor. cap. 6, v. 103). In Sale's version the word latif is rendered gracious. I have, however, translated it subtle, which is its primary meaning, and accords with the Sufiistic interpretation.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

  

CONCERNING THE ATTRIBUTES OF GOD.

SHEIKH Sadr-ud-din Rumi [*1] affirms that the Attributes  and Names of God are convertible terms; but Sheikh Sa'ad-ud-din Hamawi [*2] maintains that the Coran and Hadis contain no synonymous words whatever, and that it is incompatible with the character of a Sage to make use of two or more expressions to convey a single meaning. According to him Attributes are intrinsic and Names descriptive; the former relating to the Nature, the latter to the Aspect of

[p. 28]

the being described. Works again relate to the Individuality. This is the opinion generally received among the Sufis. Sheikh Sadr-ud-din, on the other hand, maintains that the Attributes of God are from one point themselves the Nature of God, and are contrary to it from another. They are themselves the Nature of God in this way, that where there is no existence save His Nature, His Attributes must of necessity be His Nature also. They are contrary to it in this way, that as things understood are necessarily various, the names used to express them must be various too, and must imply distinctions of meaning and idea. But all distinction and divisibility is contrary to the Nature of God.

The names applied to God, of Living, Eternal, Author or Disposer, and Omnipotent, imply His Eternal and Abiding Nature; actual names according to the Mohammedan theory having existed prior to their meanings [*1]. Such expressions therefore are the names of the actual names, and are called Positive Attributes. These names are called the four pillars of Divinity. Such names however as The Exalter and Debaser, The Giver of Life and Death, refer to attendant powers, and are called Relative Attributes. Lastly, such names as The Blameless, The Holy One, The Independent One, relate to the absence of imperfection, and are hence called Negative

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] Attributes. All the other names of God may be referred to one or other of these three classes, except the name Allah itself [*1], which comprises all  The name the attributes of His Eternal and Abiding Nature, for all the other names can be used to qualify it. The name Merciful, occurring in the initiatory formula, "In the name of God the Merciful, the Compassionate," is held in the next greatest reverence, although referring to the outward attributes of God only. The Coran says, "Say, Pray unto God (Allah), or pray unto the Merciful One (Ar Rahman). By whichsoever of the two names ye invoke Him it is equal, for to Him belong the best of names." (Cor. cap. 17, v. 110.) All these names collectively or individually indicate One and the same God.

Footnotes

^27:1 Also called El Kunawi. Vide Hajji Khalfa, ed. Flugel, Vol. I. p. 350, &c.

^27:2 Vide Hajji Khalfa, Vol. III. pp. 78, 582.

^28:1 It must be borne in mind that one of the principal dogmas of Islam is that the Coran was preexistent to all created things, and by implication also the Arabic language in which it is written, and to which the names above mentioned belong.

^29:1 The name Allah is abbreviated from Al-Ilah, "the God" par excellence.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

  

CONCERNING THE WORKS OF GOD, PHYSICALLY CONSIDERED.

THE Works of God are of two kinds, visible and invisible.  The first is the Perceived, the second the Conceived World. The Perceived World is also called The Material, Visible, Created, and Lower World. The Conceived World is spoken of as the Invisible, Spiritual, or Future World, and the World of Command [*2]: this division is based on the words,

[p. 30]

[paragraph continues] "Are not creation and command of Him?" (Cor. cap. 7, v. 52.) The material world may be described in detail, but of the spiritual world we must be content with a mere outline, for none but those who have gone hence, and entered into the spiritual life, can know the condition thereof: as Jesus Christ has said, "Except a man be born again he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven [*1]."

There are two classes of beings in the Invisible World, those whose existence is revealed in inspiration (), and those who make their existence felt

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] (). The first are subdivided into two classes, namely, Emanations and Agencies. Emanations  are what are addressed in the words of Mohammed, "Salve! in the majesty of God, in His Glory which was before the world began." They are called by the Mohammedans Malaik Muhaymeh, i.e. Angels designated by the word hamu, "salve." Mohammed gives the following account of them: "Verily with the Most High God there is a luminous land, the sun journeyeth there in 30 days, in an orbit of 30 days, like the days of the world: its creation knows the Most High God, but there are others in the earth who know not God, the sons of Adam, and Iblis."

Agencies are, as it were, the door-keepers of  Divinity, and the means by which God's bounty is vouchsafed to man. The head and chief of them, according to the Muslims, is Mohammed, than whom there is no more exalted spirit. "I have created nothing more honoured in my sight than thee."

The Holy Spirit, or Gabriel, is, according to them, the last of this class of agencies, being the actual and intermediate agent of intercourse between God and man. "There is not one of us who hath not his assigned position."

The other beings whose existence is felt are also  subdivided into two classes, namely, Agents and Powers. The former are the presiding genii, or personified laws of animal, vegetable and mineral production, whence the common saying, "Everything has its angel." Mohammed himself says, "An angel descends in every drop of rain or dew," and the mystics

[p. 32]

assert that God does not create a single leaf upon a tree without the intervention of seven angels. The human soul, though compounded both of the material and the immaterial, is reckoned amongst this class. It is the masterpiece of creation, and the whole material world is placed under its control [*1].

The Powers who form the second class are the Genii and Devils. They are created of fire, and constitute the lower order of beings in the invisible world. Some of them have a certain power over the race of man granted to them, but are rebellious against the Most High; of these Iblis is the Head and Chief. Others, again, although capable of harm, are subservient to the will of God.

[p. 33]

The material world is also of two kinds, heavenly  and earthly. The heavenly are the Throne and the Seat of God (or the Highest Heavens), the Seven Inferior Heavens, the Firmament and the Stars. The Earthly are the Face of the Earth, the Elements, Signs from on high (as thunder, lightning and rain), Compound Bodies (as minerals, vegetables and animals), the Sea, and other Works of God without end. Such is the Sufiistic account of the works of God, physically considered.

Footnotes

^29:2  The command of God  (kun fa kan), "be and it was," is here alluded to. The Sufis in their poetry frequently [p. 30] speak of God as the Lord of kaf and nun, i.e. of the two letters composing the word of command kun "be."

^30:1 

The Mohammedans although denying the Divinity of Our Lord recognize the inspiration of both the Old and New Testaments, which as well as the Apocryphal Gospels they frequently quote as authorities. They even assert that the promise of the Comforter referred to their own prophet, and support their arguments by an ingenious perversion of the text, reading periklytos for parakletos, the former being almost identical in signification with the name of Mohammed (Multum laudatus). The charge of inconsistency in not believing in our scriptures they meet by accusing the Christians of having themselves altered many similar portions of the original, and by maintaining that the mission of Mohammed, the Seal of the Prophets as he is called, abrogated all other religions. Thus Sa'adi says in his Bustan:

That Perfect one who, ere the whole of Gabriel's book he reads,
 Has blotted out the library of all the People's creeds."

^32:1 The accompanying table of the Mohammedan Cosmogony may assist the reader in understanding this and the following chapters.

Click to enlarge

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

CONCERNING THE WORKS OF GOD, METAPHYSICALLY CONSIDERED.

THE first thing that God created was the Primal  Element (), that is to say, the primal element of the entire Universe. This according to the Coran He created of Himself without any medium whatever, and in infinitely less space of time than the twinkling of an eye. "And it was not the business of an hour, but even as the twinkling of an eye, or quicker still." (Cor. cap. 16, v. 79.) [*1] This Primal Element is designated by various other names, such as the Primal Intelligence, the Constructive Spirit, the Pen, the Mightiest Spirit, the Spirit of Mohammed (or the Laudable Spirit), and the like. It is so excellent

[p. 34]

and subtle, that God alone knows its worth. It is the perfection of wisdom and propinquity to God, is ever yearning after Him, and ever present with Him; nor is there anything save this Primal Element that can directly approach Him, or become the direct recipient of His bounty.

The Primal Element is God's world, and the Universe is the world of the Primal Element. By this alone the Voice of God is heard, but its voice is heard throughout the whole Universe, conveying the behests of the Most High [*1].

It is the Pen of God which at His command wrote down the Simple Natures, and in the twinkling of an eye they started into being, the Intelligences, Souls, Elements and Natures, the Heavens and the Stars [*2]. These then took up the task, and obeyed the second mandate by writing down the compound bodies, and straightway the Mineral, Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms sprung into existence.

This is the explanation of the words which begin the 68th Chapter of the Coran: "N, by the Pen, and what they write." The mystic letter represents the World of Power, the Inkstand [*3] of God; the Pen is the Primal Element, and "what they write" refers to the Simple Natures. These are the scribes of God, and the words they write are the compound

[p. 35]

bodies of nature. They are writing even now, and will write on for ever; for "were the sea ink it would not suffice for the words of my Lord [*1]." (Cor. cap. 18, v. 109.)

There are nine heavenly spheres, each higher than  the preceding; the highest of all is called the Heaven of Heavens, or the Throne of God (). Each of these spheres possesses a Soul and an Intelligence, higher and more subtle in proportion to their order. The Intelligence of the Heaven of Heavens is called the Primal Intelligence, the Souls and Intelligences which occupy the other eight are identical with the Cherubim and Spirits of the religious account.

In point of time they precede the simple Natures of above referred to, being eternal, while the latter are casual; in point of mental excellence, however, they rank after them. Their precedence over the Simple Natures is as the precedence of the Sun's Orb over its rays. The next in order of creation are the Threefold Offspring, i.e. the Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal Kingdoms. Both the metaphysical and the physical account agree concerning these last, that they are casual; but their account of what are called the Parents [*2] differs.

[p. 36]

Because man was the final object of creation, and because when he has attained Intelligence he is complete, and because there is nothing beyond Intelligence, and Primal Intelligence was also the beginning of all things, ergo, Intelligence is the beginning and the end, and the circle is complete. This is proved as follows; a circle is traced by ascent and descent: descent is the attribute of the Simple Nature, and ascent the attribute of Compound Bodies; descent resides in Parents, ascent in Offspring; but both the Parents and the Offspring originated with Primal Intelligence, therefore Intelligence is both the beginning and the end, it refers alike to origin and return, to birth and dissolution, it refers to the Night of Power [*1], and to the Day of Resurrection. Again, descent, the remoter it is from the origin, the coarser it becomes, and ascent, the remoter it is from the origin, the more refined it becomes; now the Primal Intelligence caused the descent of the lower world, and the ascent of the higher; therefore the former is much coarser than the latter; but they are still one and the same nature. But their nature originated from the Nature of God, therefore the true conclusion is that the Nature of God first was, and first returned, but was still the same Nature of God. "From Him was the origin, and to Him is the return" (cf. Cor. capp. 10, v. 4, &c.).

[p. 37]

Some say that the originator of the Intelligences  of the lower world constitutes a tenth world, and call it the Intelligence of the Lunar Sphere, the Active Intelligence, or the Bestower of Form. Most philosophers, however, agree that there are ten Intelligences of the higher world, all active and originators of the Intelligences and souls of the lower world. The difference in the Intelligence of mankind is  from this cause; Intelligences and Souls constitute the higher world, and the fixed stars and planets are their administrators in the lower world; through their influence, therefore, the differences observable in mankind are in, proportion to the differences existing between the various Souls and Intelligences of the higher world, and the differences existing between the fixed stars and the planets themselves. Now the various qualities of the last are innumerable; astrologers have discovered some of the properties of the seven planets, but no one can give any clue to those of the fixed stars.

Many of the differences of temperament observable  among mankind are owing also to the influence of the seasons; accident of birth, health, fortune, longevity and the like again, are all considered as due to the influence of the Higher World; the method and means by which this influence is exerted is too mysterious and incomprehensible to be discussed.

In chapter 62, v. 7, of the Coran we find the  words, "To God belong the treasuries of the Heaven and the Earth;" these are then of two kinds, heavenly

[p. 38]

and earthly. To the first class belong the heavens and the stars, every one of which is a treasury; to the second class of these treasuries belong earth, air, fire, and water; every plant and every animal, nay, every embryo, is a treasury in itself. "Verily there is nothing of which the treasury is not with Us." (Cor. cap. 15, v. 21). The treasuries of Heaven and Earth are countless; they may be called the Hosts of the Lord, as the Coran has it, "Verily to God belong the Hosts of the Heavens and the Earth." (Cor. cap. 48, v. 4.)

Footnotes

^33:1 This passage is differently interpreted by the Arab commentators, and is made to refer to "the business of the last hour;" see Sale's translation.

^34:1 Cf. Psalm xix. vv. 1-3.

^34:2 The first two and the Heavens are denominated the Comptrollers: "and the Comptrollers for command." (Cor. cap. 79, V. 5.)

^34:3 The letter N stands for the word nun, which is not only the Arabic name of the letter, but also signifies an inkhorn. Cf. AL BEIDHAWI'S commentary.

^35:1 This idea of the Primal Element appears to have originated partly from a refinement on the ordinary interpretation of the text; "When He willeth aught He but sayeth to it, 'Be, and it is so'," where an undue significance is given to the pronoun it.

^35:2 By these are meant the "seven climes," or "zones," (into which, according to the Mohammedan cosmography, the earth is divided), [p. 36] and the four elements. They are called 'Aba i haftana, "the sevenfold sires," and Ummat i Chahargana, "the fourfold mothers." 

^36:1 The night on which the command Kun went forth, it is equivalent to the Chaos of the Mosaic cosmogony.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V.

  

OF THE FOUR UNIVERSAL SOURCES [*1].

THE Sufis and Unitarians divide the Universe into four Sources, of which the first is the Nature of God the second, the Constructive Spirit; and the third and fourth are the Invisible and Sensible Worlds. This division is contrary to the doctrines contained in the Coran and the Traditional Law, although many even of the strictest Mollahs recognize it. These last say, however, that the First Source, that is, God, created the other three out of nothing, and will, when it pleases Him, reduce them to nothing again. The Unitarians maintain that it is impossible for that which is not, to be, and for that which is, not to be. That which exists, must ever exist, and that which exists not, can never exist.

[p. 39]

How then, ask the Sufis, was the world made manifest? And the Unitarians reply as follows.

The First Source, which is God, is a hidden treasure,  and He desired to be known [*1]. He therefore appeared, coming from internal to external being; this was the beginning of the Second Source or Constructive Spirit. This again appeared, and the third and fourth Sources were in like manner made manifest; they are the Invisible and Sensible Worlds. The manner in which these came into being, and from them all material objects, has been narrated in a previous chapter. Everything therefore proceeds from the First Source. The Source then which was a hidden treasure was the internal Nature of God, and every existent being a manifestation of His nature; consequently everything which exists is the nature of God, and there neither is nor can be any other existence save His.

It was to this doctrine that 'Abdallah ibn 'Abbas [*2]  referred when he said, "I shall be accused of unbelief if I interpret aright the verse, 'It is God who hath created the seven heavens and of the earth like unto them, and His command descendeth between them, that ye may know that He hath power over all things.'" (Cor. cap. 65, v. 12.)

The Unitarians in general say that these four  Sources were always exactly as they are now, and have no precedence whatever, the one over the other.

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] For to assert that any one has such precedence, would be to assume that it must either have been imperfect and grown to perfection, or have been originally perfect and subsequently deteriorated; but any notion of deterioration is incompatible with existence, since that must be the existence of God.

The initiated amongst them, however, allow that the First Source has precedence over the Second, and the Second over the third and fourth; but they state that it is a precedence of order and mind, not of place or time; the precedence of the Sun's Orb over its rays, or of cause over effect, each having been manifested by the preceding.

The Unitarian theory may be summed up thus; God is the First Source, He is the hidden treasure who desires to make Himself known; the others are manifestations of the First, and the more manifestations take place, the more the First becomes known.

The Sufis maintain that these four Sources have a precedence the one over the other, both of time and place; such precedence as Adam has over Mohammed. The origin of the Universe is placed by them in Eternity (azal); that of the Constructive Spirit, the Second Source from which it sprung, in Eternity of Eternities (azal i azal), whilst the Nature of God, the First Source, is Sempiternal (lam yazul wa la yuzal).

The Traveller then must overcome the restraints of time and place, before his footsteps can border on the threshold of Eternity.

[p. 41]

There are other Unitarians, who explain the Four Sources as follows.

The First Source, the Nature of God, they call  an Infinite and Illimitable Light, a boundless and fathomless sea. The Second Source, the Constructive Spirit, proceeding from Him, is likewise an Infinite and Illimitable Light and a boundless and fathomless sea; it comprises and comprehends every existent atom, and governs and administers the entire Universe. The remaining two sources are manifestations of this Infinite Light, and the recurring phenomena of nature are but continued manifestations of the same.

The varied pictures I have drawn on space,
 Behold what fair and goodly sights they seem!
 One glimpse I gave them of my glorious face,
 And lo! 'tis now the universal theme.

In this the Unitarian account differs little from  the Sufiistic; but the former say that the sole object of such manifestation was that God, the hidden treasure, might make Himself known. It is as it were the mirror of God; the mirror in which His majesty and perfection is reflected, the mirror in which He sees Himself.

Look not askance, the Holy one will ever be the same,
 The God of all, though oft invoked by many a different name.

The Universe is the mirror of God, and the heart of man is the mirror of the Universe; if the Traveller then would know God, he must look into his own heart; if he would know the light, he must look into his own heart. In short, if he desire to avoid sin

[p. 42]

and ignorance, and to attain to holiness and wisdom, the guide that shall conduct him on his path is there, "a still small voice," that ever bids him "eschew the evil and choose the good."

All the earth I'd wandered over seeking still the beacon light,
 Never tarried in the daytime, never sought repose at night;
 Till I heard a reverend preacher all the mystery declare,
 Then I looked within my bosom, and 'twas shining brightly there.

 

 

Footnotes

^38:1 The Persians call them  "seas."

^39:1 Cf. the answer to David's enquiry quoted in p. 5.

^39:2 One of the companions of Mohammed. Cf. Hajji Khalfa, Vol. II. p. 333.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

PART III.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE SAINTLY AND PROPHETIC OFFICES DEFINED.

MOHAMMED said, "The first thing which God created  was my soul," and again, "My soul was the Primal Element;" the two therefore are identical.

Now the Primal Element, it has been already stated, has two functions, namely, that of receiving from God, and that of conveying to the world. The first is called the Saintly, the second is called the Prophetic, and is the manifestation of the other. But as it has been shewn that the Primal Element and Mohammed are identical, it follows that these offices are both vested in him. The Sufis, therefore, believe that Mohammed was a prophet before the creation, and that he holds the office still, although he has left the world; and this opinion is in conformity with his own words, "I was a prophet while Adam was yet betwixt Earth and Clay," and again, "There is no prophet after me."

Sheikh Sa'ad uddin Hamawi, who has been before  quoted, says that each of the functions of the Primal

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Element requires an exponent. The exponent of the Prophetic function was Mohammed, and he is the Seal of the Prophets.  The exponent of the Saintly function is Mehdi, the last of the Imams [*1], who is yet to come. Up to the present time the Prophetic Office has been manifested, and assumed a definite form, and the particulars thereof are known; the particulars of the Saintly Office cannot become known, nor can it assume a definite form till the appearance of Mehdi, who will be the saint (Weli), as Mohammed was the Prophet (Nebi).

Hitherto the discussions in the schools have been concerning the duties imposed by prophecy, and the particulars of the revelation introduced by it; on the appearance of Mehdi Prophecy, will have been completed, and the era of Saintship commenced. When the duties and particulars of this are known, they will form the subject of discussion until this era also shall have been completed by the appearance of the Day of Resurrection. Then shall the faithful behold the Lord face to face, according to the promise, "Verily, ye shall behold your Lord on the Day of Resurrection, even as ye behold the Sun and the Moon."

Footnotes

^44:1 Also called Sahibu'zzeman, "The Lord of Time." He is to be the sovereign of the world, to bear the name of Mohammed, and introduce the Millennium. Many religious enthusiasts of the Muslems have claimed to be the Sahibu'zzeman, amongst them Ali Mohammed, alias Bab el Islam (the door of Islamism), who founded the sect of the Babis in Persia during the present century. A history of the movement is given by Mirza Kazem-Beg in the Journal Asiatique, No. 26. Paris, 1866.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

PART IV.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

ON THE INFLUENCE OF EARLY PREJUDICE UPON BELIEF.

THE influence and example of parents and teachers  are paramount in the formation of the character, and in nothing is this more conspicuous than in the matter of religious belief. Doctrines mistily blended with the earliest recollections of life, daily inculcated as truths by those on whose wisdom and affection the child instinctively and implicitly relies, surrounded by a halo of sanctity that he has been ever taught to regard with awe and veneration, to sully which by the slightest breath of doubt he has been led to believe the deadliest of sins, doctrines such as these become in after years part and parcel of the nature of the man, and are not to be lightly cast aside for systems more attractive to the reason or the sense.

The Traveller who has been so trained will  confess, and unreservedly believe, the principles of

[p. 46]

his religion, and will act up to the practice of it, with more conscientious earnestness than he who at the outset of his journey constructs a scheme for himself upon the basis of his elders' counsel, or the conclusions of his own unaided reasoning powers.

Early prejudice is an external influence, and that which is external is far more practical and active than that which is internal. For which cause much earnestness and devotion and faith in the outward attributes of God is found amongst Travellers of this class, but the light of evidence and Divine Grace is still wanting to make them fully understand that His Knowledge, Will and Power comprehend and pervade the whole range of natural causes and effects.  They fail to observe that causes as well as effects yield and are subservient to His will, and attribute every event to the action of some natural law. This class of Travellers will lay great stress upon the efficacy of energy and exertion, and care little for submission and resignation; thus their aspirations are checked by worldly thoughts and desires, and relying upon themselves rather than upon God, they can never hope to attain to a true and full knowledge of Him.

The next class, however, whose early faith has been ripened into conviction by the rays of evidence and proof, recognize God as the Causer of Causes, and relying fully upon Him, rather than upon their own energy and efforts, or upon the things of this world, pass their lives in submission and resignation to His Will. He is their only hope and stay, and

[p. 47]

the only object of their affections and desires, nor are they ever distracted by the whisperings of doubt or shaken by superstitious fears. If beneath the weight of overpowering misery, or in the intoxication of unwonted prosperity, they should waver for a moment in their belief, they atone for their error by a long and earnest course of penitence and prayer. But when the Traveller has reached that higher Stage where he is illumined by the Divine Grace, then the day of resurrection dawns for him, the earthly clouds roll away, the Heavens are opened, and God in all His glory bursts upon his dazzled view.

Like those of the former class, he confesses with  his tongue and believes in his heart, but his faith proceeds not from the precepts of others, or the convictions of his own reason; it flows from a higher source, the fountain-head of grace itself. These are the true Unitarians, for they know and see the Unity of God with a clear and certain eye. They are superior to every consideration, to energy and exertion, to resignation and submission alike, for with them God is all in all.

As a specimen of the arguments by which faith is to be strengthened into conviction, I may instance those of the Unitarians. They maintain that there neither is nor can be any other existence save that of God, and explain this position by a simile thus: Had there never been night, and had men dwelt always in continual day, they would never have known what day really was, but from the constantly  recurring contrast of night they can form a 

[p. 48]

clear conception of day; so had there been other than God, God would have been known, and man could have formed a clear conception of Him; but as he cannot do this, it follows that there is no other than God. Firdausi, the celebrated author of the Shah-nama, says:

The height and depth of all the world is centered, Lord, in Thee:
 I know not what Thou art, Thou art what Thou alone canst be [*1].

The following little parable is also a common-place with them, and points to the same idea.

THE PARABLE OF THE FISHES.

Once upon a time the fishes of a certain river took counsel together, and said, "They tell us that our life and being is from the water, but we have never seen water, and know not what it is." Then some among them wiser than the rest said: "We have

[p. 49]

heard that there dwelleth in the sea a very wise and learned fish who knoweth all things; let us journey to him, and ask him to shew us water, or explain unto us what it is." So several of their number set out upon their travels, and at last came to the sea wherein this sage fish resided. On hearing their request he answered them thus:

Oh ye who seek to solve the knot!
 Ye live in God, yet know him not.
 Ye sit upon the river's brink,
 Yet crave in vain a drop to drink.
 Ye dwell beside a countless store,
 Yet perish hungry at the door.

[paragraph continues] Then they thanked him, and said, "Forasmuch as thou hast shown us what water is not, we now know perfectly what it is." And they departed to their own homes satisfied.

Another class of Unitarians maintain that there  are, it is true, two existences, but one is real, which is of God, and the other imaginative, which is but a mirage, and a reflection of the real. Thus neither the world nor the vicissitudes of human life have any real existence; they are mere reflections of the existence of God, beheld as it were in the changing diorama of a fleeting dream.

Footnotes

^48:1 It was this couplet which his enemies made use of when accusing the poet before Shah Mahmud of heresy and Sufiism. The Sultan in consequence refused Firdausi the full reward which he had promised him for the composition of his Shah-nama, and compelled him to seek safety in flight from Ghazni. This conduct called forth from Firdausi the spirited satire which is so much admired in the East, and in which he defends himself as follows:--

"Men fain would call me infidel or worse,
  And say that heresy defiles my verse;
  And sure no viler caitiff ere was born
  Than he whose soul religious truths would scorn.
  They lie! I serve my God and Prophet still;
  Aye! though a tyrant would my life-blood spill!
  Ne'er shall my soul from duty's path be led,
  Not were thy sword uplifted o'er my head."

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

PART V.

  

THE STUDY OF MAN.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

GROUNDS FOR THE DISCUSSION.

LIKE the ancient sages the Oriental Philosophers hold the maxim " Know thyself," to be one of vital importance to the Traveller on the Road of Life. A considerable portion therefore of their speculative treatises is invariably devoted to the study of mankind.

Much difference of opinion exists as to the point of view from which man is to be discussed; the religious teachers asserting that since God created him from nothing he may be considered as an actual being whose characteristics are capable of diagnosis and definition.

 The metaphysicians, on the other hand, say that it is impossible for that which is not, to be, or for that which is, not to be; they allow, however, that that which is may assume various forms and manifest itself in different ways, and prefer considering man as a particular manifestation of the one Universal

[p. 51]

existence of God. Both however agree in the propriety of the discussion, though upon different grounds.

Man constitutes the Lesser World, and everything  that is not man is included in the Greater World; and since every thing in the Greater World has its counterpart in the Lesser, the study of this is a duty incumbent upon all who aspire to spiritual knowledge. To know oneself is the "right way" (), for guidance in which Mohammed besought God in his prayer, "Guide us into the right way [*1]." Self-knowledge is the shortest road to the knowledge of God. When Ali asked Mohammed "What am I to do that I may not waste my time?" the Prophet answered, "Learn to know thyself."

Footnotes

^51:1 Coran, opening chapter, v. 5.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II.

  

OF THE ORIGIN AND ANIMAL DEVELOPMENT OF MAN.

THE Lesser World is the counterpart of the Greater.  In the Greater World there are four Sources, namely, the nature of God, the Constructive Spirit (or Primal Element), the Invisible and the Sensible World.

The nature of God begets, the Constructive Spirit conceives, and the offspring is the tracts of heaven and the elements. The tracts of heaven again beget, and the elements conceive, and their offspring is the triple kingdom, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral.

[p. 52]

In like manner there are four Sources in the Lesser World, namely, male and female generation, and the body and soul of man.

But the Constructive Spirit is identical with Primal Intelligence, therefore when man has attained to  intelligence he has completed his upward progress (), and reached the point from which he started;

the circle is thus complete. But Intelligence is in direct communication with God; therefore when man has attained to this point he has also attained to God. "From Him is the beginning, and unto Him is the return." The saying of Mohammed, "He who has seen me has seen God," refers to this, and not to any blasphemous assumption of divinity; for we must bear in mind that he is identified by his followers with Primal Intelligence.

It is unnecessary here to describe the first germination of the embryo; the curious will find a particular account of it, according to the Mohammedan theory, in Sale's Translation of the Coran, cap. 22, v. 5, and in the Arab commentators upon cap. 96.

Suffice it to say that according to them the cartilages, arteries, and nerves are formed during the first three months after conception; in the fourth month, whilst the sun is in the ascendant, the first germ of life appears; the limbs and members are next formed and nourished by blood, introduced through the placenta, by means of the umbilical cord; these are followed by the successive developments of the body and the soul, which arrive at  perfection in the eighth month; in the ninth, when

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Jupiter is in the ascendant, the child is born into the world.

The embryo partakes of all four elements, earth,  water, air and fire; now these in the Greater World produce a triple offspring, mineral, vegetable and animal. A similar division is therefore made in the human body. The members and limbs which are first formed partake of the four elements in different proportions, and the combined result corresponds to the mineral kingdom. The powers of attraction, contraction, absorption, digestion, rejection, growth and formation, are next developed in the members and limbs, which then require nourishment. This they receive in the shape of blood, introduced through the placenta; the chyme contained in this becoming matured is developed into the vegetative spirit, corresponding to the second division of the three kingdoms. When the digestive and other internal organs have become fully developed, the heart attracts to itself the essence of this vegetative spirit, and having further matured it, forms the life; the essence of this again is attracted to the brain, where, after being matured, it is developed into the soul, and the remainder dispersed through the nerves into the limbs, where it becomes the source of sense and motion. This corresponds to the animal kingdom of the Greater World.

Each of these developments occupies one month, embryo, mineral, vegetative and animal.

The senses are ten in number, five external and 

[p. 54]

five internal. The external senses are Sight, Hearing, Taste, Smelling, and Feeling.

The internal senses are the Common Sense (), Imagination (), Apprehension (), Memory (), and Reflection (). The Common Sense is involved in the Imagination, and the Apprehension in the Memory; the two former are situate in the fore-part of the brain, the two latter in the after-part, and the Reflection occupies the middle. The Common Sense is so called from comprising every thing that perceives the outward senses. It comprehends visible objects, while the Apprehension apprehends invisible subjects.

It is the Common Sense which appreciates the real nature of all that the external senses perceive, as for instance, distinguishing a friend from an enemy by the marks of which the external senses take cognizance. The Reflection is that which similarly appreciates the conceptions of the Imagination.

The motive powers are also of two kinds, causative and active. The active powers are subservient to and obey the causative, producing motion and the like at their instigation. The causative powers exercise two distinct functions, namely attraction for the acquirement of pleasure or usefulness, and repulsion for the avoidance of annoyance or harm. The former is called Lust, the latter Indignation.

Hitherto only those qualities of man have been

[p. 55]

treated of which he shares in common with the other animals; his spiritual and intellectual developments require another chapter.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III.

  

OF THE INTELLECTUAL AND SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT OF MAN.

EVERY animal possesses a vegetative spirit, a living spirit, and an instinctive spirit; but man has an additional inheritance, namely the Spirit of Humanity. Now this was breathed by God into man directly from Himself, and is therefore of the same character as the Primal Element: "And when I have fashioned him and breathed My spirit into him." (Cor. cap. 15, v. 29). The Sufis do not interpret this of the Life, but of the Spirit of Humanity, and say that it is frequently not attained until a late period of life, thirty or even eighty years. Before man can  receive this Spirit of Humanity he must be furnished with capacity, which is only to be acquired by purifying oneself from all evil and immoral qualities and dispositions, and adorning oneself with the opposite ones. Sheikh Muhiy-uddin ibn ul 'Arabi [*1], in his "Investigations" (), says that the words "and when I have fashioned him," refer to this preparation, and the rest of the sentence, "and breathed My spirit into him," refers to the accession of the Spirit of Humanity.

[p. 56]

Two conditions are therefore imposed upon the Traveller, first, to attain Humanity, second, to acquire capacity.

There are three developments of character that must be suppressed before man can attain to Humanity; the animal, the brutal, and the fiendish. He who only eats and sleeps, and gives way to lust, is mere animal; if besides these he gives way to anger and cruelty, he is brutal; and if in addition to 'all these he is crafty, lying, and deceitful, he is fiendish.

If the Traveller is moderate in his food, rest, and desires, and strives to attain a knowledge of himself and of God, then is the time for acquiring capacity by freeing himself from all that is evil and base, and adorning himself with the opposite qualities; after that by prayer he may obtain the Spirit of Humanity.  Some one has truly said that there is none of the perfection, essence, or immortality of man, save only among such as are "created with a godly disposition." When the Traveller has once been revivified by the Spirit of Humanity he becomes immortal, and inherits everlasting life. This is why it has been said that "man has a beginning but no end."

If when he has attained this Spirit of Humanity, he is earnest, and does not waste his life in trifling, he soon arrives at the Divine Light itself. For "God guideth whom He pleaseth unto His Light." The attainment of this light is the completion of Man's upward progress, but no one can attain to it but those who are pure in spirit and in their lives.

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] Mohammed asserted that he himself had attained it, "To the light have I reached, and in the light I live;" now this light is the Nature of God; wherefore he said " who seeth me seeth God."

The germ that contains the Primal Element of  Man is the lowest of the low, and the Divine Light is the highest of the high; it is between these extremes that the stages of man's upward or downward progress lie. "We have created man in the fairest of proportions, and then have thrown him back to be the lowest of the low, save only such as believe and act with righteousness; and verily these shall have their reward." (Cor. cap. 95, v. 4). This reward is said by the Sufis to be defined by the word ajrat, "reward," itself. This word contains three radical letters   and ;  stands for  "return,"  for  "paradise" and  for , that is "those who have handed down the faith." Their acting righteously is their return to the Nature of God, for when they have finished their upward progress, and reached this they are in Paradise, and in the presence of their God. He therefore is a man, in the true sense of the word, who being sent down upon earth strives upward towards Heaven. These aspirations are indispensable to man; he might by the Almighty Power of God exist without all beside, even had the Heavens and the elements themselves never been; but these things are the aim and want of all.

It has been said that the Primal Element or  constructive spirit as well as the Spirit of Humanity

[p. 58]

proceed direct from God. They are therefore identical, and are both included by the Sufis in the one term Concomitant Spirit. Now this Spirit, although distinct and individual, comprehends and governs the entire Universe. The Simple Natures are its administrators and exponents; of these the Seven Sires beget, and the Four Mothers conceive from the incarnation of this spirit in them, and their offspring is the triple kingdom, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal. And so it is with the Lesser World of Man.

Now this Spirit hath two functions, external and internal; the external is revealed in the material generation just alluded to, the internal abides in the heart of man. Whosoever purifies his heart from worldly impressions and desires reveals this internal function of the Spirit within him, and illumines and revivifies his soul.

Thus the Spirit at once comprehends the Universe and dwells in the heart of man.

Footnotes

^55:1 Fusus el Hikam, Metaphysical Investigations by Muhiy-uddin Mohammed ben 'Ali el Hatimi el Tayi ibn el Arabi.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

OF THE UPWARD PROGRESS OR ASCENT OF MAN.

WHEN Man has become assured of the truth of Revelation he has reached the stage of Belief, and has the name of Mumin, "Believer." When he further acts in obedience to the will of God, and apportions the night and day for earnest prayer, he has reached the stage of worship, and is called an 'Abid, or "Worshipper." When he has expelled the love of this world from his heart, and occupies himself

[p. 59]

with a contemplation of the mighty Whole, he reaches the next stage, and becomes a Zahid, or "Recluse." When in addition to all this he knows God, and subsequently learns the mysteries of nature, he reaches the stage of Acquaintance, and is called 'Arif, "One who knows." The next stage is that in which he attains to the love of God, and is called a Weli or "Saint." When he is moreover gifted with inspiration and the power of working miracles, he becomes a Nebi, "Prophet;" and when entrusted next with the delivery of God's own message, he is called an "Apostle," Rusul. When he is appointed to abrogate a previous dispensation and preach a new one, he is called Ulu 'l 'Azm, "One who has a mission." When this mission is final he has arrived at the stage called Khatm, or "the Seal." This is the Upward Progress of Man. The first stage is the "Believer," the last the "Seal."

After separation from the body, the soul of  Man returns to that Heaven which corresponds to the stage which he has attained; thus the Believer at last dwells in the first or lowest Heaven, and the Seal in the Heaven of Heavens; for it will be noticed that the stages of upward progress correspond to the number of degrees in the Heavenly Spheres, namely, seven inferior and two superior.

The metaphysicians say that these stages and  degrees do not in reality exist, but that the Heavenly Intelligence which corresponds to the degree of intelligence attained by Man attracts and absorbs his soul into itself after separation from the body.

[p. 60]

[paragraph continues] Thus every one who has attained intelligence corresponding to that of the highest sphere, his soul returns thereto; and he who has attained intelligence corresponding to the lowest sphere, his soul in like manner returns to that; those who have not attained intelligence corresponding to any of these will be placed in Hell, which is situate below the lowest sphere.

As each of the Heavenly Spheres is furnished with knowledge and purity in proportion to its position, the rank of Man's soul in the future state will, according to this last account, be in proportion to his degree of knowledge and purity of life while upon the earth.

The Upward Progress infinite.}The Unitarians say that man's Upward Progress has no end, for if he strive for a thousand years, each day will teach him something that he knew not before, inasmuch as the knowledge of God has no limit. So Mohammed says, "He who progresses daily is yet of feeble mind."

The religious account says that the soul of every man returns to an individual place after separation from the body. This the metaphysicians deny; for how, say they, can the soul of a man return to a certain place when it has not originally come from a certain place? The soul of man is the Primal Spirit, and if a thousand persons live, it is the same spirit that animates them all; and in like manner if a thousand die, the same spirit returns to itself, and is not lessened or diminished. If a myriad persons build houses and make windows therein the same

[p. 61]

sun illumines them all, and though every one of them should be destroyed, the sun would not be lessened or diminished. The sun is the lord of the sensible world, and the exponent of the attributes of the Primal Spirit. The Primal Spirit is the lord of the invisible world and the exponent of the Nature of God [*1].

When the heart of man has been revivified and illumined by the Primal Spirit, he has arrived at Intelligence; for Intelligence is a light in the heart, distinguishing between truth and vanity, Until he has been so revivified and illumined, it is impossible for him to attain to intelligence at all. But having attained to intelligence, then, and not till then, is the time for the attainment of knowledge, for becoming Wise. Intelligence is a Primal Element, and knowledge the attribute thereof. When from knowledge he has successively proceeded to the attainment of the Divine Light, and acquaintance with the mysteries of nature, his last step will be Perfection, with which his Upward Progress concludes.

But dive he ever so deeply into the treasury of 

[p. 62]

mysteries and knowledge, unless he examine himself and confess that after all he knows naught, all that he has acquired will slip through his hands, and leave him far poorer than before. His treasure of to-day should as much exceed the treasure of yesterday as an ocean exceeds a drop; but this can never be, unless he, leaving all else for contemplation and self-examination, have freedom and leisure to learn how poor he really is, and how much he needs the saving help of God.

One class of Unitarians explain the Upward Progress of Man thus. They say that every atom of existent beings is filled with light;

Arise and look around, for every atom that has birth
 Shines forth a lustrous beacon to illumine all the earth:

but that man walks abroad in darkness, blinded by the lusts of life, and laments the want of light that would, were he but aware of it, involve him in the glorious sheen of brightest day:

'Twere well to catch the odours that about our senses play,
 For all the world is full of blasts to bear the sweets away.

What they mean is this, that all existent beings are compounded of two things, darkness and light, which are indistinguishably blended together. The light belongs to the Invisible, and the darkness to the Sensible world; but the two are intimately connected, and the former exercises a paramount influence upon the latter. The object of man, according to them, is to separate the light from the darkness, that its nature and attributes may be understood, and in this consists his Upward Progress.

[p. 63]

Although the light and the darkness can never be entirely separated, for the one is as it were the veil of the other, the light can be made to prevail, so that its attributes may become manifest.

Now it is possible to separate thus far the light from the darkness in certain cases; in the bodies of men and animals, for instance, there are certain organs always at work, whose sole object is this separation. Thus, when food is introduced into the stomach, the liver receives the cream and essence of it and transmits it to the heart; the heart, in like manner, extracts the essence of this, which is the life, and transmits it to the brain; lastly, the brain extracts the essence of this, and transforms it into the elixir of life, the real light of all.

The elixir evolved by the brain is the instinctive spirit, and is as it were a lamp in a lantern; but it gives forth after all but a flickering and cloudy light, and man's object should therefore be to strengthen and purify it by Renunciation and Contemplation, until it give forth the true light which is the Spirit of Humanity. When man has attained to this he necessarily becomes free from all that is evil, and is adorned instead with every good and noble quality.

The body of man is like a lantern, the Vegetative  Spirit is the lamp, the Animal Spirit is the wick, the Instinctive Spirit the oil, and the Spirit of Humanity the fire that kindles all. "Verily its oil would almost shine even though no fire kindled it." (Cor. cap. 24, v. 35). In other words, the Instinctive

[p. 64]

[paragraph continues] Spirit should feed and supply the Spirit of Humanity, as the oil feeds and supplies the flame in a lamp. The Traveller must aim at completing this lamp, so that his heart may be illumined, and he may see things as they really are. When the Spirit of Humanity a "light upon light" (Cor. cap. 24, y. 35) has thus kindled the Instinctive Spirit, God "guideth whom He pleaseth to His own light" (idem), that is, to the divine light of His own nature, reaching which the Traveller's Upward Progress is complete; for "from Him they spring, and unto Him return."

Footnotes

^61:1 The following from Tennyson's In Memoriam forms a beautiful protest against the ideas here set forth:

That each who seems a separate whole
   Should move his rounds, and fusing all
   The skirts of self again, should fall
 Remerging in the general soul,

Is faith as vague as all unsweet:
   Eternal form shall still divide
   The eternal soul from all beside;
 And I shall know him when we meet.

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V.

  

CONCLUSION.

THE words quoted in the first chapter, "I am a hidden treasure, and I would fain be known," form the basis of the whole system of Sufiistic speculation. Considering the entire universe merely as a manifestation of God, produced by the agency of intelligence directly proceeding from Him, they rightly surmise that this intelligence is the only means by which He can be known.

Now man being with them the most perfect entity in the universe, is clearly the instrument by which the object of its creation is to be accomplished; but this object is that God should be known, and He can only be known through intelligence; therefore the attainment of this intelligence is the final aim of man.

[p. 65]

But as man sprung from the Intelligence which  originated the Universe, and should, as has been just stated, tend to the same, the Sufis proceed to consider his existence as a circle meeting in the Intelligence which reveals the Godhead. This circle they divide into two arcs, the former called Descent (nuzul), includes every stage, from the first scintillation from the original intelligence to the full development of man's reasoning powers; the latter arc, called Ascent ('uruj), includes every stage, from his first use of reason for its true purpose to his final reabsorption into the Divine intelligence. This is what is meant when they speak of the Origin and Return of Man.

The Ascent, or upward progress, naturally presents itself to the Sufiistic mind in the form of a  journey, and the doctrines which profess to describe it are accordingly called the road (tarikat).

When a man possessing the necessary requirements  of fully developed reasoning powers turns to them for a resolution of his doubts and uncertainties concerning the real nature of the Godhead, he is called a Talib, or Searcher after God.

If he manifest a further inclination to prosecute  his inquiry according to their system, he is called a Murid, or One who inclines.

Placing himself then under the spiritual instruction  of some eminent leader of the sect, he is fairly started upon his journey, and becomes a Salik or Traveller, whose whole business in after-life is suluk, devotion, (or, as the word signifies, the prosecution

[p. 66]

of his journey,) to the end that he may ultimately arrive at the knowledge of God.

Here he is exhorted to serve God as the first step towards a knowledge of Him; this is the first stage of his journey, and is called 'Abudiyat, Service or Worship.

When in answer to his prayers the Divine influence or Attraction has developed his inclination into love of God, he is said to have reached the stage called 'Ishk, Love.

This Divine Love expelling all worldly desires from his heart, leads him to the next stage, called Zuhd, or Seclusion,

Occupying himself henceforward with contemplations and the investigations of those metaphysical theories concerning the nature, attributes, and works of God, which have been described in the Second Part of this treatise, he reaches his next stage, which is that of Ma'rifat, Knowledge.

Now this assiduous contemplation of startling metaphysical theories is exceedingly attractive to an Oriental mind, and not unfrequently produces a state of mental excitement akin to the phenomena observed during the recent religious revivals. Such ecstatic state is considered a sure prognostication of direct illumination of the heart by God, and constitutes the next stage, Wejd or Hal, Ecstasy.

During this stage he is supposed to receive a revelation of the true nature of the Godhead, and to have reached the stage called Hakikat, or The Truth.

[p. 67]

He is then said to proceed to the stage of Jam'  or Wasl, direct Union with God. 

Further than this he cannot go, but pursues his habit of self-denial and contemplation until his death, which is, however, merely looked upon as a total reabsorption into the Deity, forming the consummation of his Journey, the last stage designated Fana, Extinction.

That stage in which he is said to have attained  to the Love of God is the point of view from which the Sufiistic poets love to discuss the doctrines of their sect; with them man is the Lover, God the Beloved One, and the journey above described is referred to allegorically as the distance which separates the lover from the object of his affection. The glossary which I have appended to this work will enable the student of Hafiz and other Sufiistic writers to interpret for himself the Mystical Poems of the East.

 

Thus far have we followed the Traveller upon his trackless path through every mystery, human and divine. But one thing now remains; if we, like him, aspire to reach the goal we must cast away the pride of intellect and boasted knowledge, and kneeling before the throne of God in humble thankfulness for the light He hath already vouchsafed, ask Him for guidance and protection who alone is "the light and life of men."

     
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68] [p. 69]

  

APPENDIX.

  

GLOSSARY

  

OF TECHNICAL AND ALLEGORICAL EXPRESSIONS IN USE AMONG THE SUFI POETS.

(A. Arabic. P. Persian.)

For technical reasons, the Arabic script for each entry in the following list has been omitted--JBH.

P. abru. The eyebrow. The miracles of Moses.

A. ijtima'. Collection. Man's sole desire being concentrated in a longing after God.

A. asfar. Journeys. There are four journeys undertaken by the Sufi Traveller, 1. The journey to God. See Part I. Chapter I. 2. The journey to God whilst journeying in God. 3. The upward progress and actual meeting with the Deity. 4. The journey to God whilst journeying from God for the recovery of sinners.

A. islam. Islamism. Resignation. Submission to the decrees of God.

A. alast. "Art thou not?" The words uttered by the voice of God, "Art thou not My creature?" See nida.

A. ananiyat. Egotism.

[p. 70]

P. angusht. Finger. God's all-comprehending power.

A. iman. Faith. Finding God.

P. a'ina. Mirror. The human heart. Mirrors in the East were of metal, hence the frequent occurrence of such expressions as "polish thy mirror," meaning "purify thy heart."

P. bada. New wine. Divine love.

P. bazu. Arm. God's Will.

A. batil. False. All that is not God.

P. bamdad. Morning. The last stage of the journey.

P. but. Idol. God as the object of contemplation.

P. but parast. Idol-worshipper. A contemplative devotee.

A. baitu 'l haram. The Holy of Holies. In Sufi poetry it represents the Perfect Man.

A. baitu 'l mucaddas. The House of Holiness. Ordinarily used to designate the Temple at Jerusalem, but in Sufiistic language, a heart unpolluted by earthly love.

[p. 71]

P. pakbazi. Purity. Inclination towards holiness without expecting reward or promotion, but rather seeking after God for His own sake.

P. peder. Father. God's purpose of revelation.

P. peshani. Forehead. The path of inquiry into the mysteries of a future state. See hablu 'l matin.

A. tajalli. Appearance. Every mystery that is revealed to the heart.

P. tarsa. Pagan. The revelation of God's majesty. See jemal.

P. tarsa-bachcha. A young Pagan. The Germ of the state called Hal, q.v.

A. tasawwuf. Sufiism. The purification (tasfiyeh) of the heart from earthly mists. See aina.

A. tafrikah. Distraction. Pondering upon God's general disposition and arrangement in the universe.

P. tauhid. Unity. The Nature of God.

P. jan. Soul. Darling. The manifestations of the Beloved (God).

P. janan. Darling of darlings. A constant mistress. God, the concentration of stability.

[p. 72]

A. jahil. Ignorant. Worldly.

A. jazbah. Attraction. The nearer approach of man to his Maker, through His Grace.

A. jar'. A draught. The mysteries of the various stages of the journey, or, according to some, everything that is hidden from the disciple's understanding during his prosecution of the journey ().

A. jalal. Majesty. That which veils God from human sight.

A. jamal. Beauty. Manifestation of the Majesty of the Beloved One (God).

A. jam'. Collection. The unity of God.

A. jam 'u 'l jam'. In Arabic grammar the plural of a plural. The high position of the Perfect Man.

P. chah i zanakh. A dimple in the chin. The secret mystery of beholding God.

P. chashm. The eye. The beauty of Joseph.

A. hajj. Pilgrimage. The prosecution of the journey by devotion alone. See Part I. Chapter IV.

[p. 73]

A. hal. State. Ecstasy. The beatific state induced by continued contemplation of God. This is considered to be a divine gift, and a sure prognostication of speedily arriving at The Truth.

A. hablu 'l matin. The strong rope. Acknowledging the Unity of God.

A. husn. Beauty. The concentration of perfection in One Nature.

A. hikmat. Wisdom. Metaphysics. Comprehension of the mysteries of Nature.

A. Hacc. The Truth. God.

A. hakikat. Truth. Determination of the Nature of God.

A. kakikatu 'l haka-ik. Truth of Truths. The Nature of God as comprising all truth.

P. khal i siyah. A black mole (considered a great beauty in the East). The future state.

P. kharabat. Tavern. The stage in which the Traveller is immersed in the Divine mysteries.

A. khirkah. The patched and ragged garment of a religious recluse. Comeliness and soundness of principle.

[p. 74]

A.P. khatt i sabz. Verdure. Down just appearing upon the cheek. The state of limbo, barzakh (cf. Sale's Coran, chap. XXIII. note u).

A. khala-ik. Tempers. Peoples. God's attribute of Power.

P. kham i zulf. A twisting curl. Joy of the heart at knowing God [*1].

P. kh'ahar. Sister. Revelation.

A. dakhil u kharij. Entrance and exit. Drunkenness and Intoxication, see masti.

P. dast. Hand. God's attribute of Power.

A. dakikah. Tittle. Probation.

A. dunya. The world. Anything that hinders man from seeking after God.

A. dair. Monastery. The world of Humanity.

[p. 75]

A. din. Religion. Belief arising from the stage called tafrikah, q.v.

P. dahan. Mouth. An attribute of God as speaking with man.

P. rukhsar. The cheek. Cosmos.

P. rindi. Profligacy. Thinking no more of human conventionalities.

P. ruza. Fasting. The stage called wasl (q.v.), in which the Traveller abandons the world.

P. ruy. Face. The manifestation of the Deity as comprehending all things. Also The Mirror in which the Godhead is reflected. See Part II. Chap. 5.

A. zahid. A Recluse.

P. zulf. Tresses. The mystery of the Godhead.

A. zunnar. The sacred Cord worn by the Magi. The Brahminical Thread. A mistress' ringlet; hence allegorically by the Sufis, the yearning after the appearance of the Beloved One (God).

P. zanakh. The chin. The point at which one beholds God.

A. zuhd. Abstinence. Forsaking the outer world and giving oneself up entirely to contemplation.

[p. 76]

A. sa 'id. Arm. God's attribute of Might.

A. saki. Cupbearer. The appearance of Divine Love which calls for thankfulness.

P. sukhan. Speech. The warnings of God.

A. safr. A journey. Turning the attention towards God.

A. sawad u'l wajhi fi 'd darain. Blackening the face (i.e. disgrace) in both worlds. Complete self-denial implying the state of him who performs the last of the "four journeys" described under asfar.

P. shahid. Mistress. The appearance of The Truth (God).

P. shabangah. A Night lodging. The last stage on the Journey.

A. sharab. Drink, Wine. The domination of Divine Love over the heart.

A.P. sharab khana. Wine shop. The invisible world.

A. sham'. Candle. The Divine Light kindling the torch of the Traveller. See candil.

P. shor. Disturbance. Noise. Intercourse between God and man.

A. shuhud. Gaze. The unobstructed vision of the Godhead.

[p. 77]

A. saba. The Zephyr. The breathings of the Spirit.

A. ta'at. Obedience. Righteousness. The Knowledge of God.

A. 'arif. Knowing. One gifted by God with a thorough knowledge of His Nature, Works and Attributes.

A. 'ashik. Lover. Man.

A. a'lam i jubrut. The World of Powers. The names and attributes of God. The visible, invisible and future worlds.

A. 'ishrat. Pleasure. Joy in the Lord.

A. ghar. A hollow. Jealousy. Turning the heart towards God.

A. ghammaz. One who throws side glances. The turning of the heart towards God.

A. firaghat. Rest. Devotion to things of this world.

A. firak. Separation. Not recognizing the unity of God.

A. fana. Vanishing. The total annihilation of self in the contemplation of God.

A. fana e tamam. Complete disappearance. Total annihilation and absorption of self in the contemplation of God. Death.

[p. 78]

A. catil. Slayer. The first manifestation of desire on the part of man and of attraction on the part of God.

A. catil. Slain (as by the arrows of a mistress' glance). Acceptable to God.

A. cadh. Goblet. Time.

A. calb. Heart. The intermediate state between the illumination of the reason and the soul by the Divine Light.

A. candil. Torch or Candle. The heart of the Traveller kindled by Divine Love.

A. kafir. Unbeliever. One who has reached the stage called tafrikah, q.v.

A. kibr. Haughtiness. The grandeur of God.

A. kitab i mubin. The perspicuous book. In the Coran it signifies the contents of the eternal tablet on which that revelation was inscribed and which is also called . With the Sufis it stands for the heart of the Perfect Man.

A. ka'ba. The Temple at Mecca, to which the Mohammedans turn their faces in prayer. The state called wasl, q.v.

A. kufr. Unbelief. The darkness of the stations on the road.

P. kinar. Embrace. Discovery of the mysteries of the Godhead.

[p. 79]

P. gush. Ear. Capacity for receiving the words of God by pursuing knowledge. Sometimes it means knowledge itself, exoteric and esoteric.

P. gisu. Ringlet. Details of the mysteries of divinity.

A. lahut. Divinity. Life permeating all things.

A. lubb. Pith. Intelligence sanctified and purified from doubts and suspicions.

P. lab lab. Brimful. Drinking in the Light of God and having the gaze riveted upon Him,

P.A. lab i la'l. A ruby lip. The unheard but understood words of God [*1]. Conscience.

A. madar. Mother. The tablets on which the Coran is said to have been inscribed from all eternity; called by the Arabs  ummu 'l Kitab, "The Mother of The Book."

A. misal. Fiction. The stage in which the Traveller arrives at a Comprehension of the unity of God.

A. makkmuri. Drunkenness. Returning from the stage called wusul (see wasl), by way of cessation.

[p. 80]

A. murakibeh. Observation. Rejecting conventionalities, and penetrating deeply into the truths of Religion.

P. marg. Death. Eternal life. "Mors janua vitae."

A. mazid. Increase. The state of man.

A. masti. Intoxication. Escaping from the domination of Love.

A. mutrib. Musician. The pir or elder who expounds the laws of God to his disciples.

A. ma'shuk. The beloved one. God.

P. Mughan. Magians. Christian monks, confounded with fire-worshippers by the Mohammedans. See tarsa.

P. mugh-bachcha. Young Magian. See tarsa bachcha.

A. mughni. Independent. Confessing the unity of God.

A. mulhid. Heretic. Pedant. Being learned in Theology.

A. muwafik. Complaisant. See mulhid.

P. miyan. Middle. Waist. The state of the Traveller when nothing remains to veil from him the Glories of God.

P. mai khana. Tavern. The dominion of Divine Love.

[p. 81]

P. maikedeh. Wine-house. That stage of the journey in which inclination is developed into love by the effect of prayer (see Part I. Chap. V.).

A. nahut. The channel through which lahut flows, q.v.

A. nabuwat. Prophecy. Knowing and proclaiming the truths of Godhead.

A. nida. Voice. The voice of God calling in the heart and constituting Attraction. See jazba.

A. wajd. Ecstasy. See hal.

A. wasl. Meeting. The unity of God; also the mean between the external and the internal. Seeing God face to face.

A. wakt. Time. Fixing the thoughts upon mortality.

A. wilayat. Saintship. Perseverance in the contemplation of God. See fana; see also Part III. Chapter I.

A. weli. Saint. One who has given himself up entirely to contemplation. See fana.

A. hawa. Desire. A yearning after the future life kindled by God in the heart man.

(Greek). hayula. E yle. Materials. First principles.

Footnotes

^74:1 Tholuck in his SUFISMUS (Berolini, MDCCCXXI), p. 105, explains this as follows: "Cincinnorum circuli, Sic divina dicunt mysteria, nemini praeter Deum ipsum nota." This, however, is the interpretation of zulf (tresses), not khan i zulf. The verse quoted above, in page <page 41>,

"One glimpse I gave them of my glorious face,"

affords a good illustration of this. The words of the original being

"I showed them a hair's point of my tresses (zulf)."

^79:1 Cf. the answer of the Delphic oracle to Croesus, Herod. I. 47. 4:

kai kufou syniemi, kai oy funeuntos akouu.

    
Oriental Mysticism, by E.H. Palmer, [1867], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

INDEX.

'Abdallah ibn 'Abbas, <page 39>

'Abudiyat, <page 66>

Abu Hanifa, <page 10>, n.

Agencies, <page 31>

Agents, <page 31>

Ahl i wahdat, <page 5>

Ajrat, <page 57>

Alexander the Great, Mirror of, <page 12>

'Ali, <page 51>

Allah, Name of, <page 29>

Al Shafi' <page 1>, <page 10>, n.

Apostle, <page 59>

Aquinas, St Thomas, verse quoted, <page 2>

Arabic Language, Pre-existence of, <page 28>

Ar Rahman, <page 29>

Ascent, <page 65>

Attraction, <page 19>

'Awarif al Ma'arif, <page 20>

 

Babis, sect of the, <page 44>

Bayan, <page 30>

Bayazid Bistami, <page 23>

Believer, <page 58>

 

Chaos, <page 36>, n.

Christian Scriptures, Mohammedan  beliefs about, <page 30>, n.

Christian Scriptures, quoted, <page 30>, n.

Counsel, <page 21>

Coran, Pre-existence of, <page 28>

" quoted, <page 4>, <page 5>, <page 6>, <page 8>, <page 9>, <page 12>, <page 54>, <page 15>, <page 23>, <page 24>, <page 26>, <page 27>, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 33>, <page 34>, <page 35>, <page 36>, <page 37>, <page 38>, <page 39>, <page 44>, <page 51>, <page 55>, <page 56>, <page 63>, <page 64>

Cosmogony, Table of Mohammedan, <page 32>, n.

 

David, <page 5>, <page 39>

Descent, <page 65>

De Tassy, M. Garcin, <page 2>

Devils, <page 32>

Devotion, <page 19>

Doctrine, <page 7>

" Marks and Practice of the Followers of, <page 9>

 

Element, the Primal, <page 33>

" Idea of, how originated, <page 35> n.

Emanations, <page 31>

Eternity, <page 24>, <page 40>

 

Faculties, the, <page 54>

Faith, Confession of, <page 17>

Fana, <page 67>

[p. 83]

Fellowship, <page 14>

" Rules to be observed in, <page 15>

Firdausi Shah-Nama quoted, <page 47>

" Satire of, <page 48> n.

Fishes, Parable of the, <page 48>

Fourfold Mothers, the, <page 36>, n.

Fusus el Hikam, <page 55>

 

Gabriel, the Holy Spirit, <page 31>

Genii, <page 32>

Goal, the, <page 4>

 

Hadis quoted, <page 5>, <page 7>, <page 13>, <page 18>, <page 31>, <page 43>, <page 57>

Hafiz, <page 1>, <page 26>

" Interpretation of, <page 67>

Hajji Khalfa, <page 20>, <page 27>

Hakikat, <page 66>

Hal, <page 66>

Hanefite, <page 10>

Humanity, Spirit of, <page 55>

 

Iblis, <page 32>

Inclination, <page 19>

Intelligence, Primal, <page 35>

'Ishk, <page 66>

 

Jam', <page 67>

Jemshid, Cup of, <page 11>

Kaf and Nun, Lord of, <page 28>

Karr, <page 30>

Kazem-Beg, Mirza, <page 44>

Khizar, <page 12>

"Know Thyself," <page 50>

Kursi, <page 32>, n.

 

Law, <page 7>

Life, Elixir of, <page 63>

Love, <page 19>

 

Malaik Muhaymeh, <page 31>

Ma'rifat, <page 66>

Mehdi, Last of the Imams, <page 44>

Muhiy-uddin ibn al Arabi, Sheikh, <page 55>

Murid, <page 20>, n., <page 65>

 

"Pen, The," <page 34>

Perfect Man, definition of the, <page 11>

Perfectly Free Man, the, <page 13>

Power, Night of, <page 36>

Powers, <page 32>

Prophet, <page 59>

Prophetic Office defined, <page 43>

Proximity, <page 23>

Psalms, quoted, <page 34>

 

Recluse, <page 59>

Renunciation, <page 16>

Road, The, <page 5>, <page 65>

 

Sa'ad-ud-din Hamawi, Sheikh, <page 27>, <page 43>

Sa'adi, Quotation from Bustan of, <page 30>, n.

Sadr-ud-din Rumi, Sheikh, <page 27>

Sahibu 'zzeman, <page 44>

Saint, <page 59>

Saintly Office defined, <page 43>

Saladin, <page 10>

Sale's Coran, Preliminary Discourse to, <page 5>

" Translation of, <page 26>, <page 33>, <page 52>

Salik, <page 65>

Seal, the, <page 59>

Senses, The, <page 53>

Sevenfold Sires, The, <page 36>, n.

[p. 84]

Shafiite, <page 10>

Shehab-uddin, Sheikh, <page 20>

Sirat al Mustakim, <page 51>

Solomon, <page 12>

Soul, Destination of the, <page 59>

Sources, The Four Universal, <page 38>

Spheres, The, <page 35>

Spirit, Concomitant, <page 58>

" Constructive, <page 51>

" Instinctive, <page 63>

Stages, The, <page 5>, <page 65>

Suluk, <page 65>

 

Talib, <page 65>

Tarikat, <page 65>

Tennyson's "In Memoriam," <page 61>

Threefold Offspring, <page 35>

Traveller, Definition of the, <page 4>

Truth, <page 7>

" Marks and Practice of the Followers of, <page 10>

 

Unitarian. See Preface.

Universe, Treasuries of the, <page 37>

Upward Progress, The, <page 52>

" " of Man, <page 58>

 

Wasl, <page 67>

Wejd, <page 66>

Worshipper, <page 68>

 

Zuhd, <page 66>

    


===== BOOK: ont.txt =====


     The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

OLD NORTH TRAIL

  

OR

  

Life, Legends and Religion of the Blackfeet Indians

  

BY

  

WALTER McCLINTOCK

  

London: Macmillan and Co.

  

[1910]

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: THE SENTINEL By Walter McClintock

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, August-September 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

TO

MY FATHER

WHOSE INTEREST AND ENCOURAGEMENT HAVE BEEN UNFAILING,

THIS BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

AFTER becoming acquainted with the Blackfeet Indians, I realised that there were locked up in the breasts of the old chiefs and medicine men rich treasures of folk-lore, religious beliefs and ceremonials. I saw that the younger generation was indifferent to their tribal customs, traditions and religion. I also observed that they had no written language, and it seemed inevitable that, with the passing of the old chiefs and medicine men, their ancient religion and folk-lore would fall into oblivion. When I discovered that I could obtain the unbosoming of their secrets and that the door was open to me for study and investigation, I resolved that I would do my best to preserve all the knowledge available.

Having kept accurate records of my experiences and investigations, I have been encouraged to believe that information has been secured worthy of publication. This book has accordingly been published with the hope that its narrative of experiences among the Blackfeet would interest the general reader, and its records of investigation would be of some value to the science of ethnology. The narrative form has been chosen in the belief that this method would furnish a more faithful portraiture of the environment, family life and personal character of this tribe of Indians, and would enable the reader to form a better conception of their religion,

[p. viii]

tribal customs and social organisation, than if a more formal treatise on these subjects had been attempted.

I gratefully acknowledge my indebtedness to Professor Doctor Karl von den Steinen, President of the Berlin Anthropological Society; Mr. George A. Macmillan of London; Doctor J. G. Frazer, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, England; and Professor William Ridgeway, President of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, for their interest and encouragement in my work:

To Mr. Francis E. Leupp, former United States Commissioner of Indian Affairs Mr. Gifford Pinchot, former Chief of the Forest Service, and the resident government agents of the Blackfeet Indians, for their cordial support, during my various visits at the reservations:

To Dr. J. A. Brashear of Pittsburg for his astronomical notes:

To Dr. Clark Wissler of the American Museum of Natural History for sending me his anthropological papers:

To Mr. O. E. Jennings, assistant curator of Botany in Carnegie Institute, Pittsburg, for his identification of my collection of herbs and plants:

To Mr. and Mrs. Thomas B. Magee of Browning, Montana, for their assistance and friendship during many years:

And to my brother Norman McClintock for his valuable assistance in photographic matters and identification of birds.

WALTER McCLINTOCK

PITTSBURG, PA., U.S.A.,
     June, 1910.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

CONTENTS

          
   CHAPTER I.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      MY INTRODUCTION TO THE BLACKFEET

       <page 6>

     
      Visit North Western Montana as member of a forestry expedition under   Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the Forest Service of the United States.--Meet   with Siksikakoan, an Indian scout.--He invites me to his home among the   Blackfeet.--Our journey eastward through the forests of the western   slope of the Rocky Mountains.--Cross the Continental Divide by the   Cutbank Pass.--Flora and Fauna of the country.--Magnificent   mountain scenery.--Many glaciers and snow-capped peaks.--Enter the   Blackfeet country by an old Indian war-trail.--First glimpse of the   tribal camp of the Blackfeet on the plains.--Siksikakoan introduces me   to the Blackfeet leaders.--Meet Chief Mad Wolf.--Novel experiences   in the big camp.--Accompany Siksikakoan to his home on Cutbank   River.--My first summer among the Blackfeet.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      MY ADOPTION BY MAD WOLF

       <page 26>

     
      Meet Mad Wolf on the plains.--He proposes to adopt me as his   son.--Mad Wolf's camp.--The ceremonial of adoption.--Mad Wolf's   prayer.--Directs me to take part in the ceremonial.--Appoints a   second ceremonial for giving my Indian name.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      HUNTING IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS

       <page 36>

     
      Our ride across the plains.--Individuality of pack   horses.--Difficulties of mountain travel.--A mountain   camp.--Fresh grizzly-bear tracks.--Siksikakoan's bear story at the   camp fire.--Climbing for Rocky Mountain sheep.--Thrilling adventure   with a huge grizzly.--Siksikakoan relates the legend of the Medicine grizzly   of Cutbank Canyon.--Story of Menepoka and the coyotes.

        

     
      [p. x]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      A ROCKY MOUNTAIN BLIZZARD

       <page 58>

     
      Preparations for a storm.--Tying down our lodge.--A fierce wind   and a wild night.--Siksikakoan's stories beside the lodge   fire.--Legends of the Home of the Wind Maker and of the Origin and   Destruction of the Grizzly Bear Clan.--Winter scenes in Cutbank   Canyon.--Stories told in the snow by the tracks of wild animals.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      MAD WOLF GIVES THE BEAVER MEDICINE CEREMONIAL

       <page 76>

     
      Mad Wolf's summer camp on the plains.--Preparations for the   ceremonial.--Maka's joke.--Mad Wolf begins the ceremonial with   seven chants.--The buffalo song.--Distribution of the rattles to   the priests.--Mad Wolf bids me join in the ceremonial.--Prayers   made by visiting Indians.--Animal songs.--Mad Wolf dances with the   Sacred Pipe.--Pipe Dancing songs.--The Root Digger is brought   forth.--Opening the Sacred Beaver Bundle.--Dance of four women   representing beavers.--Two weasel skins are taken from the   Bundle.--The head chief gives me the Indian name, A-pe-e-ech-eken,   (White Weasel Moccasin).--A medicine man decorates me with the sacred   paint.--Mad Wolf continues the ceremonial.--I take part in the   buffalo dance.--Ceremonial closes with a feast.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      LEGEND OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE

       <page 103>

     
      Evening in Mad Wolf's lodge.--His fatherly talk.--Tells the   origin of the Beaver Medicine.--In this legend, Nopatsis is jealous of   Akaiyan his younger brother and leaves him to die on a lonely   island.--The Chief of the Beavers rescues him and keeps him all winter   in the lodge of the Beavers.--Teaches him the ceremonial of the Beaver   Medicine and the make-up of the Beaver Bundle, and bestows upon him   supernatural power.--His youngest child, Little Beaver, returns with   Akaiyan to help in teaching the people.--He creates the Beaver Medicine,   to which many birds and animals contribute their power.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER VII.

        

     
      MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN GOAT HUNT

       <page 113>

     
      The St. Mary's Lakes.--Magnificent mountain scenery.--My   mountain camp.--Home of the mountain sheep and goat.--Stalking a   herd of five goats.--An exciting climb.--One goat   killed.--Following a wounded goat.--Laborious task of skinning a   goat on a narrow ledge.--My dangerous climb.--A mountain   storm.--The back trail.--Ideal camp on the prairie.--Return to   Mad Wolf's winter home on Cutbank River.

        

     
      [p. xi]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER VIII.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      WINTER ON THE PLAINS

       <page 125>

     
      A trip to the mountains for winter wood.--Nature's signs of an early   winter.--Narrow escape from death in the forest.--My struggle with   a blizzard.--Snow bound.--Legend of the Snow Tipi.--Na-toia-mon's   vision.--Power over a blizzard granted him by the Cold   Maker.--Supernatural power of the Snow Tipi.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER IX.

        

     
      GHOST STORIES

       <page 139>

     
      Superstitious fears of my companions during the blizzard.--Running   Rabbit ghost story.--Old Person ghost story.--Strange story of   Kattana's death.--Methods used by different medicine men during his last   illness.--His visions and death-dream.--Startling apparitions after   Kattana's death.--Story of Crow Eagle and the ghost.--Blackfeet   beliefs as to the future-life.--Disposition of the dead.--Burial   customs.--Mourning customs.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER X.

        

     
      REMINISCENCES OF FATHER DE SMET

       <page 154>

     
      Clear skies.--Big game close to the ranch.--Tragedy of Red   Rover, an Indian dog.--Bitter cold.--Starving cattle.--A   Chinook.--Mad Wolf talks about former days.--Tells how the   Blackfeet first met Father De Smet.--Taught the people to rest every   seventh day.--Fate of Motokis who scoffed at his ceremonial.--Its   salutary effect upon Blackfeet.--Two Black Robes take the place of   Father De Smet.--One of these, Scar Cheek, goes to the Gros   Ventres.--Is badly treated and returns to the Blackfeet.--Gros   Ventres are routed by the Blackfeet.--Legend of the Yellow Buffalo   Tipi.--Buffalo Bull bestows supernatural power upon Mastopeta.--His   death and farewell talk.--His body disappears from the Death   Lodge.--Final message from his disembodied spirit.--Father De   Smet's tactful use of occurrences for converting the Blackfeet.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XI.

        

     
      SUN WORSHIP

       <page 167>

     
      Religious beliefs.--Origin and meaning of "medicine" and   "medicine-man."--The reasonableness of Sun Worship in the   light of nature.--Religious significance of the Sun-dance.--Mad   Wolf's letter inviting his white son to the Sun-dance.--Reason for the   vow to give the Sun-dance by Mad Wolf's wife.--My return to attend Sun-dance.--First-night   impressions in Mad Wolf's camp.

        

     
      [p. xii]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XII.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      BEGINNING OF THE SUN-DANCE

       <page 178>

     
      Preparations of Mad Wolf and Gives-to-the-Sun.--Rules and customs   observed within the sacred lodge.--Ceremonial of consecrating the   tongues.--Methods of medicine men for impressing their supernatural   power upon the tribe.--Sudden death of Good Hunter, sacred woman at a   former Sun-dance.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XIII.

        

     
      MARRIAGE CUSTOMS

       <page 184>

     
      Immorality rare among Blackfeet women.--Sanctity of marriage   religiously taught.--Severe penalty for marital infidelity.--Purity   of family life contributed to a high moral and physical   development.--Curious marriage customs.--Wedding gifts and   preparations.--Considerations influencing the choice of a   husband.--Rules observed by the father-in-law and   mother-in-law.--Strange mother-in-law customs.--Relations of a   husband to his father-in-law.--Feast at the birth of a   child.--Position of the first wife.--Polygamy a necessity of the   social organisation.--Expedient to marry several sisters.--The use   of love-charms to win the affections of others and of anti-love-charms to   resist their effect.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XIV.

        

     
      FORMING THE SUN-DANCE CAMP

       <page 192>

     
      Mad Wolf announces time for moving to the Sun-dance camp.--Care of   the sacred woman and the loading of her travois.--My journey with Mad   Wolf and his clan.--An interesting and impressive procession.--Mad   Wolf selects a site for the Sun-dance camp.--Formation of the camp   according to clans.--Origin of clan names.--Pitching the Sacred   Tipi.--Guests in my tipi.--Arrival of Running Crane with prominent   chiefs from the South.--Visitors from many Indian tribes.--Mad Dog   society as police.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XV.

        

     
      PAINTED TIPIS

       <page 207>

     
      The tipi as a dwelling.--Impressive spectacle of the "White   City" of the Blackfeet.--Protective designs of tipis.--Their   sacred character and origin.--Strict secrecy of the owners.--I   secure an Otter Tipi that was believed to have lost its protective   power.--The ceremonial of transfer and its rules.--Special   ceremonials and feasts.--Transfer of the Cross Stripe Tipi to Wolf   Tail.--Methods of painting Tipis.--Kinds of paint   used.--Manner of securing paints.--Medicine Weasel's superstitious   fear of copying an Otter design.--Five different Otter Tipis in one   camp.--While guest in an Otter Tipi, I learn the symbols of its   decorations.--The War Tipi.--Description of its picture   writings.--I secure a war and hunting tipi.--Relation of Painted   Tipis to Sun Worship.

        

     
      [p. xiii]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XVI.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      THE SUN-DANCE CAMP

       <page 225>

     
      Camp scenes of the first day.--An Indian mother's happy   disposition.--Manner of inviting guests to a feast.--Old Morning   Eagle exhibits his war horse.--His medicine songs at   sunrise.--Natosin, a visiting chief from the North Blackfeet.--A Blackfoot   cradle.--Varied industries of the women.--Their antipathy to the   camera.--Their manufacture of tipis.--Training of girls by their   mothers.--Curing of meat and making of pemmican by women.--Diet of   the Blackfeet.--A dog feast by visiting Assiniboines.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XVII.

        

     
      EVENING SCENES IN THE CAMP

       <page 240>

     
      A wonderful prairie sunset.--Distant view of the big camp at   night.--Young men and women singing Riding songs.--A love song and   rendezvous of the lovers at the river.--Ceremonial chants and Dance   songs.--Wolf song and an ancient war custom.--The Kissing   dance.--Visit to the lodge of a sick friend.--Scenes by the lodge   fire.--A pet coyote.--Gossip of the women.--I assist a   medicine man and his wife in doctoring their patient and have permission to   photograph the performance.--Indian methods of doctoring.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XVIII.

        

     
      AN INITIATION INTO THE MEDICINE PIPE SOCIETY

       <page 251>

     
      Mysterious methods used in securing a new member.--Medicine Pipe   given to the Blackfeet ages ago by the Thunder Chief.--Disturbing sounds   in the big camp at night.--Excitement at daybreak caused by herald   announcing an election to the Medicine Pipe Society.--Initiation of the   new member.--Initiation ceremonial given in Tearing Lodge's tipi because   of a superstition.--Large fee for membership.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XIX.

        

     
      CEREMONIAL TRANSFERRING THE MEDICINE PIPE

       <page 262>

     
      Bird and animal dances.--The Grizzly Bear dance.--Many varieties   of songs.--The Woman's Pipe.--Four chants towards the cardinal   points.--Rules governing ownership of the Pipe. Care of the Pipe a heavy   burden.--The Indian firmly held in mental slavery by his medicine   superstitions.

        

     
      [p. xiv]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XX.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      DANCE OF THE KISAPA SOCIETY

       <page 271>

     
      Striking costume of Elk Horn the herald.--Fine dress of the Kisapa   (Hair Partners).--Figures of the dance.--Black Weasel, an efficient   dance leader.--Dance of little Nokoa.--Speech of Running Crane to   the dancers.--Mountain Chief urges generous gifts to the   Sioux.--Return of a victorious war expedition.--Warriors   re-enacting former battles.--An exciting horse race.--Parade of the   Sioux warriors.--They dance at Ahkiona's lodge.--The great camp at   night.--Riding songs.--Travelling song of the   Sioux.--Celebration song.--Sepe-nama and his wife mounted on the   same horse sing a Night song of remarkable beauty.--Originality of   Blackfeet music.--Importance of its preservation.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXI.

        

     
      CEREMONIAL OF THE SUN-DANCE

       <page 284>

     
      Mad Dogs build the Sweat-lodge.--Ceremonial of the   Sweat-lodge.--Tribal parade of men and women on   horseback.--Elaborate and interesting costumes.--Impressive evening   ceremonial in Mad Wolf's tipi.--Prayer of the head chief.--Indian   humour.--Practical jokes.--Dance of the Brave Dogs.--Bringing   in the poles and branches for constructing the Sun-lodge.--Ceremonial of   felling a tree for the Centre Pole, and transporting it to the Sun-lodge.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXII.

        

     
      RAISING THE CENTRE POLE

       <page 302>

     
      Ceremonial of painting Mad Wolf and clothing the sacred woman.--The   priests and sacred women appear before the tribe.--The Feast of   Tongues.--Making vows on behalf of the sick.--Awasaki's prayer for   her grandchildren.--Ceremonial of   "Cutting-the-hide."--Warriors assemble according to   clans.--They march holding long poles aloft.--The tribe sing the   Hymn to the Pole in unison.--An impressive scene.--The priests and   sacred women bless the Centre Pole.--The warriors raise the Pole and   complete the Sun-lodge.--Points of resemblance in the Feast of Tongues   to feast of the Jewish and Christian Churches.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXIII.

        

     
      INSIDE THE SUN-LODGE

       <page 312>

     
      Three medicine men have charge of ceremonies.--Bull Child's famous   medicine robe.--Sacred booth of the medicine men.--Great crowd of   people at Sun-lodge.--People are painted by

        

     
      [p. xv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      medicine men.--Society dances and "counting of   coups."--Big Beaver tells of his vow.--Kit-sta-ka's son; to   her dead lover and suicide from a high cliff.--Self torture by warriors   at the Sun-dance in former days.--Story of the fulfilment of a vow by   Two Bears.--An approaching storm.--Interesting contest between two   medicine men as weather-makers.--Mad Wolf's farewell speech.--The   tribe breaks camp.--Death of Mad Wolf.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXIV.

        

     
      ALONG THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

       <page 325>

     
      Our camp on Two Medicine River.--Sudden plans to start for   Canada.--Members composing our expedition and its object.--First   camp at foot of Hudson's Bay Divide.--Evening visit to tipi of the widow   of Screaming Owl, a former head chief.--She talks about former days and   of her dead son.--His ghost makes a night visit to our   camp.--Crossing the Hudson's Bay Divide.--Descent of its northern   slope into the beautiful valley of the North Fork.--Arrival at Spotted   Eagle's camp on St. Mary's River.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXV.

        

     
      SPOTTED EAGLE'S MYTHICAL STORIES OF OLD MAN

       <page 335>

     
      The camp of Spotted Eagle, a noted medicine man.--His jovial   disposition and reputation for wit and humour.--He relates mythical adventures   of Old Man.--Old Man plays with the ground squirrels.--Punishes the   lynx and the birch tree.--Takes part in an elk dance.--Joins in the   mouse dance and gets into trouble.--Travels with a fox and punishes a   rock.--His adventures with coyotes.--He flies with the cranes and   falls to the earth.--He is tricked by a small bird.--He dives for   berries reflected in the water.--Starts the custom of scalping dead   enemies.--Induces men and women to mate.--Steals the magical fire   leggings.--Spotted Eagle's morning bath.--His remarkable weather   prediction followed by a violent electrical storm.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVI.

        

     
      ONESTA AND THE BEAR SPEAR

       <page 352>

     
      Gift of supernatural power conveyed through certain   animals.--Onesta's watchful care of the Bear Spear.--Gives the   ceremonial for an auspicious entrance into a new country.--Relates   legend of the origin of the Bear Spear.--The Mink   Ceremonial.--Curiosity of white emigrants visiting our   camp.--Extreme heat.--Changed outlook after crossing the   International Line.--Indian theories for "Fairy Rings" on the   plains.--My botanical collection of herbs and plants used by the   Blackfeet.--Perfumes used by women.--Our arrival in the Blood   country.

        

     
      [p. xvi]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVII.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      CAMP OF THE BLOODS

       <page 368>

     
      Reserve and haughtiness of the Bloods.--Pathetic mourning of a mother   for her son.--Tragedy of Opiowan, "The Mad   Indian."--Journey along the Okoan River.--Onesta and Nitana   pray for a prosperous journey and my success.--Onesta teaches me two   queer Blackfeet songs.--Beautiful valley of the North Piegans.--The   trail along the Crow Lodge River.--Interesting Indian names for local   topography.--Lookout Butte and the Indian watchers.--Camp of   Brings-down-the-Sun.--His dignified and hospitable welcome.--Our   attractive camp under the cottonwoods.--Indian custom of exchanging   gifts.--Ideal camp of a happy and contented Indian clan.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVIII.

        

     
      CAMP OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN

       <page 383>

     
      We dine with Brings-down-the-Sun.--Onesta introduces me to the old   chief.--He declines to impart his knowledge.--Recites the wrongs   which caused his mistrust of the white race.--Allows me to remain in his   camp.--I meet his wife and youngest daughter.--He offers us free   use of their wild berry supply.--His statesmanlike reasons for   preserving their natural resources of trees and berry bushes.--First   thunder of the summer is heard marking time for opening Medicine   Pipes.--Meet my friend Bull Plume conducting a Pipe   ceremonial.--Hospitality of Brings-down-the-Sun.--Indian children's   fear of white men.--Interesting scenes along a stream.--A contented   family of beavers.--A miniature camp with complete doll   outfit.--Games of boys and girls.--"Wheel and arrow," a   gambling game of men.--An extended sunset view from Lookout Butte.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXIX.

        

     
      PROPER NAMES

       <page 395>

     
      Various methods used in obtaining proper names.--Interesting   illustrations of naming children.--Manner of changing men's   names.--Women's names.--Names for strangers.--Names for   animals.--Extended use of sign language among plains-tribes.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXX.

        

     
      ONESTA GIVES THE CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL

       <page 406>

     
      North Piegans gathering around our camp fire.--Dances by the children   E-mo-nissi and Yellow Mink.--Embarrassing relations between   mother-in-law and son-in-law.--Jealous anger of Bull Plume towards his   rival Brings-down-the-Sun.--Running Wolf

        

     
      [p. xvii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      and myself entertain a gathering with Blackfeet songs.--At Onesta's   request I sleep in the sacred Thunder Tipi.--Story of my vision has an   advantageous result.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXI.

        

     
      THE RIVAL LEADERS

       <page 414>

     
      Bull Plume urges me to visit him in his camp.--Brings-down-the-Sun is   angered by the intrusion.--Onesta explains the cause of the   rivalry.--Brings-down-the-Sun makes a friendly visit.--He agrees to   impart his knowledge.--Stories of his father Running Wolf.--Origin   of the name.--"Winter counts" kept by him as head chief of the   tribe.--His initiation into the Medicine Pipe society.--Discovers   cavern of the Thunderbird on Chief Mountain, who gives him a Sacred Pipe.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXII.

        

     
      EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN

       <page 427>

     
      Death of his father.--The Sacred Pipe and leadership of the tribe   were handed down to him.--He chose instead to become a medicine   man.--His wise and benevolent manner of dealing with the   people.--Eagle-catching his means of livelihood.--His method of   trapping eagles.--The Spirit of the Mountain gives him a Medicine   Robe.--His reasons for not using the Sweat-lodge.--He tells the   names of his children and of their remarkable deliverance from a dangerous   flood.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXIII.

        

     
      THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

       <page 434>

     
      Brings-down-the-Sun explains meaning of the name Running Wolf.--He   tells about the Old North Trail formerly used by Indian tribes.--The   Lone Pine Tree land-mark.--A former Blackfoot expedition into Mexico   along the Old North Trail.--It returns with the Dancing   Pipe.--Blackfeet names for rivers, mountains and other land-marks along   the trail.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXIV.

        

     
      BLACKFEET SOCIETIES

       <page 441>

     
      A practical joke at my expense.--Irregularity in time of   meals.--How women bake camass roots.--Brings-down-the-Sun receives   present of medicinal plants.--He asks for my family history.--In   return he gives the origins of the Blackfeet Societies.--The Sinopaix   (Kit-foxes) and their society dance.--He describes Tsin-ksi-six   (Mosquitoes).--Kuko (Doves).--Muto-ka-iks   (Buffaloes).--Knut-some-taix (Mad Dogs).

        

     
      [p. xviii]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXV.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      THE MUTSAIX (SOCIETY OF BRAVE DOGS)

       <page 455>

     
      Brings-down-the-Sun tells of its origin.--Weapons and characteristic   dress of members.--Their society dance and customs.--A courageous   mother saves the life of a Brave Dog.--Usefulness of Blackfeet   Societies.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXVI.

        

     
      LEGENDS OF THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE GRIZZLY AND THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE WOLF

       <page 466>

     
      The North Piegans gather their winter supply of   berries.--Brings-down-the-Sun tells the legend of Nis-ta-e and the   Medicine Grizzly.--A sole survivor and wounded after a fight with the   Snakes, he faces death in the mountains.--A supernatural grizzly feeds   him and carries him back home.--Legend of Itsa-pich-kaupe and the   Medicine Wolf.--The community of spirit between animals and   men.--Some animals can read the future.--Coyote barks an omen of   death.--Owls are dreaded because they are the unhappy spirits of   evildoers.

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXVII.

        

     
      BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN TALKS ABOUT BIRDS AND THE STARS

       <page 479>

     
      Variety of song birds in the Blackfoot country.--Brings-down-the-Sun   tells of the habits of the birds and explains their songs.--He gives the   Blackfeet names for the moons.--How to read the signs in the   skies.--He tells the ancient star-legends of the Seven Brothers (Great   Bear), and the Lost Children (Pleiades).

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXVIII.

        

     
      LEGEND OF POIA, THE CHRIST STORY OF THE BLACKFEET

       <page 491>

     
      Brings-down-the-Sun tells the beautiful star legend of Poia, who was   born in the sky as Star Boy, came down to earth, lived in poverty among the   Blackfeet, and was called Poia (Scarface) in derision.--Through his   bravery he reached the home of the Sun where his scar was removed.--The   Sun God sends him back to earth to instruct the Blackfeet in Sun   worship.--After establishing the ceremonial of the Sun-dance, Poia   returned to the hone of the Sun and became a Morning   Star.--Brings-down-the-Sun explains the conjunction of two Morning   Stars.--Tells about the constellations.--Sacred articles brought   from the home of the Sun.--Explains the portent of a brilliant   meteor.--Interruptions to my slumber.--At early dawn on Lookout   Butte I see Venus and Jupiter in conjunction.--Sunrise on the   plains.--An early start.--Farewell of Brings-down-the-Sun.

        

     
      [p. xix]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER XXXIX.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      THE PRESENT CONDITION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS OF THE BLACKFEET

       <page 506>

     
      Appalling inroads of death upon the Blackfeet chiefs.--Decline in the   tribal spirit and religion.--Pathetic appeal of an old chief to the   young men to "keep up their old religion."--A Government   gent's prohibition of the Sun-dance causes despondency and   indignation.--I attend a council of the Chiefs.--Stock-schi's   speech in behalf of the Sun-dance.--Challenges me to name anything   harmful in its observance.--My reply.--Changed conditions bring to   an end the development of the noble line of patriotic Blackfeet   Chiefs.--The passing of the buffalo gave the death-blow to their tribal   organisation, causing poverty, suffering, Government relief, and a rapid   moral decline.--Encouraging results from radical changes in the National   Indian policy, inaugurated by President Roosevelt and Francis E. Leupp,   former Commissioner of Indian Affairs.--Christian missions among the   Blackfeet.--The Christian medical missionary greatly needed.

        

     
   
      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
HERD OF BUFFALO ON THE PLAINS

[p. 1]

  

THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

  

INTRODUCTION

THE once powerful confederation of the Blackfeet or Siksikaua Indians comprising the North Blackfeet, Bloods and Piegans, is of Algonquin origin. Although they speak the same language, have similar customs, and are closely intermarried, these three divisions are independent of each other, each having its own Sun-dance, council and head chief. When the dominant white race, both in Canada and the United States, restricted the Blackfeet from their nomadic life, which had covered the vast region stretching, from the North Saskatchewan River in Alberta, to the Yellowstone River in Montana, and from longitude 105 degrees west from Greenwich to the Rocky Mountains, their fixed settlements were made in the localities where their permanent camps were formerly located. Thus the present reservations of the Bloods (Kainau), and North Blackfeet, in the Province of Alberta, Canada, are along the same rivers, where their ancestors camped. The Piegans became subdivided into North and South Piegans, the former in Alberta, and the latter in Northwestern Montana.

The most reliable authorities that I could consult among the Blackfeet, as to the origin of their tribal

[p. 2]

name, stated that, ages ago, their people lived far to the north of their present country, where the dark fertile soil so constantly discoloured their moccasins that they were called Siksikaua, or Black Moccasins.

They were the most aggressive and warlike of all the Plains tribes. They were constantly at war with the Crows, Sioux, Cheyennes, Assinniboines, Snakes, Kutenai and Flatheads. Their war-parties frequently met in conflict along the Old North Trail. The Blackfeet say that the Crows once roamed along the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains, but were driven by them to the south-east, where the Crow reservation is now situated. The Lewis and Clark Journals mention the Blackfeet as the only tribe against which their expedition was compelled to use firearms.

In 1832 Catlin wrote about the Plains Indians: "The several tribes of Indians, inhabiting the Upper Missouri, are undoubtedly the finest looking, best equipped and most beautifully costumed. . . . They live in a country well stocked with buffaloes and wild horses, which furnish them an excellent and easy living; their atmosphere is pure, which produces good health and long life, and they are the most independent and happiest race of Indians I have met with: they are all entirely in a state of primitive rudeness and wildness, and consequently are picturesque and handsome, almost beyond description. Nothing in the world, of its kind, can possibly surpass in beauty and grace some of their games, amusements and parades. In my travels I have more than realised my former predictions that those Indians, who could be found almost entirely in a state of nature, with the least knowledge of civilised society, would be found the most cleanly in their persons, elegant in their dress and manners, and enjoying

[p. 3]

life to the greatest perfection. Of such tribes perhaps the Crows and Blackfeet stand first; and no one would be able to appreciate the richness and elegance, (and even taste too), with which some of these people dress, without seeing them in their own country."

The Blackfeet traversed wide tracts of country in quest of plunder and adventure. They were the most daring and enterprising of the Plains tribes, their expeditions following the Old North Trail into the far distant North Land, and southward as far as Mexico. That they used horses, on these far-seeking expeditions, we have the testimony of Mackenzie, who says of the Blackfeet in 1800, "They are the people who deal in horses and take them upon war parties towards Mexico, from which they enter into the country to the south-east, which consists of plains." Sometimes their expeditions did not return for several years, and then would appear unexpectedly in full view of the tribal camp, bearing their spoils and singing their songs of victory, amid general rejoicing. The bravery of their chiefs and their wonderful adventures were then heralded throughout the tribe, and the young men were thus stimulated to emulate their deeds of valour.

In the former domain of the Blackfeet, lying between the Rocky Mountains and the Yellowstone and Upper Missouri Rivers, the mountain slopes abounded in beaver, wapiti, moose, mountain sheep and grizzly bears, while immense herds of antelope and buffalo roamed over the plains, furnishing them with an abundance of meat for food, and skins for clothing and shelter. But the irresistible advance of the white race was like the invasion of a hostile army in its effects upon this Indian paradise. It brought small-pox, measles and

[p. 4]

other contagious diseases and the seductive poison, alcohol, each in turn contributing to the undermining of the vigour of the Indian race. The last of several plagues of small-pox was introduced by a Missouri River steamboat in 1869, spreading rapidly among the Plains tribes. It decimated the Blackfeet and is still referred to by them as "the great sickness." The climax of their misfortunes finally came with the sudden annihilation in 1883 of the last of the great herds of buffalo, which had afforded them occupation and their chief means of subsistence. At the beginning of the following winter, the Blackfeet found themselves deprived of their usual winter stores of dried buffalo meat, with the result that, during that winter and the spring of 1884, a large number of them perished from starvation.

Greatly reduced in numbers and crippled in resources, the Blackfeet slowly retreated before the advancing tide of white settlers. Yielding to the pressure from the whites and their own dire necessities, they sold by treaty vast tracts of land to the United States, so that they now occupy only a narrow strip of country bordering upon the eastern slopes of the northern Rockies. The climate, being subject to severe storms in summer and blizzards in winter, has so far seemed unfavourable for agriculture. Their chief occupation of raising cattle and horses is handicapped by the hazards of extreme heat and cold.

They have held themselves, as much as possible, aloof from civilisation, cherishing the remembrance of their former days of comfort, freedom and power. Oft repeated wrongs by the whites have provoked individual retaliation and bloodshed, but not organised rebellion against the Government, and developed in

[p. 5]

the Indian heart a deep-seated mistrust and hatred of the white race. Early explorers estimated that the Blackfeet once numbered from 30,000 to 40,000. They have gradually dwindled, until at the present time there are about 3,500 full bloods in Canada and the United States. This constant decline of the full-blooded Blackfeet still continues, and we have the pathetic spectacle of a dying race.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

CHAPTER I

  

MY INTRODUCTION TO THE BLACKFEET

Visit North-Western Montana as member of a Forestry Expedition under Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the Forest Service of the United States.--Meet with Siksikakoan, an Indian Scout.--He invites me to go with him to his home among the Blackfeet.--Our journey eastward through the forests up the western slope of the Rocky Mountains.--We cross the Continental Divide by the Cutbank Pass.--Flora, birds and Fauna of the mountains.--Magnificent scenery.--Many glaciers and snowcapped peaks.--Enter the Blackfeet Country by an old Indian war-trail.--First glimpse of the tribal camp of the Blackfeet on the plains.--Siksikakoan introduces me to the leaders of the Blackfeet.--Meeting with Chief Mad Wolf.--Novel experiences in the big camp.--Accompany Siksikakoan to his home on Cutbank River.--My first summer among the Blackfeet.

I FIRST visited the country of the Blackfeet as a member of a Government expedition under Gifford Pinchot, Chief of the Forest Service of the United States, which had been sent into the north-west by the National Forest Commission, to report upon the advisability of forming certain national forest reserves.

Siksikakoan (Blackfoot-Man), also known as William Jackson, was a noted Indian. scout, who had served in the Indian campaigns under Generals Miles and Custer. He related to me the thrilling story of his escape through the Sioux lines, at the time of the disastrous battle of the Little Big Horn, June 25th, 1876, when General Custer and his battalion of the 7th U. S. cavalry were annihilated by the Sioux. [*1] Siksikakoan was attached

[p. 7]

as a scout to Major Reno's battalion, co-operating with General Custer's. During the first confusion of Major Reno's attack and repulse in the first day's fighting, First Lieutenant De Rudio, Interpreter Girard, Private O'Neal and Siksikakoan were cut off. [*1] Under cover of darkness, Siksikakoan ventured upon the battle-field and stripped from the dead Sioux sufficient leggings, moccasins and blankets to disguise themselves. Then, in the dead of night, on the 26th, he led his companions safely through their sleeping enemies, to the bluffs north of the river, to which Major Reno had retreated for safety. During the movement Siksikakoan answered the challenges of the Sioux by giving satisfactory replies in the Sioux language.

Siksikakoan continued his scouting service until the close of the Indian wars on the northern plains, when he returned to his tribe on the Blackfeet Reservation. He erected a cabin on Cutbank River, at the foot of the Rocky Mountains. He gradually built up a well-equipped ranch, and owned large herds of cattle and horses. He lived there till the winter of 1899, when he died, as the final result of injuries received during his life of adventure and hardship as a scout.

When the forestry work was completed and my Government associates had departed, Siksikakoan and I were camped together in the forest country of the Flathead Indians, on the western slope of the Rocky Mountains. One evening, by our camp-fire, I agreed to his proposal that we should return to the Blackfeet Reservation on the eastern side of the range; "for

[p. 8]

there," said he, "I have many horses and cattle. The mountains are not far distant, where the hunting is good, and the lakes and streams are full of fish. We

Click to enlarge
CAMP ON WESTERN SLOPE.

shall be in the midst of my people, and I will introduce you to the leading chiefs of the Blackfeet."

It was at the beginning of summer, when we started on our journey across the Rocky Mountains, toward the country of the Blackfeet. Our outfit was carried on

[p. 9]

the backs of pack horses. The trail was difficult and overgrown and frequently blocked by windfalls. Siksikakoan led the way with his axe, while I followed driving the pack horses. On the western slope of the Rockies the forests are very dense, because of the mild climate and abundant rainfall. The trees grow to a large size and the undergrowth is luxuriant. We rode

Click to enlarge
RIVER ON WESTERN SLOPE.

through glades, where the rank masses of weeds and grasses were shoulder high, and passed chains of beautiful lakes, hidden in the gloomy recesses of the forest, where huge tamaracks, firs and spruces grew to the water's edge, and extended high up on the sides of the mountains This was the haunt of deer, wapiti and moose, many of their tracks being visible in the soft ground along the lake shores.

A botanist would have been delighted with the

[p. 10]

great numbers of wild flowers in full bloom. I saw magnificent specimens of bear grass (Xerophyllum Douglasii), growing to the height of five feet. Their stalks were surmounted by dense caps of white flowers, each flower on an ascending pedicel an inch or more long. The leaves at the base of the stem were narrow and stiff. The root is used by the Blackfeet as a

Click to enlarge
ADDERS' TONGUES.

remedy for fractures and sprains. The leaves of a similar species are used by other Indian tribes in making baskets. There was also a great profusion of pink twin flowers (Linnaeus borealis), with its vine of shiny dark green leaves, also bishop's caps, light yellow adders' tongues and flowering dogwood (Cornus canadensis).

During our forest journey I recognised many birds

[p. 11]

native to my home in the east. When passing lonely lakes, I heard the wild, laughing cry of the loon, and olive-backed thrushes singing along the shores. In the lofty pines were chicadees, winter wrens, hermit thrushes, and myrtle warblers. In the open glades were robins, doves, ruffed grouse, chipping sparrows, flickers, juncos, and tree swallows. Here I first became acquainted with the Macgillivray warbler, his little gray

Click to enlarge
A MOUNTAIN LAKE.

head frequently peering out shyly from the willows along the streams. I found the nest, with four eggs, hidden away in some blackberry bushes, close to a lake. In the bushes were vireos, fly-catchers, and yellow warblers, and, in the deep woods, woodpeckers, red-breasted nuthatches, and golden-crown kinglets.

We surprised a large bear sunning himself in the trail, but he quietly and quickly disappeared into the

[p. 12]

forest. The trail led through a broad valley and along the bank of a swift mountain stream, climbing continually upwards towards the Continental Divide. When we reached a high altitude, the trees became gnarled and stunted, and we were frequently enveloped in heavy clouds. Here were many tracks of big-horn, and we saw a band of Rocky Mountain goats high

Click to enlarge
"WE ENTERED A HUGE BASIN SURROUNDED BY TOWERING PEAKS."

up on the mountain side. Hoary marmots, or whistlers greeted us from the cliffs with their shrill calls, but they were so timid that they quickly disappeared on our approach. We entered a huge basin, surrounded by towering peaks--a superb and vast amphitheatre about four miles wide from side to side. At the bottom was a sparkling lake, with wooded shores, surmounted by a circular mountain wall with a sheer

[p. 13]

height of 3,000 feet. It was fed by many streams, which had their sources in the glaciers and fell over precipitous cliffs with a constant roar, reverberating like thunder from the surrounding walls of rock.

Click to enlarge
THE PASS.

The Indians have given to the main range of the Rocky Mountains the appropriate name "Backbone-of-the-World." Standing on the summit of the Cutbank Pass (7,861 feet), we were surrounded by dazzling

[p. 14]

glaciers and stupendous mountains mantled with snow. The intense brightness of the snow-fields was relieved by the dark green covering of forests, which lined the valleys far below. Four miles to the north lay the Triple Divide--the Crown of the Continent, where the water-shed divides between the Pacific Ocean, Hudson Bay, and the Gulf of Mexico. Directly south was the sharply-pointed Flinch's peak, which lifted its towering mass like a cathedral spire 5,000 feet above the valley. It is impossible from the illustration to realise the sheer precipitousness of this peak.

On the west were Mt. James (10,155 feet), Mt. Pinchot (9,332 feet), and Ram Mountain, so called because frequented by many Rocky Mountain rams. To the north-west was Mt. Blackfoot (9,591), and the magnificent Blackfoot Glacier, a vast expanse of ice and snow. Beyond rose the summit of Mt. Jackson [*1] (10,023), and under its shoulder the Harrison Glacier, with its wonderful ice cascades. Turning farther to the north, we could see a multitude of peaks. Among them were Mt. Siyeh [*2] (or Mad Wolf, 10,004); Little Chief [*2] (9,542); Going-to-the-Sun (9,594); Four Bears [*2]; Almost-a-Dog [*2] (8,911); Mt. Grinnell (8,838), and the Grinnell Glacier; Mt. Red Eagle, [*2] and the Red Eagle Glacier, which is the source of Red Eagle Creek. The Grinnell Glacier is fenced on the west by a remarkable, serrated ridge of the Continental Divide known as "The Garden Wall."

In close proximity are the Gun-sight Pass (its contour resembling a gun-sight), and the Sperry Glacier; the Sexton Glacier, with its half mile of ice front, and the Swift Current Pass. Words fail to describe the

[p. 15]

magnificence of the glaciers and waterfalls, and the majesty and impressive beauty of the numerous high peaks and stupendous mountain ranges. Although this country is practically unknown, the difficult trails being frequented only by hunters, trappers, and Indians, its scenic wonders are probably unsurpassed by any within the United States. The region should be

Click to enlarge
FLINCH'S PEAK.
 "A mass of rock towering 5,000 feet above the valley."

reserved by the Government as a National Park and Game Preserve. [*1]

From the summit of the Pass, Siksikakoan pointed out the course of our trail eastward, following the Cutbank River through a long, winding valley, with high, snow-covered mountain ranges on either side. Beyond stretched the tawny plains--the country of the Blackfeet, resembling a distant ocean in its level

[p. 16]

expanse, and extending eastward many hundreds of miles into the dim and hazy horizon. We descended from the summit of Cutbank Pass between two small

Click to enlarge
THE CUTBANK TRAIL.
 (Ancient Indian route of travel.)

glacier lakes. In their dark and still waters, the surrounding crags and mountain walls were clearly reflected and many miniature icebergs were floating,

[p. 17]

having fallen from the fronts of the overhanging glaciers.

The travelling on the eastern side of the Rockies was much easier and in marked contrast with our difficult ascent of the western side. We now followed a trail, worn deep into the ground by generations of Blackfeet and other Indian tribes, when they crossed and recrossed the Rocky Mountains on their war and hunting expeditions. We entered a forest at the head of the canyon,

Click to enlarge
EAST CUT-BANK CANYON.

where the snow clung heavily to the balsams and pines. As we descended, the snow disappeared and the air became balmy.

The climate east of the mountains is more severe, because subject to extreme changes of temperature. Hailstorms are frequent, and snowstorms often occur in midsummer. In winter there are terrible blizzards, during which the thermometer drops to 50 degrees below zero, (Fahrenheit).

[p. 18]

We camped after sunset in a beautiful, natural park of luxuriant bunch-grass, fragrant with wild flowers and surrounded by forests of spruce and pine.

Early next morning--our last day in the mountains--we again took up the trail through the canyon of the Cutbank River. As the sun's rays entered the canyon, the massive walls of rock, towering overhead, became a brilliant red, while the high peaks glistened with colours as varied as the rainbow's. In crossing the summit of a high rocky ridge, we had an extended view of the forest-covered valley below, and the course of the river winding through open glades and grassy meadows, until it passed through the entrance of the canyon. Beyond were the foothills, or high, grass-covered ridges, lying in front of the canyon entrance, like a mighty barrier. Here the luxuriant vegetation of the mountains abruptly ended and the dry grass of the prairies began.

After riding through the foothills, we crossed an old trail, running north and south, now overgrown with grass. Siksikakoan explained that it was the Old North Trail. It is no longer used by the Indians, its course having been broken in many places by the fences and towns of the white man's advancing civilisation. Yet the old horse trail and travois tracks were still plainly visible, having been worn deep by many generations of travelling Indians.

We rode out over the treeless plains until, from the crest of a ridge, about twenty miles from the main range of the Rockies, we looked down upon a scene, which I will never forget because of its novel and exceeding beauty. In a luxuriant tract of meadow, and on the shore of a lake, lay the tribal camp of the Blackfeet, pitched in the form of an enormous circle.

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] The undulating ridges, which surrounded it were brilliant with blue lupines and velvet-leaf sun-flowers: Great herds of horses were contentedly feeding on the rich bunch grass. Smoke from the evening fires was rising from the lodges. A faint breeze, laden with a pleasant fragrance from the meadows, brought distinctly

Click to enlarge
VELVET LEAF SUNFLOWERS ON PRAIRIE.

the sounds of an Indian camp, the shouts of men and women, the crying of children, the barking of many dogs and the slow, measured beating of Indian tom-toms in dances and ceremonial gatherings.

After entering the Blackfeet camp, I accompanied Siksikakoan while he visited the lodges of the different chiefs. As we sat smoking a friendly pipe together. he

[p. 20]

explained to them that I had come from the Great Father (President of the United States), for the purpose of protecting the forests of their country, that they might be preserved for future generations. In this way I first met Chief Mad Wolf (Siyeh), their greatest orator, the high priest of their Sun-dance and the owner of the Beaver Medicine Bundle (an important ceremonial). This was the beginning of a mutual bond of sympathy and attachment, unusual between an Indian and a

Click to enlarge
TRIBAL CAMP OF THE BLACKFEET.

white man, which developed gradually into a strong and lasting friendship.

On my first night in the Blackfeet camp, I chose to sleep outside the camp circle in a meadow, not far from Mad Wolf's lodge, because the weather was clear and warm and I had no fear of being molested by the Indians. I was within hearing of any ceremonials that would take place in Mad Wolf's lodge and nothing of moment could occur in the encampment without my knowledge.

[p. 21]

Click to enlarge
MY OWN DECORATED TIPI IN THE BLACKFEET CAMP

[p. 22]

I placed my blanket-bed on the prairie-grass, and, instead of the lodge covering for a roof, I had the magnificent canopy of the night-sky, spangled with an innumerable multitude of stars. On account of the clearness of the atmosphere over the plains, these sparkling orbs of light shone with a rare brilliance and splendour, and appeared lower down in the horizon than I had ever seen elsewhere. Lying on my back and gazing up into the wonderful beauty of the heavens gave me an overwhelming sense of the infinity of God's universe and my own littleness by comparison.

I was not, however, to be entirely free from disturbance. While lying upon my blankets, my attention was attracted by two wandering Indian boys, who had been startled by the weird and ghostly appearance of my bed. They were standing at a short distance conversing together in awed whispers. When I gave a sudden jump and rattled the white canvas covering, they took to their heels, believing that I was a ghost. During the night, I was again aroused by the hot breath of a large animal upon my face. Being awakened from a deep slumber, I imagined that it was a grizzly bear standing over me. Jumping from my blankets with a yell, I found that it was an Indian horse, which had been standing quietly, with lowered head, over my bed. My outfit had aroused his curiosity, but my actions were so precipitate and my appearance, clad in white, so startling, that he quickly stampeded with frightened snorts.

At first I was at a loss to know how to secure suitable board and lodging in the Blackfoot camp. Their diet of dried meat and meat stews was to me neither appetising nor sufficiently nourishing. The difficult problem was, however, solved for me in a very satisfactory

[p. 23]

way by my friend Big Eyes. I had gained the good will of himself and wife through the interest I had taken in their children. To show their appreciation, his wife, Ips-e-nik-ki, who was skilled in the making of lodges, presented me with an Indian tipi, decorated with pictographs of interesting events in her husband's life. With the acquisition of a tipi, I had my own home in the camp, but it was necessary to do my own cooking and to care for my own Horses and outfit, for the Blackfeet have no servants, and I had not taken a wife.

I soon discovered that my diet of bacon, cereals, and dried fruits was no more pleasing to the Blackfeet than theirs was to me. After Spotted Eagle, the medicine man, had dined with me, he said that he had never been able to understand how people could live on the food eaten by white men. He told me of a journey he had once taken with some officers of the United States Army, "with whom he could stay no longer than a week, because of the strange food they ate."

When the Sun festival was finished and the Indians separated, I accompanied Siksikakoan to live on his Blackfoot ranch, not far from Mad Wolf's home on Cutbank River. I found him to be a man of fine mind and practical common sense, resourceful and fearless in emergencies and thoroughly equipped in all that goes to make an ideal guide and companion in the wilds. Under him I learned woodcraft, the handling of the broncho, the mysteries of the "diamond hitch" and the location of the old Indian trails leading across the plains and through the mountains. He was a natural orator and had standing and influence in the councils of his tribe. He spoke English fluently as well as the Blackfoot and Sioux tongues, and was thoroughly

[p. 24]

familiar with the ancient customs and traditions of his people. It was under his influence that I became deeply interested in the Blackfeet, and through his friendship that I was gradually brought into an intimate association with their leaders.

During my first summer among the Blackfeet, I rode over the reservation, visiting them in their camps and in their homes. Many interesting subjects crowded themselves upon my mind and enlisted my energies. I carried a medicine case containing simple remedies with which I was sometimes able to relieve the sick and help the injured. I endeavoured in every way to aid their advancement towards the white man's civilisation, helping in the cultivation of the ground, herding horses and cattle, and cutting timber in the mountains for building their cabins, fences, and corrals. When the sun was hot in midsummer, I helped them to make hay in the luxuriant meadows of the river bottoms. Although that kind of work was hard, it never seemed to dull my mind to the wonderful and ever-changing beauty of prairie, river, and distant mountains. In the clear days of autumn, when the bite of frost was in the air, I joined their hunting expeditions across the broad plains and into the Rocky Mountains.

I now look back with the deepest pleasure upon the freedom of that life, the delight of living and of working in that exhilarating mountain atmosphere. Those who spend sleepless nights, because of the absorbing and nerve-racking occupations of modern civilisation, may well envy my nights of refreshing sleep, while wrapped in my blankets beside some swiftly flowing mountain stream, or on the plains under the open sky. The life of the Indian, so close to the heart of nature, the companionship with inspiring mountains, sunlit

[p. 25]

plains, lakes and rivers, the ceaseless, but ever beautiful succession of lights and colourings, while day waned into night and night gave place to day, and the wonderful colour transformations, which came and went with the changing seasons, all these fascinated and held me with an irresistible grip.

It required, however, a long period of cordial relations to overcome the natural prejudice of the Indians against a white man, but I gradually gained their confidence, which I was careful never to abuse. I lived with them, not merely for pleasure and adventure, but chiefly for the purpose of gaining as full a knowledge as possible of their characteristics and customs, their traditions and religion. I realised that I had an unusual opportunity of studying a remarkable race of people, who properly belonged to the Stone Age, whose religion and social organisation had come down from a distant past, free from contact with any other religion, or culture. The younger generation were indifferent to their ancient customs and religion and it seemed that this primitive and most interesting people must soon lose their identity and disappear for ever.

Footnotes

^6:1 The Blackfeet tribe of Montana and Alberta should not be confused with the Sioux Blackfeet of Dakota who fought against General Custer in the battle of The Little Big Horn.

^7:1 "During the night Lieutenant De Rudio, Private O'Neal, Mr. Girard, the interpreter, and Jackson, a scout, came to our line. They had been left in the river bottom when Major Reno made his retreat." (Extract from Capt. E. S. Godfrey's "Custer's Last Battle," Century Magazine, volume 43, p. 379, Jan. 1892.) The same incident is referred to in the report of Gen. W. T. Sherman, Secretary of War, 1876, p. 33.

^14:1 Named after Wm. Jackson (Siksikakoan).

^14:2 Name of a Blackfoot chief.

^15:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

CHAPTER II

  

MY ADOPTION BY MAD WOLF

My meeting with Mad Wolf on the plains.--He proposes to adopt me as his son.--Mad Wolf's camp.--The ceremonial of adoption.--Mad Wolf's prayer.--He directs me to take part in the ceremonial.--Appoints a second ceremonial for giving my Indian name.

ONE afternoon in midsummer, while riding with Siksikakoan across the plains, we met Mad Wolf near Willow Creek. He was alone and signified his desire to speak with me. He was standing with his blanket drawn closely around him. His long hair tinged with gray fell loosely over his shoulders. From his neck hung a medicine whistle made from the wing-bone of an eagle. In his back hair, a single eagle feather stood erect. When I had dismounted, he warmly shook my hand. For a moment, he gazed into my face with eyes as penetrating as those of an eagle. Then, with head erect, he addressed me in a strong and earnest voice.

"The snows of two winters have now passed since you first came to live in my country. I have been watching you continually from the time when you first arrived, and my heart feels warm towards you. I have never taken a son from among the white men, but I now wish to adopt you as my son, because I believe that some day you will become a chief among your people. I am growing old, and it is probable that I will go before you to dwell with the Great Spirit, for you are still a young man. When I am gone you will then be left to help and to advise my people."

Having in a few words made known to Mad Wolf

[p. 27]

my willingness to become his son, he waved his hand towards the North, and said:

"My lodge is out there on the plains. It is on the other side of yonder butte, and cannot be seen from here. Come to my lodge to-morrow, when the sun is high. My relatives will be there; I will hold a ceremonial, in which I will paint you with the sacred red paint, and in their presence adopt you as my son."

The developments of subsequent years have enabled me more fully to appreciate Mad Wolf's serious purpose in adopting me as his son. Prompted by the constant misrepresentation and misunderstanding of the Indian by the whites, his purpose was to seek a white man's strong friendship, hoping for an alliance that would be productive of sympathy and fidelity to the welfare of his tribe. He wanted a white representative, who had lived sufficiently long among his 
Click to enlarge
MAD WOLF (SIYEH).
 people, to become familiar with their customs, religion, and manner of life, and would tell the truth about them to the white race.

Upon the day following my meeting with Mad Wolf the sky was overcast. Riding in a northerly direction, I arrived at the ridge pointed out by the chief. I paused on its crest, and looked down upon a small Indian camp. The freshening wind had begun to drive low clouds over the plains, while occasionally a furious gust shook the lodges, firmly anchored by ropes thrown around their tops. The only living thing to be seen

[p. 28]

was a coyote, slinking away over a neighbouring butte, and the only sign of human occupation was the slender wisp of blue smoke issuing from the top of Mad Wolf's tipi. During a lull in the wind I heard the subdued and measured sounds of Indians chanting and beating upon drums. As I sat still upon my horse, my mind went back many years, and I pictured to

Click to enlarge
LOOKED DOWN ON A SMALL INDIAN CAMP.

myself the days when the ancestors of Mad Wolf and his followers were the rulers of this entire region, and their lodges were numbered by thousands. When the song had ceased I rode down from the ridge and dismounting, raised the door. A small fire was burning in the center, and in the dim light I saw that a large number of Indians were assembled.

"Oki!" (come in), cried Mad Wolf. Upon entering I found myself in a large, well ordered tipi of about

[p. 29]

twenty-five feet in diameter. Mad Wolf was seated at the back,--the position of honour. His relatives and friends were on either side, the men to his left, and the women to his right. He greeted me with a warm handshake and said, "Ke-a-e-es-tsa-kos-ach-kit-satope" (spread the robe out for him to sit down). He wore beaded buckskin leggings and moccasins and from his neck was suspended a medicine whistle. He had a noble countenance, and a large and shapely head, the upper part of his body was bare, his shoulders broad and well formed, and his arms strongly developed, he was in every way a magnificent specimen of Indian manhood. From his piercing glance and the firm expression of his mouth, I knew he was accustomed to command. He had a natural dignity of manner, while conducting the ceremonial, that fascinated me, and I found myself intently watching his every movement.

Next to Mad Wolf, and assisting him in the ceremonial, was Natoya Apau (Blessed Weasel). The expression of his face and eyes told me that he had a kind heart and a good disposition. On my left was Morning Plume, who gave me a smile of welcome and was careful of my comfort, spreading a robe for my seat and watching that I should male no mistake during the ceremonial. Beyond him were Isoko-yo-kinni, Double Runner, Stock-stchi, Bear Child, and Many White Horses. The latter was so named because he made a speciality of white horses and would have no other colour in his herds.

To the right of Mad Wolf lay the sacred bundle of the Beaver Medicine. [*1] Next to it sat Mad Wolf's wife, Gives-to-the-Sun. From the lodge poles over their heads hung the Medicine Pipe and a raw-hide case

[p. 30]

containing the Medicine Bonnet. [*1] To the right of Gives-to-the-Sun were women and children completely filling the circle to the doorway of the lodge.

All sat silently gazing into the small fire, for they were about to commence a religious ceremony. Gives-to-the-Sun spoke in a low voice to a young woman, who arose and, bending over the fire, slowly stirred a

Click to enlarge
"STRIKES-ON-BOTH-SIDES."

large kettle containing a stew of sarvis berries and tongues. Pointing to her, Mad Wolf explained that she was his daughter who would now become my sister, saying also, "When she was small, the enemy had captured her, but I followed them and, when they were preparing to kill her, I jumped among them and, striking the enemy down on both sides, rescued her. So we named her "Strikes-on-both-sides!"

[p. 31]

A large pipe of polished red stone was continually circulating, everyone smoking except the children. The pipe always started from Mad Wolf, who first blew four whiffs to the Sun and four to the Earth, then it was passed to Blessed Weasel on his left, who handed it to me, stem first. After smoking I passed it on to Morning Plume. On its return I handed it to Blessed Weasel, stem first as before, but was corrected by him, with the explanation that, in going towards Mad Wolf, the pipe should have been handed bowl first. No one else seemed to notice this infraction of one of their customs. I was often impressed, in gatherings of the Blackfeet, by the dignified courtesy and genuine nobility of manners on the part of their head men, in passing over, without remark, or notice, any unwitting breach of social or ceremonial observance.

Mad Wolf began the ceremonial by taking a hot coal from the fire with a long forked stick. He placed dried sweet grass upon it and the rising smoke soon filled the lodge with a pleasing fragrance. At this moment the clouds parted in the sky, and the sun came out. The bright rays, streaming down through the top of the lodge, shone upon the ground in front of Mad Wolf. Holding his hands in the sweet smoke of the incense, Mad Wolf passed them along his arms and upon his breast to purify himself, and then chanted:

"To-day, our father (Sun) shines into the lodge, his power is very strong.

"Last night our mother (Moon) shone into the lodge, her power is very strong.

"I pray the Morning Star (their Son) that, when he rises at daybreak, he too will shine in to bless us and to bring us long life."

Mad Wolf and Blessed Weasel together led a chorus in which all joined. The women held aloft their left

[p. 32]

hands and closely watched Mad Wolf, who with bent arms held his hands folded on a level with his head. Then passing his hands along his arms alternately, after their manner of a blessing, he finally folded them upon his breast, and chanted:

"Mother Earth have pity on us, and give us food to eat!

"Father, the Sun, bless all our children, and may our paths be straight!"

Taking a sacred stick decorated with red paint, representing a cane, Mad Wolf placed it upon his right and left shoulders in turn, and prayed for long life. Blessed Weasel did likewise, handing the cane to me. I laid it upon both of my shoulders while they prayed that I might live to be old. The cane was passed around the circle, all performing the same ceremony. When the stick was returned to Mad Wolf, he and Blessed Weasel with their wives placed their hands upon it and sang a low chant.

Mad Wolf brought forth a small buckskin bag from which he took some red clay, the sacred paint which the Blackfeet believe has power to ward off sickness and to bring long life. When I saw him preparing it in his hands, I knew the moment for my adoption had arrived. There was an impressive silence as he motioned to me and said, "Here comes my white son." While kneeling before him, he painted my face on the forehead, chin and both cheeks, representing the Sun's daily course through the heavens. The forehead represented the rising, and the left cheek the setting Sun. Then taking the beaver skin, he passed it down both sides of my head, shoulders and arms to the hands, ending with an upward movement, by which he imparted his blessing and prayed:

[p. 33]

"Before you, my father, Great Sun Chief, I now adopt this young man as my son. Let the red paint be like the sunlight to protect and bring him health and strength. May all my people be friendly and protect him that he may be happy as long as he remains among his Indian brothers and sisters. My father, the Sun, who gives us light, keep him from harm when he goes again to his home towards the East. Give him light by day, that his path may be free from danger. If he should go into the wrong trail, lead him safely back, that his path may be firm and down hill to old age. As the sweet smoke of the incense ascends towards the sky, so may our prayers arise and be acceptable to thee, O thou great Sun God!"

After the prayer Mad Wolf directed Blessed Weasel to unroll a bundle containing buffalo and elk hides, which were spread out before the men. Large rattles were also distributed among them. Mad Wolf handed me two rattles, saying "You are now my son and should take part in this ceremonial." Kneeling on the ancient buffalo hide, I joined with them in the chants and beat time on the hide with my rattles. The first chant we sang represented a porcupine sitting on a hill and watching a beaver at work. The porcupine said: "I will take my bow and arrows and kill you." But the beaver jumping into the stream swam off under the water and escaped. We also sang the song of the war eagle, describing it as soaring high in the air above the mountain peaks and at times swooping down towards the earth when seeking its prey. Mad Wolf then danced around the fire with the pipe, singing and, at intervals, blowing upon his medicine whistle. Stock-stchi took the pipe from Mad Wolf. He blew four whiffs to the North, South, East and West, and then, holding the pipe towards the Sun, prayed to the Great Spirit in the Sun for the recovery of his sick child.

Mad Wolf ended the ceremonial at sunset with the prayer:

[p. 34]

"Great Sun God! Continue to give us your light that the leaves and grass may grow so that our cattle will increase and our children may live to be old.

"Our mother! (the Moon), give us sleep that we may rise again like our father (the Sun). May our lives be strong, and may our hearts feel good towards our white brothers, as we are all your children."

When the wife of Blessed Weasel arose to ladle out the stew, Mad Wolf directed that she set aside for his white son some of the tongue which the Blackfeet consider a delicacy. When the stew had been passed to everyone, I was preparing to eat, when Blessed Weasel motioned to me. Then I noticed that all were waiting. To my surprise it was for a blessing upon the food, for, after a short pause, Mad Wolf said: "The berries that grow are blessed, for upon them we live." He held a sarvis berry aloft in his right hand and chanted, everyone imitating his motions and joining with him in his prayer to Mother Earth that they might live to see many summers. After each person had planted a berry in the ground, a symbolic act in recognition of the source of their sustenance, they partook of the feast. None of the food was wasted. What remained was gathered together and set aside.

When I was ready to depart for my camp, Mad Wolf said, "O-mis-tai-po-kah (White Calf), the head chief, and I are selecting for you an Indian name. I ask you to come again to my lodge in one week." I replied, that next day I would start with Siksikakoan on a hunting expedition into the Rocky Mountains. He sat in silence for a moment and then said:

"It is now the moon when the leaves are beginning to turn yellow. I have adopted you as my son, and you have met my family and relatives. On the first day of the full moon, at the

[p. 35]

time when the leaves are falling, I will be camped on the South Fork of Cutbank River. Come to my lodge on that day, for I will have there the leading chiefs and medicine men. I will hold a sacred ceremonial, and will unroll the ancient Medicine Bundle [*1] of the Beavers. We will give you an Indian name, again painting you with the sacred paint, and receiving you into the tribe of the Blackfeet."

Footnotes

^29:1 See [*Appendix].

^30:1 See [*Appendix].

^35:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

CHAPTER III

  

HUNTING IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS

Our ride across the plains.--Individuality of pack horses.--Difficulties of mountain travel.--A mountain camp.--Fresh grizzly bear tracks.--Siksikakoan's bear story at the camp fire.--Climbing for Rocky Mountain Sheep.--A thrilling adventure with a huge grizzly.--Siksikakoan relates the legend of A-koch-kit-ope, the Medicine Grizzly of Cutbank Canyon.--Story of Meneopka and the coyotes.

EARLY on the following morning, the herd was driven into the corral, the pack and saddle horses selected and roped. In a short time the packs were on and we started across the plains for the mountains. The sky was of the deepest blue. In the clear air the high peaks of the Rockies, white with fresh snow, appeared deceptively near. Siksikakoan led the way, while I followed driving the pack horses. From the start, instead of keeping in line and moving at their usual gait, they persistently straggled off over the plain. It is a peculiarity of most pack horses that, at the beginning of an expedition, they realise the work ahead and spend their first energies in seeking to avoid their task.

They very much resemble men in disposition. First of all, there is the ambitious horse, who is only content when leading the rest, and in that capacity is invaluable; then the reliable hard-working horse, who attends strictly to business; the crafty and lazy horse, whose

[p. 37]

wits are devoted to shirking rather than working. Baldy, my own pack horse, was an animal of the latter kind. His ingenuity in dodging work, his cuteness in eluding capture when getting ready for an early start, his habit of puffing out his sides during the cinching of the pack-saddle, necessitating a halt in a short time to tighten, and his readiness for leadership in a stampede, made him a disturbing and exasperating element in the

Click to enlarge
SUNRISE.

outfit, requiring constant vigilance. On this occasion he was lightly packed, for he carried only my blankets and personal effects. With the intuition of an experienced veteran, he realised that there was hard work ahead and made such loud grunts that one, not familiar with his disposition, would have thought him abused and overburdened. When I took no notice of his complaints, he lay down, closed his eyes and groaned as

[p. 38]

if in great distress. But I saw through his crafty tricks. Dismounting, I seized a stick and, brandishing it with much energy, ran towards him with a shout. Baldy was so taken by surprise, that he quickly rose to his feet and, with an angry snort and toss of his head (a horse's imprecation), joined the outfit. Although he

Click to enlarge
REPACKING (BAGGAGE) BUCK.

failed to have his pack removed, no further complaints were heard from him.

No pack horse outfit is complete without its Buckskin, distinguished alike for his colour and for his endurance and tractability. Our Buckskin was no exception. The hardest drives never seemed to tire him. At the day's finish he was still fresh and generally in the lead. After his long rest, Buck was feeling in fine trim and was eager for adventure. The chance soon came. His

[p. 39]

sides were so round and yielding from his recent high living that, after we were well under way, the cinches became loose and the saddle slipped. He expressed his disapproval in one of his highest bucks, landing stiff-legged on all-fours, and giving the pack such a jar that it turned, and away he went. As the pots and kettles began to fly, his example proved instantly contagious to the other horses, for they turned at once and galloped in an opposite direction across the plain. It was a complete stampede. Siksikakoan followed the main outfit, while I started to overtake Buck, who was fast disappearing in the distance. On coming up with him, I saw that everything had been kicked off except the cinch-rope and pack-cover, which were dragging behind. Going back over Buck's trail, which was plainly marked by cooking utensils and provisions of all kinds, we gathered together, little by little, the precious contents of his pack. Such an experience brought forcibly to mind the difference between the cayuse of the Rocky Mountains and the plodding horse of the city. The wits of the former become sharpened by hard knocks, unexpected emergencies and the necessity of hustling for a living, developing both a capacity for mischief and a resourcefulness in danger that the latter, made dull and plodding by the featureless routine of daily work, is a stranger to.

Passing through the foot hills, and riding along the Cutbank River, we entered the mountains. Siksikakoan followed the old Blackfoot war-trail, used by them in the early days, when they crossed the Rockies on war expeditions against the Pend d'Oreille, Kutenai, and Flathead tribes. We passed through small parks of luxuriant bunch grass brilliant with wild flowers, and along the shores of lakes hidden away among the

[p. 40]

mountains. Then we plunged into a dark forest of fir, spruce, and pine. When the trail became well nigh impassable, because of fallen timber, Siksikakoan went

Click to enlarge
A BLACKFOOT WARPATH.

ahead with an axe and chopped a way through. This trying situation again put to test the real disposition of our pack horses, bringing out the bad traits of the vicious. The bell-mare promptly chose to turn aside

[p. 41]

and go down the mountain, while I dodged through the thick timber to head her off. The obstinate Baldy led the other horses away from the trail and, in driving them back, many of their packs were torn and loosened by the trees, and it became necessary to repack them. The Blackfoot language being deficient in curse words, Siksikakoan, suitably to express his feelings, fell back upon a picturesque and expressive assortment of English imprecations he had learned, while a scout, from army officers. Under similarly irritating conditions I have seen men, who were never known to swear, become suddenly profane, and no man, who has not himself driven a pack outfit along a steep trail and through thick, or fallen timber, is competent to sit in judgment upon such offenders.

While fording a swift stream, the horses stopped to drink. When Baldy, my pack horse, had his fill, he began pawing the water, a sign that he intended lying down for a roll. I prevented this catastrophe by jerking his neck-rope, but to my dismay, my trusty saddle-horse, catching his frolicsome impulse from Baldy, suddenly lay down in midstream and took a roll, dumping me off into the icy water.

We finally passed from the forest into an open basin surrounded by lofty peaks. I marvelled at the luxuriant growth of the grass and the variety and brilliant colouring of the flowers, caused by the abundant precipitation. There was the beautiful dark blue flower of the camass, the violet red of the wild geranium, the violet blue of the western virgin's bower, and the yellow of the wild parsley; also forget-me-nots, mountain lilies, spring daisies, and blue larkspurs.

A stream of clear water, cold as ice, flowed along one side of the meadow, the pines standing tall and

[p. 42]

Click to enlarge
"AT THE UPPER END OF THE BASIN WAS A LAKE SURROUNDED BY AN UNBROKEN FOREST."

[p. 43]

straight on the farther bank. At the upper end of the basin was a lake surrounded by an unbroken forest,

Click to enlarge
TWO MEDICINE FALLS AND MOUNT RISING WOLF.

which extended from the north and south shores high up on the mountain sides. To the south, Mount Rising

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Wolf and a pair of twin peaks rose abruptly, and to the west, like a massive wall, the Continental Divide, with its imposing procession of snowy peaks. This was a welcome haven of rest for our weary outfit, and we hastily prepared camp for the night. Our lodge was pitched at the edge of the forest near an old fir tree, a thick grove of spruces protecting us from the west winds.

After a warm supper, we forgot our hard day's work and sat closely together around a small fire. The Indian invariably builds a small fire. He will tell you that it is more convenient for cooking and better for warmth, and will speak with derision of the white man's fire as too large and wasteful.

The horses were quietly feeding close to camp. We felt secure in turning them loose because of the rich pasturage, their weariness, and the difficult back-trail. Suddenly we heard loud snorting, and a clatter of hoofs as they galloped madly through the valley. Hurrying to discover the cause of their fright, we found among their tracks the huge footprints of a grizzly bear. Unmindful of our presence, until discovered by the horses, he had been feasting on huckleberries, tearing up the ground, and turning over large stones for insects.

Returning again to our camp fire, Siksikakoan said: "I once had an experience with a bear in this same locality so unusual, that the bear himself can hardly have forgotten it. It was in the early spring, about the time when bears leave their winter dens. I had followed so long and eagerly the fresh trail of a large mountain ram, that nightfall overtook me unprepared. The weather luckily was warm and pleasant. Finding a depression in the ground filled with long soft grass,

Click to enlarge
HUNTING CAMP IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] I stood my rifle against a neighbouring tree and lay down in the hollow place to sleep. During the night I was aroused by the heavy breathing of a large animal, and an oppressive and disagreeable odour. At first I was dazed and only half conscious, as in a dream, of something standing over me, but I lay perfectly still. A grunting and snuffing, close by my head,

Click to enlarge
"OUR LODGE WAS PITCHED AT THE EDGE OF THE FOREST."

quickly forced me to realise that I was in the strange and horrible predicament of lying beneath a grizzly bear. A cold sweat came over me, and I was half paralysed with terror. The grizzly had been prowling about, led to my bed by his scent of the remnants of my supper, and so happened to walk over my body, partly covered by the grass and hidden in the depression. It was of course impossible to reach my rifle standing against the tree. Acting on a sudden

[p. 46]

impulse, I doubled up my knees, and with all my strength plunged my fists and feet simultaneously against the belly of the brute. It was a complete surprise for the grizzly, who was, if possible, the more frightened of the two, for he ran bellowing into the forest, while I quickly gathered up my small outfit and started away in the dark."

On the following morning, while Siksikakoan was examining the surrounding heights for game, he caught sight of a band of Rocky Mountain sheep. They were quietly feeding above timber line. While considering the best way of approaching them, the band suddenly took flight. Then a dark form appeared with awkward gait, following the sheep over the boulders. My glasses showed it to be a large grizzly bear. Siksikakoan said: "It is our old friend of last evening," and seizing his rifle called to me to follow him. We climbed the mountain facing us, crawling through thick underbrush and scaling difficult ledges. In one place we discovered the grizzly's freshly-made tracks in the soft earth beside a small stream. But the excitement over our seeming proximity to the monster was of short duration. When we reached the timber line, Siksikakoan stopped and said dejectedly, "the wind has shifted and old grizzly is gone." But I must confess that the announcement gave me great relief.

During the following two days, from early morning until sunset, Siksikakoan and I hunted in vain for sheep and goats on the surrounding mountains. We saw many tracks but no more game. On the third day we came upon a camp of two lodges, beyond a high wooded ridge to the south-east, belonging to Sis-ta-wau (Bird-Rattle), and A-po-at-sis-ipo (Looking for Smoke). Having reported that they had secured six sheep, we

[p. 47]

knew that they had frightened the game from our vicinity. Siksikakoan then resolved to go among the high peaks at the head of the canyon. There the mountains were difficult of access and he could take but one horse, so I consented to remain in camp as guard for our provisions and outfit. To increase his chances of success in hunting, I made him take my large Winchester rifle, while he left with me his inferior gun of small calibre. After he had gone, I busied myself with caring for the horses, securing a plentiful supply of trout from the stream near-by and some small game in the forest.

My active life and a Rocky Mountain appetite, with abundance of good food, the best of water and plenty of sleep gave me such a feeling of vigour and exhilaration, that I could not remain idle, but occupied myself in hunting with the camera, climbing to the summit of the Continental Divide, and to other high points in quest of new scenes. The most beautiful landscapes were along the old Indian war-trail, which skirted our camp. It was flanked by magnificent snowy mountain peaks and disappeared in a forest of firs, arching overhead, and thickly carpeted with pine-needles underfoot.

I spent my evenings completing my notes and reading, while lying in my comfortable blanket bed beside the lodge fire. It was made of small, resinous pine sticks, which gave out an abundance of light and heat. I was awakened early each morning by the shrill cries of a flock of blue jays. The leader, or chief of the flock, made himself especially obnoxious by sitting in the big fir tree, close to the lodge, as if remonstrating against my wanting to sleep after sunrise. His chatter was so incessant, and so like a challenge, that I finally took a shot at him from the doorway. But my bullet went

[p. 48]

too high and he flew away with a parting cry, very like a derisive laugh.

I prepared an out-of-door kitchen, about twenty feet distant, but stored the bulk of the provisions within the lodge, for protection from storms and invasion by wild animals. During the afternoon the sky became overcast. Dark clouds gathered along the divide. In the evening, a storm broke suddenly, the wind rushing down with a roar from the high peaks at the head of the canyon. The lodge would have been carried away, if it had not been for the protection of the small grove of gnarled and twisted balsams, through which the wind whistled as through the rigging of a ship. I lay comfortably wrapped in my blankets, gazing into the fire and listening with peaceful indifference to the howling storm. I watched the fire burn low, until there were but a few glowing embers, and then fell asleep. During the night I was awakened by the horses coming close to the lodge. I wondered at their having left their feeding grounds and went outside to drive them back. The wind had ceased, and all signs of the storm had disappeared. I stood for a moment, fascinated by the wildness of my surroundings. The deep stillness was broken only by the subdued roar of rapids in the valley below, the distant howling of wolves in the forest on the mountain side, and the hooting of a pair of owls; I could distinguish between the voice of the male and the answering call of his mate.

When I was again under my warm blankets, I fell into a doze but had a vague feeling that something was prowling about. Startled by heavy footsteps near the lodge, I sat up and listened They led in the direction of the kitchen some twenty feet away, and then followed a rattling of pans. I seized a stick and ran

[p. 49]

out to investigate. I saw a large, black-looking object near by, and thinking that one of the horses had returned, was about to hurl my club. But a sudden intuition changed my mind. This intruder could not be a horse. It stood too high in front and low behind. It looked steadily at me with head lowered and moving slowly from side to side. When I heard a vicious "woof!" the terrible reality flashed over me that I was in close quarters with a huge grizzly bear. The thought of having conic so near charging upon him with a club made me shudder and my knees feel weak. A cold chill crept up my back and over my scalp, with the feeling that my hair was standing on end. I backed into the lodge and sat down, debating what could be done. I realised that, in such close quarters with a large grizzly at night, and with an inferior rifle, my large rifle having been taken by Siksikakoan, it would be madness to shoot. A bold front is the best defence, and to run from a grizzly is but to invite attack. Any further deliberation was cut short by his moving towards the lodge. He stopped for an instant a few feet away, sniffing the scent of the provisions stored inside the lodge, but fortunately turned again towards the kitchen. Believing. that the fire-light might drive him off, I cut a few shavings and soon revived my smouldering fire. Hearing him coming again, I seized the small rifle and jumped to the side farthest from him. While I stood waiting, the suspense and strain upon my nerves were terrible. He came straight to the lodge door, but again turned aside to investigate my saddles. His curiosity being satisfied, he stopped at the side of the lodge where my provisions were stored. I cocked the rifle and knelt in readiness to receive him. Rising on his hind legs, he placed his

[p. 50]

fore paws against the lodge poles. I saw the canvas pressed in with his weight, and heard his deep breathing, for I was underneath him. I had now recovered my nerve. My heart beat steadily and I held the rifle without a tremor, although I thought my end had surely come. I quickly loosened the canvas from its pegs and prepared to escape from under, for I thought his weight would break through. But he stood there sniffing the air and seemingly undecided as to his next move. Then I stood erect and gave a loud yell. He must have thought my "power" was stronger than his own, for he turned away and the next moment I heard him at the kitchen, tearing off the canvas covering from a mess of trout. Having safely passed through what I thought was the crisis of his visit, I actually began to take a friendly interest in the old grizzly's performances, and watched him from the doorway. He tore open the parfleches [*1] containing flour and sugar and smelled at the heavy iron "dutch-oven" containing a small piece of butter, my greatest delicacy, although not very fresh. He turned the oven over and over, but the lid held fast. Finally he gave it a heavy blow with his big fore paw, and the lid flew off. Its contents were quickly disposed of and I heard his rough tongue licking with relish the inside of the kettle. With the hope that I might drive him away, I opened the lodge door that the fire-light might show more brightly, and stepping out fired my rifle into the air. But he only threw up his head, as if annoyed at the interruption, and dropped it quickly to finish a bowl of stewed peaches, the last of my store of provisions at the kitchen. When the first faint streaks of dawn appeared, my dangerous visitor suddenly departed into the deep forest. Having built a cheerful

[p. 51]

and comfortable fire, I at once wrote in my note book. the details of the grizzly's visit, and then, wrapping myself in my blankets, slept soundly until wakened by the squirrels racing over the frozen canvas above my head. The thrilling events of the night seemed like a dream and I hastened to find the grizzly's tracks and prove the reality of the adventure. Close beside the lodge, I found prints of his feet measuring thirteen inches in length, six inches broad at the heel and seven inches across the toes. When Siksikakoan returned from his hunt, and saw the tracks, he said that a grizzly of that size would weigh as much as a large horse. He brought back with him a Rocky Mountain sheep and two goats. In the evening, while seated beside our outside fire, after telling about his hunt, Siksikakoan said: "We are now camped within the range of a grizzly bear, who has been famous for many years among the Blackfeet for his size and daring. I will tell you the story, just as Mad Wolf told it to me."

  

THE MEDICINE GRIZZLY OF CUTBANK CANYON.

"When Mad Wolf was a young man, he was chief of a war party, that crossed the Rocky Mountains against the Flathead Indians. Two of his brothers also started with the expedition, but turned back, before they reached the Flathead country. Mad Wolf and his party returned later by the Cutbank Pass. After crossing the summit, they entered the dense forest near the head of the canyon. Mad Wolf was in the lead, while the others followed in two separate columns along each side of the trail, as was the custom of war parties in those days. They rode in silence because the trees were so dense they could not see far in

[p. 52]

advance. Suddenly Mad Wolf stopped and signed to the others that he heard someone ahead striking his horse with a quirt (whip). The Blackfeet quickly ambushed themselves among the trees. A war party of Kutenai (Mountain Indians) were returning from an expedition into the Blackfeet country. They ran into the ambush and there was a fierce battle. Mad Wolf, as chief of the expedition, was entitled to the first shot. He singled out the leader, but the Kutenai chief was very brave. Although badly wounded, he ran into the thick woods where Mad Wolf killed him. While taking his scalp, Mad Wolf recognised on his belt the scalps of his own two brothers. He hurried back to his people, who were by this time hard pressed by the Kutenai and were retreating. Mad Wolf, now aroused to great courage and daring, rallied the Blackfeet to another attack and soon turned the rout into a victory. They killed all of the Kutenai save one old squaw. After scalping the dead, they clothed her in a soft tanned buckskin dress, ornamented with elk teeth and with leggings and moccasins decorated with porcupine quills. They painted her face black and giving her a warm blanket and a sack of dried meat, set her free, with the prayer that the Sun would take pity on themselves, just as they had pitied their helpless enemy. They then continued on their way until they came upon the camp of Running Wolf, Black Bear, Ear Rings, Stock-stchi, Ahpasis, and other well-known Blackfeet chiefs pitched in this same glade near yonder big fir tree, by which our people have ever since identified this camping ground. It was in early summer, the time when the camass is in bloom and they were engaged in cutting and peeling lodge poles. In those days the Blackfeet travelled so far in a year that their

[p. 53]

lodge poles were worn too short. [*1] Every spring they went into the mountains to cut new poles and to dig camass roots.

"It happened that in the evening, the chiefs were assembled in Stock-stchi's lodge, listening to Mad Wolf's story of his war expedition against the Flatheads. It was a warm moonlight night and the women were sitting outside singing and talking together. Stock-stchi called to his wife to go to the stream for water. But she was afraid, saying, 'The woods are dark down there and the water deep.' But her husband made her go. She soon returned, badly frightened, and said, 'I was dipping my bucket, when a man came from the forest. He jumped across the stream and ran up the trail. He carried a rifle and wore a war bonnet.' Just then another woman came into the lodge saying,

We saw a stranger go to the big fir tree yonder. He hung his war bonnet there and then stole over to the lodge. He looked in and went away. He was an enemy. We saw him plainly in the bright moonlight.'

"Mad Wolf and the other chiefs hurriedly seized their rifles and ran down to the stream just in time to see a small party of Gros Ventres emerging from the forest. The Blackfeet opened fire and killed all except their leader. He stood his ground until his ammunition gave out, when he took refuge in the underbrush.

"Our people clipped the branches off all around him with their bullets, but could not hit him. Finally they made a charge, but the Gros Ventre chief fought savagely with his knife, roaring all the time like a grizzly bear at bay and calling to the Blackfeet 'Come on, I am not afraid. My name is A-koch-kit-ope and my medicine is powerful. When day broke, our

[p. 54]

people were uneasy, thinking the Gros Ventre chief might have supernatural power. They told him he was free to go, but they would scalp the others. A-koch-kit-ope replied, 'No, they are my brothers and I will not leave them.' Feeling thirsty, he walked to the river and drank, daring any of the Blackfeet to stand forth for a hand-to-hand conflict. When our people finally killed him, they discovered that the grizzly bear was his medicine. He had a grizzly claw tied in his front hair. The Blackfeet were so afraid that some of his power might escape, that they built a fire and burned A-koch-kit-ope's body. If a spark or coal flew out, they carefully threw it back into the fire, to prevent the possible escape of any of his power. They scalped the other dead Gros Ventres and had a scalp dance around the fire.

"When the fire had burned out, the Blackfeet hurriedly moved camp. But in spite of their precautions, A-koch-kit-ope transformed himself into an enormous grizzly bear and followed them. He came upon the Blackfeet when they were pitching camp, killing some, while the rest escaped by flight.

"The next spring when our people went up the canyon to cut lodge poles, they camped again near the big fir tree in the same park. Early in the night, while the horses were still picketed close to the lodges, an enormous grizzly bear came into camp. The horses were frightened and stampeded, just as ours have done. The dogs attacked him, and he killed some of them and put the others to flight. The people were afraid to shoot, because they recognised the bear as A-koch-kit-ope. He appeared beside the fir tree, where the year before the Gros Ventre medicine man had hung his war bonnet. The grizzly boldly went through camp

[p. 55]

eating all the food he found and tearing to pieces hides and parfleches. Whenever our people camp near the fir tree in the canyon they see the medicine grizzly, whom they have named A-koch-kit-ope. He comes only at night and disappears before daybreak. The Blackfeet know his medicine is strong and are afraid to shoot at him. When we made peace with the Gros Ventres, we told them about this medicine grizzly and they said that he was A-koch-kit-ope, their great medicine man. They declared he could not have been killed, if all of his followers had not been slain first. A-koch-kit-ope had predicted to them that he would be killed, if he should ever be left alone in battle with no one to make a 'medicine smoke.' As this happened many years ago, A-koch-kit-ope, the medicine grizzly, must now be very old."

After Siksikakoan had finished telling the legend of the Medicine Grizzly I went out into the night. I gazed with a deeper interest at the big fir tree, where the Gros Ventre warrior hung his war bonnet, while making the night attack upon the Blackfeet, and at the black, wall-like line of forest, where the Blackfoot woman first encountered A-koch-kit-ope. I felt convinced that the huge grizzly, who had frightened me the night before, must be the dreaded "Medicine Grizzly, A-koch-kit-ope," who had already made this locality famous by so many manifestations of his supernatural power. Beyond were the massive mountains, their snowy summits dimly lighted by the myriads of brightly shining stars. I saw the dog star in the north-east, rising with remarkable brilliancy over the tops of the tall spruces and pines. I could faintly distinguish the horses at the edge of the timber and heard Baldy give a frightened whinny when he suddenly realised that

[p. 56]

he was feeding alone, too near the ghostly woods, and hurriedly joined his companions. Returning to the lodge, which looked most picturesque, lighted up by the golden glow from the fire within, and showing in clear outline the weird decorations on the canvas, and the tapering poles overhead, we turned into our comfortable blanket-beds beside the fire. The deep stillness of the night was broken by the mournful howl of a wolf in the forest close by. He was answered by another and then another, until they all united in a chorus of long howls. Siksikakoan said: "When the wolves howl like that, it is a sign of coming storm. This morning when the sun rose, I saw two large sun dogs in the eastern sky, that resembled enormous crosses, and at midday there was a huge circle around the sun,--nature's warning signs of a big storm."

I asked Siksikakoan if he had ever known of a man being attacked by wolves. He said: "Wolves and coyotes are very wise, their wisdom having been given to them by Napi (Old Man). Although savage by nature, they sometimes use their wisdom to help people when in danger and distress. I recall a strange incident that happened many years ago, when we were camped far out on the plains. It was a cold winter. There had been a big storm and the snow lay deep. Menepoka, an old man, went alone and on foot from camp to look for horses. He carried a quirt and was dragging a long rawhide lariat. He felt something tugging, and turning about, saw a large coyote biting at the other end of his lariat. He stopped and yelled at the coyote, calling him evil names to scare him away. The coyote trotted to the summit of a butte near by, and howled four times to the north, south, east and west. Before long another coyote appeared. Then another came running up to

[p. 57]

him, and they kept on coming, until Menepoka found himself surrounded by them. The terrible circle, with hideous cries, red mouths and glittering eyes, drew closer and closer. He tried to drive them away with his quirt, but without effect. He expected that, in a moment, they would rush upon him and tear him to pieces. He was old and not strong, and in his terror his legs gave way and he sank down into the snow. It happened that an Indian on horseback had ridden to the summit of a neighbouring butte looking for his horses. Hearing the coyote pack making an unusual outcry, he rode towards them, thinking they had made a kill of game they had run down in the snow. Discovering a human body lying on the ground, he gave a shrill cry and galloped towards them, shooting an arrow into their midst. The coyotes quickly scattered, and he then saw that it was Menepoka lying in the snow as if dead. Lifting him upon his horse he took him back to camp. Our medicine man tried to drive out the evil spirit, going through with the motions of pulling something from his body, explaining that, when the coyotes were closing in upon Menepoka, they were constantly shooting their hairs into him. But the incantations were of no avail, because the evil spirit was one over which the medicine man had no power. Menepoka lived for only a few days. When he died, his body was placed upon the summit of the high butte, where the famous chief Big Nose now lies. They both belonged to the Ich-poch-semo band (clan of Grease Melters)."

Footnotes

^50:1 See [*Appendix].

^53:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

A ROCKY MOUNTAIN BLIZZARD

Preparations for a storm.--Tying down our lodge.--A fierce wind and a wild night.--Siksikakoan's stories beside the lodge fire.--Legends of the Home of the Wind Maker and the Origin and Destruction of the Grizzly Bear Clan--Winter scenes in Cutbank Canyon.--Stories told in the snow by the tracks of wild animals.

I WAS wakened on the following morning by mournful howls from a band of coyotes at the edge of the forest near the lodge. Lifting the door-skin and looking out the sky was heavily overcast and a huge bank of clouds hung over the entrance to the canyon. After an early breakfast, we lost no time in beginning preparations for the approaching storm. We constructed an outdoor kitchen, without a roof, under the shelter of a thick grove of pines. It was made of forked poles supporting cross-pieces with green branches laid against it to form a wind-break. We placed inside of this enclosure our cooking utensils and the tripod with its heavy camp kettle.

Almost before we were in readiness, a heavy east wind, with a drenching rain, set in, but we made safe against it by anchoring the tipi on its eastern side in true Indian fashion. This was done by driving two strong stakes firmly into the ground, throwing the noose of a lariat over the tops of the tipi poles, taking a hitch around the stakes and then drawing it taut, until the

[p. 59]

ropes sang in the gale. We reset the ears for the change of wind, crossing the earpoles in front to protect the smoke-hole and to prevent the ears from being torn, and laying stones and logs around the bottom of the canvas, so that the pegs could not be loosened by the wind-strain.

The storm which Siksikakoan predicted from nature's

Click to enlarge
LODGE WITH EAR POLES CROSSED IN FRONT FOR STORM.

signs, began with snow and a high wind from the west, continuing three days and three nights. Dense masses of clouds hung low upon the mountains, but moved uncertainly about the high peaks, sometimes lifting, as if to disappear, only to lower again more dense and threatening than before. The temperature fell rapidly, and by evening, the rain had changed to snow. The horses, which we had left unpicketed, feeding in the

[p. 60]

meadow, were driven by the storm into the thick underbrush for protection. We could hear them whinnying to each other for encouragement, while trying to keep together. When the sky cleared at sunset of the third day, it seemed as if the storm was over, but Siksikakoan shook his head dubiously, saying, "When a storm breaks at sunset, the weather is still unsettled, but, if the sky clears during the night, or in the early morning, we will have settled weather."

After nightfall the wind increased. The snow and sleet beat violently against the canvas. The furious blasts rushed through the tops of the pines and firs, with a sound like that of escaping steam, and swept the exposed slopes above timber-line, with a confused and distant roar. It was a wild nigh t and sleep was impossible. But it was just the night for story-telling while lying secure and comfortable by our small inside-fire. Siksikakoan whiled the hours away with Blackfeet legends and tales of his adventures as an army scout, during the Indian wars of the north-west. I will only take space to repeat two of his legends.

  

THE HOME OF THE WIND MAKER.

"Many years ago, when a heavy wind swept across the plains, a chief of the Blackfeet faced the storm and made a vow to find its origin. He crossed the plains and entered the mountains. His way led through dark canyons and dense forests, where the wind rushed and roared. The terrible wind and the dark and gloomy surroundings filled him with dread, but, because of his vow, he pressed forward until, at last, he saw in the distance, close to one of the highest peaks, the shining water of a lake. During a lull in the storm, he crept

[p. 61]

close to the shore and watched. Suddenly from the middle of the lake, arose the huge antlers of an enormous bull elk. His eyes were red and flames

Click to enlarge
THE SNOW-COVERED FOREST.

darted from his nostrils. When he waved his huge ears, a wind arose, so fierce and terrible, that the waters of the lake were whisked up into the air. When the elk sank again beneath the waves, the wind event down.

[p. 62]

The chief hurried back to his tribe to tell them of his wonderful discovery of the home of Medicine Elk, the Wind Maker."

  

ORIGIN AND DESTRUCTION OF THE GRIZZLY BEAR CLAN.

"Weasel Tail was a man noted for his skill in catching eagles. He lived close to the mountains with his wife and six children, far from the main camp, in a place where eagles were plentiful. He dug a pit for trapping them, covering it ingeniously with green branches, grass and stones. He sat in it every day from sunrise to sunset, watching his bait of buffalo meat, lying overhead on the covering of branches. Whenever an eagle came to the bait, he seized it firmly by the legs and; drawing it between the branches into the pit, wrung its neck.

"Weasel Tail had been having bad luck for many days. The eagles would not come to his bait, although he prayed all night in his lodge, chanting Eagle songs and rubbing himself with the smoke of sweet grass, that his body might be free from scent. He then fasted for many days and took a human skull with him into the pit, that it might make him invisible like a ghost. But it was all in vain, for the eagles continued flying high above him and avoided his bait.

"One day exhausted by his efforts and weary waiting, he fell asleep in the pit, when an eagle appeared to him in a dream and said, 'If you will kill one of your children as an offering, you will have the power to catch many eagles.' When Weasel Tail awoke, he decided to offer his dog as a substitute, which he loved next to his children. He dressed the dead body of the dog to resemble a child and, placing it on the roof of

[p. 63]

the pit, returned to his lodge. At night the Eagle again appeared to him in a dream saying, 'I did not like the dog you offered me for food and could not eat it. I told you I wanted one of your children.' Weasel Tail then went on a hunt and killed an antelope. Returning he directed his wife to bring in the meat. While she was gone he killed his youngest child. He then felt so badly that he killed all of his children. He did not offer any of their bodies to the eagle, but buried them together, and sat in his lodge, waiting for his wife to come back. When she returned, he said, 'I have killed all of our children, but we shall all be together soon in the Spirit World, for I will now kill you and then myself.' She replied, 'Be it as you say, only wait until I go to the stream for water to wash the antelope meat.' She did not return, but ran away into the mountains. Worn out and famished, she wandered into a bear's den. A large grizzly was seated inside with her family of four children. When the bears saw that the woman was starving, they took pity on her. They were so kind and hospitable, that she lived with them for many years, and became the wife of a big grizzly.

"One day, her grizzly husband asked her if she wanted to return to her own people. She replied, 'Yes! if you can change yourself and our children into people, and can also get another family of bears to go with us, so that we can protect ourselves.' He said: 'I have a relative with four children. He lives farther up on this mountain. I will get him to come down here and live with us. I can then change all of us into people.' When the big grizzly had brought the other family of bears down, he said to his relative: 'We two will go together to the Indian camp on the prairie and

[p. 64]

kill a man. We must get his heart, for with it I can doctor and change all of us into people.' The two grizzlies went to the camp and returned with the heart.

Click to enlarge
THE FROZEN STREAM.

When the big grizzly had driven the others from his den, he began his incantations. He divided the heart, cutting a portion for each bear. Calling them together, after sundown, he distributed the pieces, and said, if

[p. 65]

they would go at once to bed they would arise as people. In the morning the woman arose first. After cooking the meal, she told all the bears to get up, and when they stood upon their feet they became people.

"The two families intermarried, the big grizzly becoming the chief of the band and taking the name Red Bear. The men hunted buffalo upon the prairies, making six lodges from their hides. They joined the Blackfeet camp, where the woman was recognised. She told the story of her murdered children, and said that the people with her had come from a long distance. They dressed in bear skins and wore grizzly claws around their necks, arms, wrists, and ankles. Their arrows were wrapped with bear skin, and they also carried daggers and spears for weapons. They painted themselves with red clay mixed with bear fur and flint, which they rubbed in so hard that their faces and bodies were covered with blood. They also painted black streaks across their eyes and mouths. For robes they used the smoked tops of lodges. This band of strangers soon became so insolent and dangerous, that if any of the Blackfeet objected to their actions they were killed. Whenever one of their own number was killed, the old mother was said to be able to doctor him and bring him back to life. The people were compelled to do whatever the bears wanted. They increased in number rapidly, for their children, according to the nature of bears, grew up and became mature in one year. The strangers acted like bears in so many ways, that the Blackfeet called them the clan of Grizzly Bears.

"A young man named Owl went on the war path against the Snake Indians. He came back unsuccessful.

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] Disheartened and worn out from travel, he wandered aimlessly over the prairies, for he was ashamed to return to camp. One night a small underground animal came to him in his sleep, saying, 'Near the high rocky cliff the Chief Bear wishes to see you.' He awoke, and from the top of a butte examined the surrounding country. Seeing near the mountains a rocky and precipitous ridge, he went towards it. At the foot of the cliff, he found a bear's den, and lay down to sleep in front of the door. During the night, he was awakened by a large bear dragging him into the cave. When it became light, he saw at the back of the den a huge grizzly with his family on either side of him. Finally the big bear spoke to Owl, saying: 'I am the head chief over all the bears. My medicine is strong, and I cannot be killed. I have brought you here for I have taken pity on you and your people. I will give you power so that, like me, you cannot be killed.' The Chief Bear then sang a medicine song, and burned sweet grass as incense, rubbing the smoke over Owl's body. He arose and danced around the den, grunting, blowing, and snorting. He shot an arrow at Owl; it struck him between the shoulders, but fell harmlessly to the ground. He thrust a spear at his side, but the point broke off. He struck him with a tomahawk which did him no injury. For the fourth trial the Chief Bear stabbed him in the side, but when he pulled out the dagger, there was no wound. The Chief Bear then directed Owl to return to his people, saying: 'You cannot be hurt as long as you stand your ground and fight. You can only be killed when you flee from an enemy.'

"As soon as Owl returned to the Blackfeet camp, he

[p. 67]

dressed and painted himself like the tribe of Grizzly Bears who had been ruling the people.

"The old mother of the bears had an instinctive fear of Owl. She warned all of her children to make a friend of him, and said: 'I fear him, for I know his supernatural power is greater than ours.' But Red Bear, the chief, was scornful towards Owl, saying: 'There is no reason why we should fear that fellow.' He commanded that no one of the tribe should sit on top of the butte north of the camp. When Owl heard of the command, he immediately went up and sat there in sight of the people. The Grizzly Bears then went out together and shot at Owl, but could do him no harm. They next said they would kill anyone leaving camp for a hunt. To show his contempt for this order, Owl announced to his people that he was going away for a buffalo hunt. When the Grizzly Bears tried in vain to kill him, the old mother again warned her children, saying, 'I advised you to make friends with Owl; now behold, he is stronger than you. If he prevails over us, we will all be killed.'

"Owl selected for his comrade a poor boy, named Little Robe, saying to him: 'To-morrow night when the moon rises, I will doctor you so that you cannot be killed.' On the following evening, taking the boy into his lodge, he painted and dressed him after the manner of the Grizzly Bears. He said: 'When I have finished doctoring you, we will have a game of "hide the bones" with the Bear tribe.' Owl rubbed sweet grass smoke over Little Robe's body, as the Chief Bear had done. He took the tooth and claw of a grizzly bear and directed him to hide the claw, either in his mouth, or in one of his hands. He then started a

[p. 68]

song, [*1] while Little Robe, swaying his body in time with the singing, hid the claw. Taking his bow and arrow, Owl shot Little Robe between the shoulders. The arrow did him no harm, for the shaft was splintered, and Little Robe said, 'You guessed wrong, for I have the tooth and not the claw in my mouth.' [*2] 'I will try again,' said Owl. Grasping his spear, he thrust it at the boy's side. But the point was broken off, and the spear did not penetrate the flesh. Little Robe said: 'I have the claw in my left hand, it is not in the right.' He next plunged his dagger into the boy's side, but it left no wound. Then Owl said: 'Go now to the Grizzly Bears and tell them that Owl wants to gamble with them.' Word was sent back by Little Robe that they were willing to have the game if it could be played in their own camp. When the Blackfeet heard the news, they crowded into Owl's lodge, saying, 'Why do you want to gamble with this terrible people? They will only kill you, and probably the rest of us also.' Owl said, to Little Robe before they started for the camp: 'When we enter their lodge, pull down the buffalo robe fastened over the door, and take it in with you. We will both sit on it' (to secure power from the buffalo).

"They found the Grizzly Bears gathered together in one big lodge. The men were painted and armed with spears and bows and arrows. Before the game started, the mother of the Bears made a talk, warning them not to gamble with Owl and his friend, but they did not heed her. Red Bear, the chief, asked: 'Who will hide the bones first?' Owl replied: 'My little brother here.'

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] The youngest of the Bears said he would do the guessing. Owl started a gambling song, beating time with arrows on his bow. Little Robe took two bones, one marked and the other plain. He swayed his body and arms in time with the song, while quickly moving his hands and hiding the marked bone from the youngest of the bear warriors. The song grew louder, and the movements of Little Robe quickened. The Bear tribe

Click to enlarge
CLOUDS LIFTING FROM MOUNTAINS AFTER BLIZZARD.

grasped their weapons with excitement, and fiercely watched the two players. While they gazed at Little Robe, he seemed to them to resemble a bear. Suddenly the youngest Bear shot an arrow at Little Robe. The shaft struck him between the shoulders, but fell harmlessly to the ground. Little Robe said: 'you guessed wrong.' The second Bear then tried, spearing Little Robe in the side, but the spear broke in two.

"Red Bear, the chief, said: 'I will take the last two

[p. 70]

guesses.' The song was again started, and as Little Robe waved his hands, the chief struck at him with a tomahawk, which did him no harm and then stabbed him under the arm, but the dagger left no wound. Owl said: 'None of you have guessed right. It is now our turn. My little brother will do the guessing, while you hide the bones.' He arose, and stood beside the door. Red Bear the chief, threw the bones, singing 'Try your best to guess right.' Little Robe shot an arrow into the chief's head and he fell to the ground dead. Owl, standing by the door, allowed no one to go out. He felt glad when he saw the chief of the Grizzly Bears fall dead. He and Little Robe then killed everyone in the lodge. When the Blackfeet knew that their terrible enemies were overpowered, they destroyed all the Grizzly Bears in the other lodges. They feared to let one of them live. Owl became head chief of the Blackfeet and Little Robe a great medicine man. They lived for many years, until they fled from an enemy when both were killed."

Siksikakoan continued his story telling far into the night. After midnight the wind began to subside, and, by morning, had entirely ceased. The light of sunrise in the eastern sky indicated that the clouds were breaking. The horses had left the sheltering willows and were contentedly feeding in the meadow, uncovering the snow from the grass, by pawing with their forefeet. This trait, which is called "rustling," has been so long inbred in the cattle and horses of the great plains of the north-west, that it has become a universal instinct. In mid-winter, while the snows are deep, and the grass is beyond their reach, they are compelled to resort to other shifts for food, and, if none are available, they perish. One food substitute in winter is the bark of

[p. 71]

the cottonwood tree, which is very nourishing and palatable. If an Indian camp is near a growth of these trees, and they have no summer-cured hay, the squaws will fell large trees for their Indian ponies, from which they will strip the bark completely. Although their horses are very hardy, their winter lot is at the best a hard one, and they are apt to come out of it in the

Click to enlarge
"HORSE UNCOVERING SNOW FROM GRASS BY PAWING."

spring in a reduced and weak condition. But, they fatten very rapidly, when the prairies grow green with the early-spring grasses. A broncho becomes accustomed to hardship and a precarious living, while a city-bred horse would starve to death under similar conditions.

The clouds lifted slowly from the mountains, unveiling in the clear air the canyons and forests and finally the high peaks. In spite of Siksikakoan's friendly remonstrances, I started off on foot with my camera, over the

[p. 72]

old Indian war-trail and towards the head of the canyon. He said "it is unwise to go alone and unarmed in the Rockies, especially after a heavy snowfall, when the

Click to enlarge
THE OLD TRAIL AFTER SNOWSTORM.

wild animals come forth to hunt and are apt to follow any fresh tracks in the snow, seeking for prey." Cut-bank Canyon was filled with winter scenes of wonderful beauty. The outlines of every stone and log were

[p. 73]

Click to enlarge
CUTBANK CANYON AFTER SNOWSTORM.

[p. 74]

beautifully rounded with a white mantle of snow and the branches of firs and pines bent under the heavy burdens they had received during the night.

In the early morning, after a snowstorm, one can read by their tracks in the snow, as if recorded in an open book, all the night movements of wild animals. I saw many coyote and wolf tracks crossing and recrossing the trail, and the peculiar footprints of the Lepus americanus, or snow-shoe rabbit, so called because the fur grows long on their feet, making the footprint to resemble a snow-shoe. A pair of mountain lions with large round tracks, resembling those of a large mastiff, were travelling close together towards the head of the canyon, their long tails occasionally leaving their marks behind. The snow told a sad story (whose sequel was probably a tragedy) of two large gray wolves running down a buck-deer. I came to a much trampled place, red with his blood, where he had stood at bay to fight them off, and then they all left the trail together in the direction of Mount Rising Wolf. Because of the ravages by numerous gray wolves, moose, wapiti and deer now show a marked decrease in this part of the Rocky Mountains. The large footprints of a grizzly bear emerged from a rocky ravine and crossed the trail, overturning stones and logs, while on his way down the mountain to drink at the river. While absorbed in taking a picture, with my head under a focussing cloth, I heard behind me several dull thuds, quickly following each other. They sounded so like the heavy footsteps of a large animal, that I quickly withdrew my head, fully expecting to find myself face to face with a grizzly. But, to my great relief, it was only the falling of heavy masses of snow from the fir trees.

[p. 75]

When I emerged from the forest on my return to camp, the western sky was aglow with colour. The sun was sinking below the horizon line of the Continental Divide. For a brief moment, the last rays suffused the winter landscape of forest and mountain with a soft and rosy light. The silvery crescent of the new moon and the evening star crowned all with their celestial beauty.

Siksikakoan was waiting, with the lodge fire brightly burning and the horses picketed near for safety, in accordance with an old Blackfoot custom.

Footnotes

^68:1 Songs were sung in gambling to distract the attention of the opponents.

^68:2 Shooting an arrow at his opponent represented a guess, both in this test game and in the real game to follow. 1f a failure it was counted a wrong guess.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

CHAPTER V

  

MAD WOLF GIVES THE BEAVER MEDICINE CEREMONIAL

Mad Wolf's summer camp on the plains.--Preparations for the ceremonial.--Maka's joke.--Mad Wolf begins the ceremonial with seven chants--The buffalo song.--Distribution of the rattles to the priests.--Mad Wolf bids me join in the ceremonial.--Prayers made by visiting Indians.--Animal songs.--Mad Wolf dances with the Sacred Pipe.--Pipe Dancing songs.--The Root Digger is brought forth.--Opening the sacred Beaver Bundle.--Dance of four women representing beavers.--Two weasel skins are taken from the Bundle.--The Head Chief gives me the Indian name  (White Weasel Moccasin).--A medicine man decorates me with the sacred paint.--Mad Wolf continues the ceremonial.--I take part in the buffalo dance.--Ceremonial closes with a feast.

SIKSIKAKOAN and I returned from the mountains in good time to keep my appointment with Mad Wolf. Early in the morning of the first day of the full moon, when the leaves were falling, I rode across the plains in search of his summer camp on the South Fork of Cutbank River. When I reached a high ridge overlooking the river valley, I looked down upon a serene and beautiful landscape. In a meadow near the river was a cluster of white lodges. To the west of the encampment, like a massive wall, extending into the distant north and disappearing in the far south, was the main range of the Rocky Mountains. Over the highest summits floated light, fleecy clouds, the beautiful snow-capped peaks of Rising Wolf and Going-to-the Sun standing sharp and clear against the deep blue sky.

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Far away over the plains in the east and enveloped in a bluish haze, were the Kato-yi-six (Sweet Pine Hills), [*1] resembling distant islands in the ocean. The smoke of many fires was rising from the lodges, bearing the sweet odour of burning cottonwood. Grazing horses dotted the green hillsides, and I met Indian boys riding bare-back and racing their ponies. Groups of Indians in brightly coloured clothing were variously occupied among the irregular rows of tipis. When I rode nearer I recognised the large painted-tipi of Chief Mad Wolf in the centre of the camp.

Clustered around Mad Wolf's were the lodges of O-mis-tai-po-kah, the head chief, Isso-ko-yi-kinni, White Grass, Ear Rings, Medicine Wolf, Bear Child, Drags-his-robe, Double Runner and Elk Chief. The sound of my approach brought forth Mad Wolf's daughter Strikes-on-both-sides. She looked very picturesque in a buckskin dress heavily beaded and a robe of soft-tanned fawn skin with beaded stripes. She wore small white shells in her ears and necklaces of elk teeth and deer bones. Her leggings and moccasins were beautifully decorated with coloured porcupine quills. She called to those within, that A-poi-a-kinni (Light Hair) had come back and laughingly said to me, "I see that you are still smiling." She took my hand and led me inside the lodge. At the back sat Mad Wolf. To his left were the priests-O-mis-tai-po-kah, the head chief, White Grass, a judge and medicine man, Isso-ko-yi-kinni, Stock-stchi, Medicine Wolf, Elk Chief, Bear Child, Ear Rings, and. Double Runner. To the right were Gives-to-the-Sun, wife of Mad Wolf, and Natokema, wife of O-mis-tai-po-kah, and other women.

Turning to the head chief, Mad Wolf said: "Because

[p. 78]

you are my friend, I request that you select a suitable name for my white son." O-mis-tai-po-kah bowed his head in silence.

Maka, near whom I sat, was an Indian of unusual appearance. He was thick-set and short in stature, with an enormous head, his heavy growth of hair resembling the mane of a lion. He was, however, full of drollery and good nature. There was something upon his mind, for frequently he looked at me, with eyes dancing with merriment, and he occasionally shook with laughter. He kept his joke to himself with difficulty, for several times he was on the point of telling, but changed his mind, when he looked at stern Mad Wolf. Finally he said to me in a. low voice, "I have a name which I will give you later." But this little episode did not escape Mad Wolf's keen ears and he turned upon him quickly, with such a piercing and reproving glance, that nothing further was heard of Maka's joke.

  

CEREMONIAL OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE.

Bear Child arose and with a forked stick, covered with sacred paint, selected a live coal from the fire and placed it in front of Mad Wolf. He took dried sweet grass from a small buckskin bag and, holding it aloft to command attention, and as a signal that he was ready to begin the ceremonial, placed it upon the hot coal. When the rising smoke filled the lodge with a pleasing fragrance, Mad Wolf began with seven songs, which were chanted in unison, each song being repeated four times. The first was to Napi (Sun Power, not referring to Old Man).

Mad Wolf led the chants with strong voice, swaying

[p. 79]

his body to and fro and marking time with raised finger, explaining to me that the Beaver Chief made this sign when giving instruction to Akaiyan, the founder of the Beaver Medicine.

1. "Behold Napi comes into the lodge.
     He is a strong Medicine Man.
     He came in.
     I see him."

Click to enlarge
MARKING TIME WITH FOREFINGER.

2. "The Heavens provide us with food.
     The Heavens are glad to behold us."

3. "The Earth loves us.
     The Earth is glad to hear us sing.
     The Earth provides us with food."

Mad Wolf ended this song with the gesture of sweeping his hands towards the ground.

4. Song to the "Prongs." (The prongs are sacred sticks painted red. They are forked, and are

[p. 80]

used to take hot coals from the fire in the burning of incense.)

Mad Wolf, O-mis-tai-po-kah and their wives, as the principals in the ceremonial, knelt beside the Bundle, and chanted in unison, while laying their hands upon the "prongs" held in the sweet smoke. Each in turn held a prong against his shoulder, in imitation of beavers carrying sticks, while at work building their

Click to enlarge
HOLDING THE "PRONGS" IN SWEET SMOKE.

lodge, and then, extending their arms together, with hands raised and parallel (the sign of the beaver lodge), they prayed together to the spirit of the beaver,

"Pity us! Grant us your wisdom and cunning that we may escape all dangers. May our medicine provide us with food. May all of us be blessed."

5. Two Beaver Songs.

"The Old Man, (Beaver Chief), is coming in.
  The Old Man has come in. [p. 81]
  He sits down beside his medicine.
  It is a very strong medicine."

"The Old Woman (Female Beaver) is coming in.
  The Old Woman has come in.
  She sits down and takes the medicine.
  It is a very strong medicine."

6. Buffalo Song.

During this chant Mad Wolf and O-mis-tai-po-kah with their wives knelt by the side of the sacred

Click to enlarge
MAKING THE SIGN OF THE BEAVER LODGE.

[paragraph continues] Bundle and with deep reverence slowly lifted it, singing the following in unison:

"I take hold of the sacred Buffalo.
  While I am walking, I walk slowly.
  I stop with my medicine.
  The ground where my medicine rests is sacred."

7. The seventh and last chant was a Buffalo song.

"When summer comes, He will come down from the Mountains."

Mad Wolf directed his wife to bring forth the Koto-ki-a-nukko (buffalo raw hides), 

[p. 82]

and turning to me explained that, during the ceremony which would follow, the priests would beat time on these hides with the rattles, in imitation of the way the beavers drummed by striking the water with their tails. Mad Wolf first chanted and then prayed over the buffalo

Click to enlarge
BRINGING OUT BUFFALO RAW HIDE.

hides with closed eyes, holding his right hand raised impressively with fingers closed and thumb pointing upwards, a sign used by the Beaver Chief. After the hides had been unrolled all chanted in unison,

"The Buffalo likes to live in the mountains during the autumn.
  He comes down from the mountains to the plains.
  The mountains are his medicine."

During this chant, Mad Wolf, O-mis-tai-po-kah and

[p. 83]

their wives held up their hands with the two index fingers curved towards each other (the others closed) in imitation of buffalo horns, the sign of the buffalo. The hides were spread on the ground in front of the priests during the chant:

"The Buffalo came down from the mountains.
  He lies down upon the ground."

Gives-to-the-Sun handed Mad Wolf an old medicine

Click to enlarge
MAKING BUFFALO SIGN.
 (Index fingers curved in imitation of buffalo horns.)

sack containing rattles. They were made by stretching raw hide over wicker frames, in shape like gourds, enclosing pebbles and having short handles. While the two women, Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema, knelt beside the sacred Bundle and raised it reverently, Mad Wolf took the rattles from the medicine sack. He distributed them among the Awa-wa-nukki (singers or priests) and, handing two to me, said: "You are now

[p. 84]

my son and it is proper for you to join with us in this ceremonial." He then chanted the two Crow songs:

1. "I fly high in the air.
     My medicine (power) is very strong.
     The wind is my medicine."

2. "The Buffalo is my medicine.
     He is a very strong medicine.
          The trees are my medicine.
     When I am among them I walk around my own medicine."

Click to enlarge
TAKING RATTLES FROM MEDICINE SACK.

The Rattle songs came next, all uniting in the song, "The rattles I hold are good." This was repeated four times. The priests then grasped the rattles and beat rhythmically upon the buffalo raw hide, singing in unison "I now take the rattles." I watched every movement Mad Wolf made and when he grasped the rattles and began beating, I did likewise and also joined vigorously

[p. 85]

in the chant. He had been watching my movements for, at the end of the song, he said, "I like the way you swing your rattles, I feel proud of my white son."

At this moment, a visiting chief from the Bloods raised his voice in prayer, saying,

"Great Spirit in the Sun! I am praying for my people that they may be able to have food and survive the coming winter. May all

Click to enlarge
MAKING THE ANTELOPE SIGN.
 (Imitating with their hands the movement of antelope running.)

of our children grow and have strong bodies. May they live long and be happy."

During this prayer, Mad Wolf and the entire assembly reverently bowed their heads, joining in an ejaculatory assent (Amen) when he had finished.

Mad Wolf started the Elk song, while the two women, Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema. imitated the actions of elk rubbing their horns against trees.

In the Moose song four men came forth imitating, with their heads, the movements of moose rubbing their horns.

[p. 86]

For the Antelope song Mad Wolf, O-mis-tai-po-kah and their wives chanted while making the antelope sign. Holding their hands closed, one above the other, they changed positions alternately with a quick graceful movement, in imitation of antelope running.

The songs were, at this point, interrupted by the wife of the Blood chief making a long prayer for her own tribe and for the people among whom she was visiting.

Mad Wolf now brought forth the sacred Pipe wrapped in red flannel. Before starting, he explained to me that the ceremonial of the Pipe included two Pipe songs and three Pipe Dancing songs. They chanted the first two, while unrolling the Pipe, one while untying the strings, and one while removing the cover. Mad Wolf, while seated, led the first Pipe song, chanting the words,

"Our father, the Sun! It is now time you were rising.
  I want to dance with you."

Mad Wolf then arose and, drawing his blanket around him, held the Pipe in its red cover, while the entire assembly united in chanting the first Pipe Dancing song. Mad Wolf danced, blowing his medicine whistle and circling the fire in the same direction the sun moves through the heavens. O-mis-tai-po-kah took the Pipe for the second Dancing song, and White Grass, the medicine-man, for the third, turning from right to left as he danced around the fire. While Mad Wolf unrolled the Pipe he gave the cry of the beaver and imitated the actions of a swimming beaver. O-mis-tai-po-kah arose and, blowing his medicine whistle, danced around the fire with a slow, graceful step. Taking the Pipe from Mad Wolf, he held it before him, while the priests sang and heat vigorously with their rattles.

[p. 87]

O-mis-tai-po-kah then danced, holding the Pipe beneath his blanket and finished by returning it to Mad Wolf, who held it up towards the north, south, east and west. Finally, placing it in the sweet smoke of the incense, he bowed his head and prayed to the Great Spirit in

Click to enlarge
"HOLDING THE PIPE IN THE SWEET SMOKE,
 MAD WOLF BOWED HIS HEAD AND PRAYED
 TO THE SUN."

the Sun for the recovery of the sick. The Root Digger was then taken from the Bundle with the chant,

"I am digging the sacred Turnip."

[paragraph continues] The two women Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema placed their hands upon it and prayed, holding it in position for digging.

The ordinary root-digger is a wooden stick, about two feet long, with a sharpened point, in common use by Indian women for digging roots. The sacred Root Digger is similar, but is painted with red paint and figures prominently in the sacred Bundles of the Sun-dance

[p. 88]

and Beaver Medicine. The Blackfeet believe that, according to their tradition, it was originally brought to them by the Indian maiden, who was loved by Morning Star, and was taken by him to live in the home of the Sun. She was compelled by the Sun God to return to earth and her tribe, because of her disobedience to his commands, in digging up the sacred Turnip, and in gazing down at her people on the earth through the hole she had made in the sky.

The sacred women, Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema, seated beside the Beaver Bundle, were distinguished from the other women by the colour of their blankets, which were decorated with red paint. They had both made the vow for the Sun-dance, and were held in high honour by the Indians. To be eligible as sacred women they were required to have led perfectly pure lives before the entire tribe, and they must also be known for their kindness of heart towards everyone.

The time had now come for the opening of the Beaver Bundle. The priests sang a lively chant called the "Song of the Buffalo Bull":

"The head chief is looking for something to hook that may help him."

The two sacred women knelt beside the Bundle, imitating the actions of the buffalo and representing the buffalo bull, or chief, slowly approaching the Beaver Bundle. He stopped three times before reaching it. At the fourth time, the women imitated the Buffalo Chief, hooking at the Bundle with his horns. Mad Wolf chanted the Hurrying song and then the String song, as the women untied the strings and removed the outside cover, revealing a beautiful beaver skin called in their ceremonial "His Robe." The song was changed to a solemn chant led by Mad Wolf, while

[p. 89]

the sacred women slowly unrolled the beaver skin, uncovering the many skins of the birds and animals from the plains and mountains.

It is difficult for one of the white race to realise the deep solemnity with which the Indians opened the sacred Bundle. To them it was a moment of deepest reverence and religious feeling.

Click to enlarge
OPENING THE BEAVER BUNDLE.

Mad Wolf, taking the beaver skin reverently held it up while chanting:

"My medicine (Beaver) says, 'when I go out from the lodge and see an enemy, I dive down into the water where no one can harm me. '"

He then moved the beaver skin in imitation of the animal's movements while swimming, and suddenly blew shrilly upon the medicine whistle, to represent the Beaver's alarm when seeing an enemy and diving out of sight. Mad Wolf and the priests joined in a Beaver song accompanied by the beating of rattles. The sacred

[p. 90]

women knelt by the side of the Bundle, making mysterious motions with their hands, in imitation of the Beaver swimming and working and building his lodge, gracefully swaying their bodies in time with the rhythmical beating. Each in turn took the Beaver

Click to enlarge
WOMEN PRAYING WHILE HOLDING ROOT DIGGER.

[paragraph continues] Skin and with bowed head reverently held it to her breast, praying to the spirit of the Beaver:

"I take you, my child, in order that my children and relatives may be free from sickness."

Two women arose and knelt with Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema in front of the Medicine Bundle. The four women together imitated a beaver's movements. They covered their heads with blankets to represent the beaver hidden in his lodge, all the time moving their bodies in time with the chanting of the

[p. 91]

priests and the rhythmical beating. Then they came forth to work on their beaver-dams, the women representing beavers rising to the surface by uncovering their heads, and holding sticks in their mouths like beavers carrying branches, imitating also the swimming motions with their hands. Suddenly the beavers dived under the water, and at this point Mad Wolf slowly lifted the sacred Beaver Skin, while the four dancers

Click to enlarge
WOMEN PRAYING WHILE HOLDING BEAVER SKIN.

continued their mysterious and symbolic movements. Then the dancers imitated the beavers coming to the surface and swimming across the river. They went out for a dance upon the shore, sitting upright, wiping their faces with their hands, and looking carefully in all directions after the manner of beavers guarding against danger. The four women arose and stood in single file, with Gives-to-the-Sun at the head of the line as the wife of the Beaver Chief. They danced around the fire with their hands crossed upon their breasts, turning to

[p. 92]

and fro and swaying their bodies in time with the chanting of the priests. Mad Wolf handed the Beaver Skin to Gives-to-the-Sun. The singing and drumming became louder as the women circled the fire, imitating the call of the beaver. Gives-to-the-Sun held the Beaver Skin beneath her robe making it appear to swim around her waist and then around her neck. After dancing once around the fire, she handed the Beaver Skin to the woman next in line, saying:

"I do not give you away, my child (the beaver), because I am tired of you, but because the son of this woman is sick and she prays that he might be restored to health."

The woman, receiving the sacred skin, was careful not to let it fall, lest it bring misfortune, and prayed,

"I take you, my child (the beaver) that my husband and children might be free from sickness and that they may live to be old."

[paragraph continues] She danced once around the fire with the skin across her shoulders. This part was continued, until each one of the four women had taken the Beaver Skin in turn.

Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema held up two snow-white winter skins of the weasel. They prayed to the spirit of this animal for its skill in hunting, and providing food. The priests chanted the Weasel song, while Mad Wolf, taking one of the skins, held it to his breast, praying for a blessing and then, rising, danced around the fire, blowing at intervals upon his medicine whistle to represent the weasel's cry and imitating its movements when hunting for food. O-mis-tai-po-kah, the head chief, with a gesture of authority, held the snow white skin aloft, so that all within the lodge could see. There was a deep silence as he looked fixedly at me, saying impressively,

[p. 93]

"This is the skin of the A-pe-ech-eken (White Weasel Moccasin), one of the animals belonging to the Beaver Bundle. After this sacred animal we now name you. We think you resemble this animal because your hair is light and your eyes are blue. We pray that this name may bring to you long life and good fortune."

Mad Wolf, having expressed his approval of the name, moved to the left, White Grass, the medicine man, taking the leader's seat. The face of White Grass was painted a dark red. Upon the centre of his forehead

Click to enlarge
WOMEN PRAYING WHILE HOLDING TWO WHITE-WEASEL SKINS.

a black spot represented a thunderbolt, from which extended on both sides yellow zig-zags of lightning. He prayed:

"Great Spirit, bless us all, men, women, and children.
  Sacred Medicine Bundle, help us to live a straight life.
  Sacred Medicine Pipe, bless us, also the rivers, mountains, prairies, animals, and birds.
  Mother Earth, provide for us until we die."

After the prayer, White Grass brought forth the sacred red paint, which he kneaded with his hands, his

[p. 94]

body meanwhile swaying to and fro. First he painted Mad Wolf and then O-mis-tai-po-kah; in like manner the priests, Isso-ko-yi-kinni, Stock-stchi, Bear Child and Ear Rings. I was seated next to Ear Rings and when my turn came, Mad Wolf said, "Here comes my white son." White Grass then signed to me to approach. Going before him, I knelt while he placed the sacred

Click to enlarge
PREPARING THE SACRED RED PAINT.

paint upon my forehead, chin and hands, the places where the beaver rubs himself with his paws. A beaver song was started by Mad Wolf and O-mis-tai-po-kah, in which all joined, accompanied by the beating of rattles.

After the song, White Grass, addressing me, said impressively,

"This lodge is a sacred place, and the ceremonial, in which we

[p. 95]

have painted you, is also sacred. We pray that you may never be sick."

White Grass then pointed along the ground towards my seat, a sign that he had finished. Bear Child arose and taking the prongs, picked out a live coal from the embers and laid it in front of O-mis-tai-po-kah, the head chief. Placing dried sweet grass upon the coal and holding both hands in the rising smoke, he prayed:--

"My father, Great Sun Chief, who gives us light, look down in favour upon this young man whom we have taken into our tribe. Grant that his relatives and all his friends may have a good life. Protect him day and night from all harm, that he may live long, and return many summers to visit his Indian brothers."

The formal act of naming his white son and making him a member of the tribe having been completed, Mad Wolf returned to his seat beside the sacred Bundle to continue the ceremonial.

It required a wonderful feat of memory to conduct accurately the Beaver ceremonial, with its great number of songs, prayers, and dances, continuing from early morning until after sunset. Every song, prayer and dance must be performed correctly. If any mistakes are made, it is believed that misfortune will surely follow. One instance of the care taken to perform accurately every detail of the ceremonial occurred in the "Dance of the Lynx." Mad Wolf brought from the Bundle the decorated tail of a lynx. It was handed to O-mis-tai-po-kah, who held it aloft while all sang, accompanied by the beating of rattles. Gives-to-the Sun stood a stick, painted red, upon the ground to represent a tree. Natokema took the tail and imitated the movements of a lynx hunting squirrels. First, it walked around and then sat down, looking up at the tree. Several times it ran towards the tree, as if in

[p. 96]

pursuit of a squirrel, but each time it returned and sat down. Finally, it made a quick dash for the tree, when Natokema carried the tail rapidly up one side and down the other. At this point, O-mis-tai-po-kah raised his hand and stopped the service. The medicine women were astonished. Everyone in the lodge was silent. The chief announced that the ceremonial had not been conducted correctly. The rhythmic drumming and singing began again, as the old chief took the tail. He represented the lynx as making several feints, and then ran suddenly to the tree, just as the women had done. But O-mis-tai-po-kah made it climb more slowly and held it for some time on top, where it had a dance, keeping time with the singing. He then brought it slowly down the other side, clambering little by little as a lynx would do, pausing frequently to look around and listen, making sure that all was well. It finally reached the ground, and, scampering away, was returned to the medicine bundle.

Mad Wolf brought forth two badger skins, taking them out backwards like badgers emerging from their holes. He then imitated the timid actions of the badger, which is naturally a great coward. He moved the skins this way and that, like a badger trying to get away. Suddenly he turned the skins around as if the badger was about to attack but instead it became frightened and ran back into its hole.

During the song of the Wild Goose, Mad Wolf stopped for an instant and, bowing his head, closed his eyes. The entire assembly waited "in complete silence. Suddenly Mad Wolf looked directly at me, saying, "There is my son, A-pe-ech-eken. I must ask him to continue the ceremony in my place." This was intended as a humorous diversion. The Indians enjoyed the unusual

[p. 97]

occurrence. The silence was thus relieved, and Mad Wolf soon continued the service.

The head of a mallard duck was next taken out. Mad Wolf started a chant, in which both men and women joined, accompanied by the rattles. Elk Chief arose and drawing his blanket around him, circled around the lodge, imitating the movements of a duck. From across the lodge Soft Woman arose. Both danced towards each other until they met and together circled the fire, their movements representing the swimming and flying of a duck. Soft Woman held up her right hand, swaying her body from one side to the other, while Elk Chief spread out both his arms with hands extended in imitation of a duck flying. This dance was very interesting because of the graceful movements and steps of the two performers.

A woman entered the lodge. Her dishevelled hair hid her face and her blanket was closely drawn around her. She looked pale and emaciated, from fasting and her arms were bleeding, having been slashed with a knife. One of her children had died and she was in mourning. She was indeed a sad and forlorn-looking creature. She remained standing before the assembled company until Mad Wolf took a handful of sage and purified her, praying, that she might begin a new and happier life. She then withdrew as silently as she had come.

Four Otter songs were sung and then the Mink song. After these were the following Women songs, Prairie Dog, Lizard, Sitting and Tobacco. It was now time to fill the sacred Pipe. Mad Wolf held the pipe bowl close to the tobacco. He slowly picked up the stone used as a stopper and placed it in the bowl, leading a chant in which all joined:

"The Sun beholds the smoke grow larger and larger."

[p. 98]

Picking up the pipe and tobacco he said,

"The heavens provide us with seeds of the tobacco."

Holding the tobacco up, he chanted,

"I drop the seeds as I go along."

He filled the pipe and prayed,

"The place where I sit is sacred."

Then, holding up the pipe with the bowl pointed towards himself, he chanted:

"Sacred Person! behold I am still alive.
  I ask the spirit of the wild geese to smoke with me,
  The first that came into this country."

"I know of no medicine so strong as my smoke."

While going through this ceremonial with the pipe, the bowl became loose and fearing that it might fall, which would be an ill omen, Mad Wolf removed it. He held up the stem and placing his right hand upon his breast gazed intently at the sun and chanted:

"Sacred Spirit in the Sun, it has been a long time since you have smoked with me."

He arose and danced, holding up the sacred Pipe and blowing upon his medicine whistle. Stock-stchi followed and the women also joined, all dancing in single file around the fire, following the direction of the sun's course through the heavens. After the dance was finished Mad Wolf remarked that his Pipe was very old, having been handed down through many generations.

When he came to the skin of the red headed woodpecker, Mad Wolf said it had three songs. In the beginning, when the birds gave their songs to the Beaver Medicine, the woodpecker offered three. Mad Wolf chanted the songs, holding the skin of the woodpecker in his right hand and beating time with the

[p. 99]

rattles with his left. In closing, he held both the skin and rattles over his head and gave the call of the woodpecker.

For the Buffalo dance, Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema arose, wearing head dresses having horns, in imitation of buffalo cows. Mad Wolf handed to Gives-to-the-Sun a string of buffalo horns which had been added to the Beaver Bundle as the symbol of the buffalo by the chief, who secured the Buffalo Tipi from the Sacred Buffalo Bull. The Indians found both interest and amusement in this dance, because it represented the mating of buffalo by women choosing their men. Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema knelt before the Beaver Bundle with heads lowered, making motions of hooking the ground in imitation of buffalo cows digging wallows in the autumn. They pawed the ground and bellowed, simulating buffalo throwing dirt and catching it upon their backs, then shaking themselves and making the dust rise into the air.

Gives-to-the-Sun and Natokema then danced, imitating the capers of mating buffaloes. They stood before their mates pawing the ground and hooking at them with their horns. Mad Wolf and O-mis-tai-po-kah then joined in the dance. The men followed the women around the fire like buffalo bulls following cows. They danced in pairs until Gives-to-the-Sun threw the hoofs to Snake Woman. All then sat down and, amid laughter, Snake Woman danced in front of Medicine Wolf, her relative. When Medicine Wolf arose and joined her, she threw the hoofs to Strikes-on-both-sides, who came gracefully across the lodge and danced before me. While my Indian sister stood there, dancing with quick, short steps and swaying her body in time with the singing and the beating of rattles, I

[p. 100]

heard them calling, "Get up! A-pe-ech-eken you are a chief now and should enter the dance." Grasping the string of buffalo hoofs lying before me I danced, following Strikes-on-both-sides around the fire, swaying my body, turning, holding my feet together and bending at the knees. I heard many shrill war cries from both men and women and exclamations of "Good boy, A-pe-ech-eken!" I stopped at intervals to mimic the call of the buffalo and to imitate its movements, digging wallows, kicking, hooking, pawing the ground and throwing dust. When Strikes-on-both-sides brought our dance to a close I completed the circle and throwing the hoofs to Bear Child's wife, sat down.

Last of all came the Dog dance. Its lively air and fast time made it the most popular of the Beaver Medicine dances. It is a woman's dance, in which all the women within the lodge are expected to join, the men urging them on, singing their loudest and beating time with the rattles. The women entered into the Dog dance with spirit and dash, laughing merrily and joking with each other.

The wife of Stock-stchi, who was not dancing, sat with her little daughter of about twelve years, both intently watching. The dance was just at its height and the little girl's eyes were sparkling with excitement, when her mother, snatching off her own blanket, threw it over the shoulders of the little girl and pushed her into the circle. She looked very pretty with her shining black hair falling over her shoulders, in striking contrast with the brilliant scarlet of her squaw dress, which was beautifully fringed and decorated with beads. Her leggings were also beaded, and around her waist was a miniature squaw belt, closely studded with shining brass-headed tacks. At first she was abashed and

[p. 101]

cast her eyes demurely downward, but soon forgot herself and entered into the dance with animation, her lithe body swaying to and fro, and her small moccasined feet keeping perfect time to the beating of the rattles. As the singers gradually quickened the time, the steps of the dancers grew faster and faster, until they were tired out and ceased, saying they could

Click to enlarge
"AFTER THE CEREMONIAL ALL PARTOOK OF A FEAST."

dance no longer. When the dance was at its height, I noticed two old white-haired women having a dance of their own outside the lodge. They were in mourning and so could not enter the main dance, but they could not resist the call of the lively Dog dance. They were surrounded by a circle of young people, who were urging them on and seemed more interested in their performance than in the main dance.

The sun had already set and the Indians began

[p. 102]

preparations for returning to their lodges, bringing in the horses, changing their beautifully decorated clothes and beaded dance moccasins for those of everyday use. But, before they separated, all partook of a feast of sarvis berry stew. It had a delicate, sweet flavour and was a very popular dish. The men were always served first. I noticed, however, that but few of them ate their share. Many children were brought to the ceremonials and the food generally ran short. There was a custom that any man, feeling generously inclined, would call out the name of a woman. His plate with the remaining food was passed to her. If she had children she always shared it with them. Amid a general calling of names by the men and changing of plates, I requested that mine be passed to Morning Plume's wife, who had many mouths to feed. It was eagerly seized, divided into several portions and rapidly disappeared.

While the rest were feasting, I saw Awunna, a kindhearted old priest and doctor, gathering together a supply of food. Before tasting anything himself, he carried it to his wife, E-kit-o-waki, one of the old women who had been dancing outside the lodge. They were an interesting couple. He always seemed thoughtful of others and in a good humour, while E-kit-o-waki, his wife, was still full of fun and life. Before the ceremonial began I saw Awunna draw her to one side and gently placing his hands upon her, uttered a prayer giving her his blessing. This was because she was about to enter Bear Child's lodge to doctor a sick child.

With the end of the service and the closing day, the Indians separated and the entire camp subsided into quietness, broken occasionally by a crying child in one of the lodges, or the dismal howling of distant prairie wolves and the answering yelps of the Indian dogs.

Footnotes

^77:1 Called Sweet Grass Hills by the Whites.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

LEGEND OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE

Evening in Mad Wolf's lodge.--His fatherly talk.--He tells the origin of the Beaver Medicine.--In the legend, Nopatsis, jealous of Akaiyan his younger brother, leaves him to die on a lonely island.--The chief of the Beavers rescues him and keeps him all winter in the lodge of the Beavers.--Teaches him the ceremonial of the Beaver Medicine and the make-up of the Beaver Bundle, and bestows upon him supernatural power.--His youngest child, Little Beaver, returns with Akaiyan to the Blackfoot camp to help in teaching the people.--He creates the Beaver Medicine, to which many birds and animals contribute their power.

RETURNING to Mad Wolf's lodge I found him reclining upon his blankets, resting after the strain of the services. There was a long silence, which I did not venture to break, nor to disturb him, while smoking with half-closed eyes. Meanwhile the deepening twilight, which in a northern latitude comes quickly after sunset, but lingers, had settled over prairie and camp. As I looked upon the sacred Beaver Bundle, lying by his side in the flickering light of the small fire, I thought of their mysterious power over the Indian mind and life, and of the strange superstitions centred about them, which had been handed down through many generations. I was aroused from my reverie by Mad Wolf knocking the ashes from his pipe. He looked at me intently for a few moments. His manner was earnest and dignified, and as he sat erect, his long black hair fell loosely over his shoulders. He

[p. 104]

answered my inquiring look towards the Medicine Bundle by signing to me that I should grasp one end of the rope. We together removed the cover that hid it from view. He allowed me to gaze upon the sacred Bundle for a moment, when the robe was solemnly replaced. He then began to speak in a low voice, with eyes half closed, as if gazing into the far distance, saying:

"When I was a young man, I too became interested in the mysteries of the medicines, which have been taught to me by old Indians, and what they have told me I know to be true. I have never before explained those mysteries to white men, because I have always been afraid to trust them. I am now willing to have you repeat these to the white race, because I know that you will speak the truth and because I feel toward you as a father to his son. When I bought the Beaver Medicine from O-mis-tai-po-kah, there came with it a very old pipe, which now lies by its side. I will not smoke this pipe for it brings bad luck. When O-mis-tai-po-kah smoked it his children began to die, so I preserve it only as a relic. There was a time when I had many relics. If I had them now I would give them to you, but they are gone."

He handed me the two rattles I had used in the ceremonial and a small buckskin sack, saying,

"In it are some of the original seeds of the tobacco given to us by the beavers. They were secured many years ago by Akaiyan, the man who lived all winter in the lodge with the chief Beaver and brought back with him the Beaver Medicine. I will relate to you the story as it has been handed down from our ancestors. What I will tell you happened long ago, when our people made all of their tools and weapons from stone, and when they used dogs instead of horses for beasts of burden."

  

THE ORIGIN OF THE BEAVER MEDICINE

"In those days there were two orphan brothers. The younger, named Akaiyan (Old Robe), lived with his brother Nopatsis, who was married to a woman with an evil heart. This woman disliked Akaiyan and continually urged her husband to cast him off. One day

[p. 105]

when Nopatsis came home, he found his wife with her clothes torn and her body lacerated. She explained that, during his absence, Akaiyan had treated her brutally. Nopatsis said nothing to his younger brother, but planned how he might be rid of him for ever. It was midsummer, the time when the ducks and geese dropped their feathers. He proposed to Akaiyan that they should go together to an island in a large lake and said, 'At this time there will be many ducks and geese there, and we can gather the feathers they have dropped to be used for arrows.' When the brothers came to the lake they built a 'skatstan' (raft), binding together logs with buffalo raw-hide and then floated on it to an island, far out in the lake. As they walked along the shores of this island looking for feathers, Akaiyan wandered off alone. He was returning with his arms full, when he beheld his brother out on the lake, going towards the shore of the mainland. He implored Nopatsis not to abandon him to perish on the lonely island. But his brother only called back, that he deserved no pity because of his brutal treatment of his sister-in-law. Akaiyan besought him to return, solemnly declaring before the Sun that he had not injured her. But Nopatsis replied heartlessly, 'You can live alone on the island all winter. In the spring, when the ice melts in the lake, I will return to gather your bones.' Akaiyan sat down and wept. He thought his time had come to die. Then he called upon the animals and the under-water spirits for assistance. He also prayed to the Sun, Moon and Stars, saying,

'Haiyu! Mistapixit Mekape Natotsichpi!'
 Behold, O Sun! I cast away whatever of bad I have done.'
 'Kokumekis! Kokatosix Kummokit Spummokit!'
 'O Moon! O Stars! pity me! Give me strength!

[p. 106]

"After this prayer Akaiyan felt relieved and strengthened. He walked around the island and found a few branches, with which he made a shelter. He also

Click to enlarge
BEAVER DAM.
 (Home of a Beaver Family.)

gathered many loose feathers, piling them up and making a bed that fitted his body so well that he slept warmly on the coldest nights. He killed many ducks

[p. 107]

and geese before their time for leaving the island to fly south, shooting the wild ones with his arrows and striking the tame ones upon the head with long sticks. He kept some for his winter food, but he skinned others and made a warm robe for himself by binding the skins together with alder bark.

"One day, when he discovered a beaver lodge, he lay

Click to enlarge
BEAVER BUNDLE OF MAD WOLF.
 (It lies at the foot of tripod.)

for a long time watching it and weeping to himself, because he had been abandoned. Finally, a little beaver came from the lodge, and said to him, 'My father wants you to come into his lodge.' Akaiyan followed the little beaver into the lodge, where he saw a big beaver with his wife and family seated around him. This beaver was white from the snows of many

[p. 108]

winters, and so large that Akaiyan knew he must be the chief of all the beavers. The Beaver Chief bade him be seated, and asked him why he was living alone on the island. Akaiyan told him how cruelly and unjustly he had been treated and left alone to die. The Beaver Chief pitied Akaiyan and counselled with him, saying, 'My son, the time will soon come when we will close up our lodge for the winter. The lake will freeze over and we cannot come out again for seven moons, until the warm winds of spring will break up the ice. Remain in our lodge while the snows are deep. We will teach you many wonderful things and, when you return again, you can take knowledge with you, that will be of great value to your people.' The beavers were so hospitable, Akaiyan decided to remain with them. He took with him into the beaver lodge many ducks and geese for food and his bird-skin robe to keep him warm. They closed their lodge before it became cold, leaving a hole for air at the top. During the coldest days the beavers kept Akaiyan warm by lying close to him and placing their tails across his body. He made friends with all of them, but he liked the youngest and smallest beaver best of all. He was the cleverest as well as the favourite child of the Beaver Chief. Akaiyan learned their habits and manner of living. They taught him the names of the herbs and roots, which we still use for the curing of the people. They showed him also the different paints, and explained their use, saying, 'If you should use these, they will bring to your people good luck and will ward off sickness and death.' They gave him the seeds of the tobacco (origin of tobacco), and taught him how they should be planted with songs and prayers. They made scratches with their

[p. 109]

claws on the smooth walls of the lodge to mark the days, and when the days completed a moon they marked the moons with sticks. He witnessed many dances belonging to their medicines, and listened carefully to the songs and prayers. The Beaver Chief and his wife (Wise Old Woman) taught him the prayers and songs of their medicine and the dances that belonged to them, and said, 'Whenever any of your people are sick, or dying, if you will give this ceremonial, they will be restored to health.' He noticed that the beavers never ate during the ceremonial, and that they beat time for the dances with their tails, always stopping when they heard any suspicious noise, just as they do when they are at work. They told him that they counted seven moons from the time when the leaves fall before they prepared to open their lodge in the spring. When they heard the booming of the ice breaking in the lake, they knew it would soon be time to leave their winter home.

"Little Beaver told Akaiyan that, before he parted with them, his father, the Beaver Chief, would offer him a present and would allow him to choose anything within the lodge. Little Beaver also advised him, saying, 'When my father asks you for your choice, say that you will take your little brother. He will not be willing to part with me, for he prizes me above everything he owns. He will ask you four times to choose something else, but take me with you, for I will have more power to help you than any of the others.'

"The ducks and geese were flying north, when the beavers finally opened their lodge for the summer, and the Beaver Chief said to Akaiyan, 'You will soon leave us now, because it is time for your older brother to return. But, before you start, I will allow you to

[p. 110]

choose anything in my lodge to take away with you.' Then Akaiyan, remembering the advice of Little Beaver, asked for his youngest child. The Beaver Chief made many excuses and endeavoured to persuade him to take something else, but Akaiyan would have no other gift. After the fourth trial, the Beaver Chief said, 'My son, you show your wisdom in selecting your little brother to go with you. I am sorry to part with him, because he is the best worker and the wisest of my children, but, because of my promise, I now give him to you.'

"The Beaver Chief also told Akaiyan that, when he returned to his people, he should make a sacred Bundle similar to the one he saw them using in their ceremonial. He also taught him the songs and prayers and dances that belonged to the Bundle and informed him that, if any of the people were sick, or dying and a relative would make a vow to the Beaver Medicine, the sick would be restored to health.

"One evening, when the Beaver Chief returned from his cutting, he said to Akaiyan, 'My son, remain in hiding and do not show yourself. To-day, when I was among the trees on the main shore, I saw your brother's camp.' The next day Akaiyan, watching from the beaver lodge, saw Nopatsis coming to the island on the raft. He saw him land and walk along the shore hunting for his bones. Then Akaiyan ran, with Little Beaver under his arm and took possession of the raft. He was far out in the big lake before Nopatsis saw him, He at once realised that his younger brother had secured power superior to his own and had become a great medicine man.

"Akaiyan now returned with Little Beaver to the

[p. 111]

tribal camp. He went at once to the head chief's lodge and told his story. All the people received him with the greatest honour, when they heard of the wisdom and power that had been given him by the Beavers. Akaiyan gathered together a Beaver Bundle as the Beaver Chief had directed. He and Little Beaver had remained all winter in the camp, teaching the people the songs, prayers and dances given him by the beavers. When Spring came, Akaiyan invited all of the animals to add their power to the Beaver Medicine. Many birds and animals of the prairies and mountains came, offering their skins and taught him their songs, prayers and dances to accompany their skins, just as the beavers had done. The Elk and his wife each contributed a song and dance, also the Moose and his wife. The Woodpecker gave three songs with his dance. The Frog alone of all the animals could neither dance nor sing, and it is for this reason he is not represented in the Beaver Bundle. The Turtle could not dance and had no song, but is represented in the Bundle, because he was wise and borrowed one from the Lizard, who owned two songs.

"In the following spring Akaiyan returned to the island with Little Beaver to visit the beaver lodge. He saw his brother's bones on the shore and knew the beavers had not helped him. The Beaver Chief welcomed Akaiyan warmly and when he gave back Little Beaver to his father, the old chief was so grateful that he presented him with a sacred pipe, teaching him also the songs, prayers and dances that belonged to it. When Akaiyan returned again to the Indian camp he added this pipe to the Beaver Bundle. Every spring Akaiyan went to visit his friends, the beavers, and each time the

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Beaver Chief gave him something to add to the Beaver Bundle, until it reached the size it has to-day. Akaiyan continued to lead the Beaver ceremonial as long as he lived and was known as a great medicine man. When he died, the ceremonial was continued by his son, and has been handed down ever since."

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN GOAT HUNT

The St. Mary's Lakes.--Magnificent mountain scenery.--My mountain camp--Home of the mountain sheep and goat.--Stalking a herd of five goats.--An exciting climb.--One goat killed.--Pursuit of a wounded goat.--Laborious task of skinning a goat on a dangerous ledge.--A mountain storm.--The back trail.--Ideal camp on the prairie.--Return to Mad Wolf's winter home on Cutbank River.

EARLY on a clear October morning, when the air was peculiarly exhilarating, I threw the "diamond hitch" upon my pack, taking care that the ropes were taut throughout, and headed north-west for the St. Mary's Lakes. The ride across the plains seemed short, for my saddle horse was in fine condition, after his long rest, and Baldy, my pack horse, followed readily.

From the crest of St. Mary's Ridge (the divide running east and west), I saw a beautiful lake country spread out before me, and, towards the west, the magnificent snowy peaks "Almost-a-Dog," "Citadel," "Four Bears," "Little Chief," "Red Eagle," and "Going-to-the-Sun"; while a host of other peaks continued the imposing procession, until they lost themselves in the blue sky of both northern and southern horizons.

Amid such magnificent surroundings, mounted upon my own saddle horse, and followed by Baldy carrying all my possessions, I experienced a delightful feeling

[p. 114]

of independence and exhilaration, which only those who have had a similar experience can fully appreciate. Having crossed the ridge, I rode through rich

Click to enlarge
MY ROCKY MOUNTAIN OUTFIT.

meadows of long bunch grass along the shore of upper St. Mary's Lake. After climbing well up on the side of "Goat Mountain," where the trail became rough and dangerous, I approached the towering and inaccessible

[p. 115]

peak of Going-to-the-Sun. It is so called because of the large glacier that lies just under its summit. In winter, it is an unbroken expanse of ice and snow, but, under the melting of the midsummer sun, it takes the outline of a turbaned head, facing the south-west. It is more correctly named by the Indians, "Looking-towards-the-setting-Sun." After sunset I came to Baring's Creek in the dense forest, a large swift stream roaring and plunging down towards the lake. Following the stream, I climbed rapidly upwards, passing many beautiful falls. Near nightfall, I passed from the forest into a large basin. It was surrounded by lofty and jagged peaks, which looked dark and gloomy in the fading twilight. My lodge was pitched at the edge of the forest, on the grassy shore of a beautiful lake, whose waters, fed by the surrounding glaciers, were clear as crystal and cold as ice. The falls of Baring's Creek, not far distant, sent forth a constant roar. Soon the moon rose over the summit of Red Eagle, transforming the scene into one of enchanting and fairy-like beauty. In the clear atmosphere of the high altitude the moonlight was intensely bright, flooding the basin with its silvery light, illuminating the glaciers and snowfields, the peaks and pinnacles, towering above the camp, and making visible the contrasting darkness of the gorge beneath.

Upon waking the next morning, and while still under my blankets, I looked across the gorge and up at the high ledges of Going-to-the-Sun, fully expecting to see a goat, or a mountain sheep gazing down at my camp. The clouds were lifting along the mountains, and the morning mists were fast dissolving before the warm rays of the sun. After breakfast, I saddled Baldy, my sure-footed pack horse, and, with my rifle,

[p. 116]

started up the basin, watching carefully through my glasses for goats and sheep on the rock shelves, high on the side of Going-to-the-Sun.

At the head of the basin the climbing became so rough and difficult, that I picketed my horse in a convenient place and continued afoot. Many beautiful flowers were blooming by the side of snow-drifts, and I passed through patches of huckleberries of very large size and delicious flavour. At noon I stopped for lunch beside a noisy little stream flowing from beneath a large snow-drift. The day was warm and bright, and the view from my lofty position magnificent. To the north rose the twin peaks of Mt. Siyeh (Mad Wolf), also Mt. Allen and Mt. Grinnell. After the long and fatiguing climb it was a luxury to lie in the warm sun. Several times I was startled by large masses of ice, crashing over precipices with a thundering roar, having been detached by the sun's rays from the glacier high above me.

From behind a clump of gnarled and twisted pines, I looked carefully through my glasses for fresh tracks of sheep and goats in the snow, and examined their well-worn trails on the mountain opposite. The width and depth of many of these trails indicate the large numbers of game formerly inhabiting these mountains. The constant tread of their hoofs through many ages has worn deep paths in the solid granite. As long as the buffalo and antelope were in vast numbers upon the plains and easy of capture, supplying almost all the wants of the Indians, mountain sheep and goats were hunted but little, and their numbers were limited only by the food supply.

In the Northern Rockies, the mountain goat is to be found only among the most inaccessible peaks.

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] Ordinarily he must be approached from beneath. He is generally found either standing on the edge of a high precipice, or lying upon one of the narrow shelves, or ledges, so numerous among the higher summits. From his lofty perch, he commands a view of the mountain side beneath him, and, if he detects the hunter's pursuit, quickly disappears from sight, or reach. While the "big horn," or mountain sheep, is more keen of scent and sight, the almost inaccessible haunts of the goat make his hunting more difficult and dangerous, and account for the value of his head as a hunter's trophy.

It was now growing so late in the afternoon, that I was fast losing hope of seeing any game that day. After a final examination through my glasses of the side of Goat Mountain, I turned them upon the mountain at the end of the basin. Far up on its slope there was a herd of five goats with fur as white as snow. Had it not been for their jet black horns it would have been impossible to distinguish them from the snow-bank across which they were rapidly moving. Having crossed the summit at the head of the basin, they were headed for a grassy knoll high up on the side of Going-to-the-Sun, and there was a chance that they might delay to feed. My only hope of getting within rifle-shot was to reach the knoll first and to lie in ambush. I waited until they were hidden from view by an intervening shoulder of the mountain. Crawling from my ambush, I climbed with all my strength. The goats were travelling rapidly, and, if I had correctly estimated their course, it would take them but a short time to reach the knoll. Although speed was necessary, I had to take into account that, if I lost my wind, and had to shoot in an exhausted condition, there would be small chance

[p. 118]

of hitting them. When I reached the knoll, I hid behind a thick patch of grass. Before I had time to get my rifle in position, the head of a goat appeared above the edge of the slope. He took a bite of grass and then stepped into full view. I carefully raised my rifle and cocked it, but the click attracted his attention. He stopped and gazed suspiciously towards me. I lay perfectly still, which apparently satisfied him, for he lowered his head and continued feeding. Then I fired, hitting him directly behind the shoulder, and gave another shot to a large billy which was following, seriously wounding him.

By this time, the first goat had struggled to a snowdrift, where I killed him. In the meantime the wounded billy and a nanny, with her two kids, had disappeared. It did not seem possible that the billy could go far. I started in pursuit, climbing with difficulty through the deep snow. I came upon the nanny with her two kids standing within short range at the edge of a precipice. The kids were beautiful little animals, and though large enough to care for themselves, I had not the heart to shoot them or their mother. I left them to hunt for the tracks of the large billy. While I was following his trail, he started for a precipitous part of the mountain, where I feared I might lose him, for wounded goats frequently go off to die in such inaccessible places, that it is impossible to reach them. He ran along a series of shelves made by the out-croppings of the horizontal rock strata. As he jumped from one to another of these I got another shot. This last bullet slackened his pace, but, with vitality equal to that of a grizzly bear, he still crawled on. The climbing became difficult and dangerous. The goat jumped to a lower shelf, and seeing that if he went farther, he would escape, I

[p. 119]

leaned over and fired. Fortunately he sank in his tracks, although I fully expected to see him roll from the narrow ledge. Returning to the snow-drift where the first goat had fallen, I quickly skinned him and un-jointed his head. Turning next to the task of passing along the ledges to reach the second goat, I found that, what had been done before with comparative ease, and without any feeling of danger, because of the excitement of the chase, now tested to the utmost my strength and self-control. Carefully refraining from looking at the heights above, or the rocks far below, I dropped safely to the lower shelf, which was scarcely wide enough to hold the body of the goat. The natural smell of a goat is offensive, but with the hide partly off it was extremely so. However, there was no escape. Behind was a wall of rock sloping outward, so that I could not stand erect; in front yawned the precipice, over which I dared not look. While skinning in such narrow quarters, it was a difficult problem to turn the carcass of the goat over, for it was very heavy, weighing as much as a large sheep. When I had unjointed the head and finished my work, I crawled to the end of the shelf farthest from the carcass, and sat down to recuperate. While absorbed in the excitement of the hunt, I had not noticed the signs of an approaching snowstorm, which would make my descent difficult and even hazardous. The clouds were lowering upon the mountains, and on some of the peaks the storm had already begun.

There still remained the dangerous and laborious task of removing the head and hide away from the ledge. Fortunately I carried my lariat. Wrapping the head inside the hide, I lashed them with the rope, and throwing the end of it to the shelf above, climbed up, pulling the bundle after me. A projecting rock blockaded the

[p. 120]

way at a point, where the ledge was narrow and the slope steep. While endeavouring to shove the pack across, it began to slide. Fearing that, in such a dangerous place, I might be drawn over the precipice, I let the rope go. The pack rolled from the ledge and fell upon the rocks far below. It seemed as if all my labour had been in vain for, even if I were able to reach the pack, I feared that the head had been ruined by the fall. But, after discovering a way of approach from below, I was delighted to find the head had been saved from serious injury by the thick fur of the pelt. Returning to my first goat I made a new pack of both heads and pelts which, with my rifle, was a heavy load for the return trip. When I reached Baldy, picketed far down the mountain-side, I was very tired. Gathering together sufficient material for making a small fire, I toasted some dry bread and bacon. With an appetite sharpened by hard climbing at a high altitude, they seemed the most delicious morsels I had ever eaten. When I reached camp at dusk the timbered mountain slopes were white with snow and the surrounding peaks hidden from view.

In the morning when I opened my lodge door, I looked out upon a dazzling scene. Over the peak of Red Eagle the sun was shining in a clear sky. Meadow, forest and mountains were covered with a white mantle of snow. It hung heavily upon the balsams and pines and many icicles flashed like diamonds in the sunlight. The deep blue sky and clear images of the high peaks were mirrored in the quiet lake beneath. As if this lovely lake-picture had not enough of beauty, the snowstorm of the night had added a framing of white the brown trunks and dark foliage of the firs and pines serving to soften its dazzling whiteness.

[p. 121]

I was delayed in breaking camp by the pranks of my mischievous pack horse Baldy. In roping him, he put his front feet through the noose of the lariat, which then became fastened around his belly instead of his neck. He ran around the camp bucking and kicking until, becoming thoroughly frightened, he galloped away and I had great difficulty in catching him.

Click to enlarge
MY MOUNTAIN CAMP AFTER THE SNOWSTORM.

The sun was high when the horses were at last saddled and all my belongings were finally packed upon their backs. As I descended, the snow rapidly disappeared and in the lower canyons it had vanished entirely. I travelled rapidly, for the horses were headed towards home and were eager for a better grazing range. While leading Baldy, my pack horse, across a dangerous piece of trail, where the way was

[p. 122]

narrow, and its side sloped downward towards the edge of a precipice, overhanging the stream, his pack overbalanced and he staggered. For an instant, it seemed as if he must tumble into the river far below. Throwing my whole weight upon the neck rope, I held him fast, until he recovered himself, and in a few moments we were again upon safe ground. My camp for the night was made on the prairie beyond the eastern shore of Lower St. Mary's Lake.

In the evening I stood on the summit of a high ridge to take a last view of the wonderful mountain scenery, unsurpassed by any along the entire Rocky Mountain chain. As the sinking sun slowly disappeared behind the summit of Red Eagle, the forests of pine on the mountain slopes changed from dark green to black, and the heavy cloud masses projected their long shadows upon the prairies and foothills still bathed in sunlight. Far to the east over the plains were the hazy and rounded outlines of the Sweet Pine Hills. The broad prairie surrounding me, with its flowers and long waving grass, bright in the evening sunlight, had never seemed more beautiful, for its openness and brightness were in strong contrast with the deep canyons and gloomy forests from which I had just returned. The all-pervading stillness was occasionally broken by the distant roar of the rapids of St. Mary's River, borne upwards on the light south wind, and by the howling of a pack of prairie wolves. The heavy clouds behind the mountains were lighted up with a glorious colouring that slowly deepened into red until even the clouds overhead glowed like a sea of fire. In the darkening twilight Venus appeared high in the golden after-glow of the western sky. She seemed like a radiant spirit of the heavenly world, gazing down upon the snowy

[p. 123]

Click to enlarge
SUNSET ON THE PRAIRIES (ROCKIES IN THE DISTANCE).
 "The broad prairie, with its flowers and long waving grass, had never seemed more beautiful."

[p. 124]

mountains, an unfailing source of inspiration for the many legends which the Indian imagination has woven about the personality of the "Evening Star."

The following day I crossed the brown plains and rode down into the Cutbank Valley, in search of Mad Wolf's camp. Fording the swift river, I followed a beaten trail, leading up the valley towards his winter home. Ice was beginning to form along the edges of the running stream, and the air was fragrant with the odour of fallen leaves. Towards the west the perennial green of the forests of pine and fir on the foothills stood out clearly in the strong sunlight, while towards the north the table-like summit of the Milk River Ridge formed an unbroken and level line against the horizon. The way led through meadows of long bunch grass and groves of stately cottonwoods. Their foliage, now fast turning to yellow, was in striking contrast with the brilliant scarlet of the sarvis berry and wild rose. Many leaves had already fallen, exposing the silver-grey of the cottonwood trunks, and revealing the delicate purple of the alder bushes and the bright red branches of the thickets of willows. Beneath the large cottonwood tree, marking from afar the home of Mad Wolf, I recognised his large lodge covered with picture paintings. It was after sunset and Mad Wolf was about to close a ceremonial, which he had been conducting on behalf of a mother, who had made a vow to the Beaver Medicine for the recovery of her sick child.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

  

CHAPTER. VIII

  

WINTER ON THE PLAINS

A trip to the mountains for winter wood.--Nature's signs of an early winter.--Narrow escape from death in the forest.--My struggle with a blizzard.--Snow bound.--Legend of the Snow Tipi.--Na-toia-mon's vision.--Power over a blizzard granted him by the Cold Maker.--Supernatural power of the Snow Tipi.

WHEN Mad Wolf said the time had come to secure our winter firewood, Ah-see-tuck (his son-in-law) and I went together to the mountains. We left the camp at sunrise with four powerful bronchos, harnessed to a timber wagon without a bed. Ah-see-tuck was a skilled but reckless driver. He drove standing on the axle between the front wheels, while I sat back upon the reach. It required both strength and agility to hold my uncertain seat, while the bronchos were running at a mad gallop over the plains, the wagon swinging and tilting at times upon two wheels. The bronchos, frightened by the rattling wheels, ran away, but there was no need to hold them, for our course lay across the broad plains, without fences, or obstacles of any kind, and with a constant upgrade towards the mountains. When we reached the foothills and Ah-see-tuck wished to slacken the speed, he put the brakes on hard and skillfully headed them up the steep slope of a butte and brought them to a standstill. He then guided them into a canyon and finally to the edge of a thick forest

[p. 126]

of pine, spruce and fir. We felled only dead trees, thoroughly seasoned and, having trimmed them free from branches, we had the horses snake them out from the standing timber to be loaded upon the wagon. At midday we rested from our exhausting work, on the bank of a small mountain brook, and were refreshed by the fragrance of the firs and balsams. While reclining upon a thick carpet of moss and pine-needles, we watched

Click to enlarge
DRAWING OUT TIMBER WITH HORSES.

a golden eagle flying high over the mountains and a flock of white swans passing near the summit of Mount Rising Wolf. Many flocks of ducks skimmed the treetops overhead, in their swift and level flight, while far away was heard the faint honking of migrating geese.

Ah-see-tuck then imparted some of his weather wisdom by remarking, "Geese are endowed with great wisdom and foreknowledge of the weather. When they

[p. 127]

fly high, it is the sign of an early winter. The movements of other birds and the thickened skins of fur bearing animals, have already given us warning. The curlew stopped it's singing in the early summer. The song birds have gathered into flocks and the yellow breasts (prairie larks) have disappeared before the sarvis berries were ripe. The skins of the otter, mink and beaver are heavier than usual, and the jack rabbits have turned white earlier than is their custom."

Our work in the forest was brought to an abrupt close by my narrow escape from death. We were working together on a large spruce tree, Ah-see-tuck chopping on one side, while I was standing on the other. When the tree began to topple, and I saw it coming in my direction, I jumped for a position of safety. The top unexpectedly struck a leaning tree, which caused the butt to be thrown into the air and then to come rolling towards us. It narrowly missed Ah-see-tuck, but, notwithstanding his mighty yell, there was no escape for me. At the same instant I was struck and hurled to one side. When I came back to consciousness, I thought my end had come, for I was unable to breathe, or move. My breath slowly returned and I sat up. A glancing blow from the jagged butt of the tree had torn a ragged wound in my side six inches long, whose scar I shall always carry. If I had been one foot nearer, I would have been crushed to death. I carefully bound up the wound, using antiseptics and other remedies from my small medicine case. It healed with remarkable rapidity, because of the bracing atmosphere and my excellent physical condition.

In early November, after returning from the mountains, I rode alone from the camp many miles to the north, in search of missing horses. The sky was clear and the

[p. 128]

air as mild as a day in early summer. At midday, while stopping for rest in a thicket of willows and quaking asps, I was alarmed to see, in the north, a heavy bank of clouds, which spread rapidly, until the high ridge of the Hudson's Bay Divide was completely obscured. Quickly saddling my horse, I started for the camp at a gallop. The thermometer dropped seventy degrees in a few moments and a driving snow storm, with a cold wind from the north, set in. The surrounding plains were shrouded in a white mist and the ground was soon covered with a fine drifting snow. I took a southerly course with the storm at my back. My horse having been purchased from the Kutenai Indians, on the western side of the Rockies, and therefore a stranger to the range, was constantly inclined to turn westward towards the mountains. Finding that he lacked endurance, I changed from a gallop to a slow trot, in order to save his strength in the deepening snow. I followed a small stream, until I recognised the land marks of my former crossing, and then pushed on towards the Milk River Ridge, the most dangerous part of my ride. Having climbed to its summit, I was upon a broad table-land many miles in width. To hunt for a distant camp on the plains, in such a storm, was taking desperate chances, but there was no alternative. The air was bitterly cold, while a fierce gale was driving the snow in blinding clouds. My horse presented a droll appearance with a heavy coat of frost covering him from head to foot, leaving only holes for his eyes. The dripping water from fording the streams formed icicles along his sides and matted his long tail, which rattled like a bunch of bones at every step. Darkness fell, while I was crossing the plateau. The snow grew deeper and deeper, and my horse moved more and more

[p. 129]

slowly, losing both spirit and strength. When my spurs failed of effect, I dismounted and tried leading. Then he wanted to lie down, so I remounted and by freely using both whip and spurs, again moved slowly forward. The storm increased in violence. Everything was enveloped in a dense white pall and I lost all sense of direction. I felt as if I were becoming blind and losing my senses, so I gripped myself and shouted, that I might hear the sound of my own voice. I knew when we descended into a coulee by the feeling that we were going down, down, down, I could not tell how far. But, when we reached the bottom, my horse was stuck fast in a deep drift, helplessly groaning without even trying to move. It was now a desperate question of life or death, with the latter staring me hard in the face. Nerved with the energy of despair, I seized him by the bridle, struck him with my whip, and by pulling with all my strength upon his tail, slowly worked him loose. Just then the moon broke through the low driving clouds for a moment, enabling me to correct my course. I struggled on, until I came at last to the edge of the plateau and then descended to the lower level of the plain. I was still far from the camp, having struck the river valley, too high up through the tendency of my horse to veer westward towards the mountains. But, it was not difficult to follow the trail down the valley, sheltered from the full force of the storm by the big cottonwoods and dense thickets of willows. At last, the cheerful lights of the lodge fires appeared, and my hard struggle with the blizzard was ended. Mad Wolf was rejoiced at my safe return, having believed that I had been claimed by the "Cold Maker." Completely exhausted and chilled to the bone, the warmth and shelter of my own lodge, on that stormy night, was to me the most

[p. 130]

delightful haven of rest and comfort I had ever enjoyed. After finishing my supper, I lay on my blanket-bed listening to the wind whistling through the ropes and poles overhead. Above the roar of the storm, I heard faintly the bawling of frightened cattle, as they drifted  before the driving wind and snow and bitter cold.

When I first wakened on the following morning the

Click to enlarge
MY LODGE DURING THE BLIZZARD.

terrible blizzard was still raging. Drawing the warm blankets more closely around me I slept soundly until I was aroused at midday by Strikes-on-both-sides calling me to Mad Wolf's lodge to eat. When I looked outside it seemed as if a white sheet had been let down before me. Huge drifts were piled up on the north and south sides of the lodge. Bull Plume, a visiting chief from the North Piegans, appeared on

[p. 131]

horseback, struggling through the drifts. He held Nokoa (a young child) in his arms, completely wrapped in blankets. Mesamax (Takes-a-long-time-to-fly--a name derived from the habit of the swans which are slow in starting to fly)--a boy of eight years, rode behind holding tightly to his father, while his little daughter, six years old, Natoya-niskim (Sacred Buffalo Stone), sat in front. Three women were following on

Click to enlarge
BULL PLUME AND FAMILY COMING THROUGH THE BLIZZARD.

foot, Ika-sta-pina (Bull Plume's wife), a very pretty young woman, carrying a baby on her back, Mistina, her mother, and Itomina, her old and deaf aunt. Bull Plume explained that his fire-wood was gone and his travelling lodge was a poor shelter for women and children during the blizzard.

The storm of wind and snow from the north continued for ten days. In the meantime the close companionship round the lodge fire dissolved all reserve and facilitated,

[p. 132]

what I most desired, the unbosoming of their experiences, legends and religious beliefs. I heard many thrilling stories of war and adventure, also of strange and unearthly experiences with disembodied spirits. The story-telling generally began in the evening, continuing far into the night, for the Blackfeet, when they feel in the mood, are great talkers, going into minute details

Click to enlarge
SETTING THE EAR POLES FOR A CHANGE OF WIND.

and giving vivid descriptions of their experiences for which their language is well adapted. They are superstitiously opposed to relating legends in daylight and insist that they should be told after dark and in the winter time.

We were all gathered one night around the lodge fire. There had been a long silence, which Mad Wolf broke by telling

[p. 133]

  

THE LEGEND OF THE SNOW TIPI.

"The Blackfeet have a Winter or Snow Tipi. It was given to us by Es-to-nea-pesta, Maker of Storms and Blizzards. Whenever it is pitched, cold weather and winds are sure to come because of its great power. For this reason the Bad Weather Tipi is rarely seen in our midsummer camps, when the people are most anxious for warm and pleasant weather. That, which

Click to enlarge
SUNSET AFTER THE CHINOOK (WARM WIND).

[paragraph continues] I will now tell, happened many years ago during this same autumn moon.

"The ducks and geese had flown south, the last of their flocks having disappeared many days before. It was past the time for the beginning of winter, but the air was warm and the sky cloudless. One morning a band of hunters were running buffalo on a broad plain. Na-toia-mon (Sacred Otter--father of Morning Plume) and his young son had been very successful.

[p. 134]

[paragraph continues] When the hunt was over they began at once to skin their buffalo. While busy on the carcass of a large bull, they did not notice the coming storm. When they had finished, Na-toia-mon saw a heavy black cloud hanging low in the northern horizon and extending high up in the sky. As he watched the cloud it began spreading out and rolling over and over. Soon he saw

Click to enlarge
SNOW TIPI.

a low, seething, flying mass of clouds advancing rapidly over the plain. He then realised that a terrible Ma-kai-peye (charge- storm or blizzard)) was coming, and there would be no chance for escape. They lay behind the dead buffalo bull for shelter, but the cold became so intense he knew they would soon be frozen. With the fresh buffalo hide he made a low shelter behind the bull's carcass and both crawled inside. The

[p. 135]

snow soon covered the frozen hide with a deep drift making them warm and comfortable.

"Na-toia-mon then fell asleep and dreamed that he was travelling alone on the plains. He discovered a large tipi in the distance and, as he drew nearer, saw that it was decorated. Its top was yellow like the sunlight, with clusters of the seven stars painted on both sides, representing the North, from whence the blizzards come. At the back was a red disc for the sun, to the centre of which was attached the tail of the sacred buffalo. At the bottom were the rolling ridges of the prairies, with their rounded tops, and a broad yellow band, with green discs to represent the colour of holes in ice, or frozen drifts. Beneath the yellow top and on four sides, where stood the four main lodge poles, were painted four green claws with yellow legs representing the Thunder Bird. Above the door, which was made of spotted buffalo calf-skin, was a buffalo head in red, with black horns and eyes in green,--the ice colour. Horse tails were tied at either side over the door, and bunches of crow feathers, with small bells attached, that tinkled whenever the wind blew, were fastened to the ends of both ear poles.

"While Na-toia-mon was contemplating these picture paintings, he heard a voice saying, 'Who is it that walks around my tipi? Why do you not enter?' So, lifting the door flap and entering, he beheld at the back a large and handsome man smoking alone in the lodge. His hair was white and he was clothed in a long white robe. Taking a seat near the door, Na-toia-mon gazed anxiously around, the stranger continuing to smoke in silence. He was seated behind an altar of fresh earth with juniper laid on the top, similar to the one used in the Sun ceremonial. Smoke was rising like incense

[p. 136]

from a hot coal close to the altar. His face was painted yellow with a red line across his mouth and another across the eyes to his ears. His medicine stick was also yellow. In his back hair he wore a black feather and around his waist strips of otter skin with small bells attached. Across his breast was a beaded mink skin, with small bells fastened to its paws and one also to its mouth. Beside him lay a tobacco sack made also of mink skin. He smoked a black stone pipe, the stem of which had been blackened in the fire. The stranger still smoked in silence for a long time and then finally spoke:

"'I am Es-tonea-pesta, the maker of cold weather and this is the Snow Tipi or Yellow Paint Lodge. It is I who bring the cold storms, the whirling snow, and the biting winds from the north, and I control them at my will. I have called you to my lodge because I have taken pity on you. I am going to help you for the sake of your son who was caught in the blizzard with you. I now give you the Snow Tipi with its decorations and medicines. With it I also give you the mink-skin tobacco pouch, the black stone pipe, and my supernatural power. You and your son will not perish in this storm. Your lives will be spared. When you return to camp make a tipi just as you see this one is made.'

"The Cold Maker explained to Na-toia-mon the decorations to be used in painting, advising him to remember them very carefully, also the songs and the ceremonial to be used in transferring the tipi to anyone who might make the vow. He told him that the mink skin should be worn as a charm, whenever he went to war and that the horse tails, hanging over the door, would bring him good luck, both in keeping his own horses and in securing others from the enemy.

"Na-toia-mon then awoke from his sleep. He saw that the storm was abating and knew that the North Man would keep his promise. As soon as he returned to camp, he made a model of the Snow Tipi, painting it just as the Cold Maker directed. He gathered together

[p. 137]

the medicines necessary for the ceremonial and in the spring, the time when the Blackfeet make their new lodges, Na-toia-mon made and painted the Bad Weather, or Snow Tipi.

"During the following winter, the Blackfeet found out that the power, given to Na-toia-mon by the Cold Maker, was very great. When the snows lay deep (February), they were camped near the mouth of the Cutbank Canyon. Meat was very scarce, so a party crossed the high plateau to hunt on the North Fork of Milk River. They killed some buffalo but, while skinning them, were caught in a blizzard. They were upon an exposed plain, where there was no shelter. Finding a few small willows they built a fire to thaw out the frozen hides. Part of the expedition started for camp, but lost their way. After wandering around in a circle they came back to the place they started from. When the wood gave out they held a council. It seemed useless to attempt to cross the high plateau in such a storm, but, if they remained, all would be frozen to death. Then, Morning Plume turning to Na-toia-mon said: 'Brother! will you not try the power given you by the Cold Maker? If his medicine is strong, now is the time to use it. For the sake of your wife and children, drive back this storm.' Na-toia-mon replied, 'I came not from the Sun! How can I drive back the Ma-kai-peye?' 'Try it!' said Morning Plume. 'For the sake of our wives and children I now call upon you for help.' Na-toia-mon had with him the mink-skin tobacco pouch and the black pipe given him by the North Man. When he was ready to open the pipe, he gave directions to wrap up the women and children as warmly as possible, and to place them upon the travois, [*1] and told the men to go in advance, and break a trail through the

[p. 138]

deep snow for the horses. When they were ready to start he called out, 'As soon as I begin to pray for power to break this storm, start at once. Travel as fast as you can for camp, for I can only hold back the storm for a short time. When it sets in again, it will come more fiercely than before.' Na-toia-mon filled the black pipe and when he began smoking he gave the signal to start. He blew the smoke first towards the north-east,--the direction the storm came from. Then he held up the sacred pipe and prayed:

"'Maker of Storms! listen and have pity! Maker of Storms! hear us and take pity on our women and children as you once took pity upon my youngest son! Pity us now and hold back this storm! May we survive! Listen, Oh Maker of Storms!'

"When he blew the smoke towards the south-east, the sun shone through a rift in the clouds. Na-toia-mon called after the people, 'Hurry now as fast as you can across the high ridge, for the storm will soon come upon you again.' He smoked towards the south-west and the clouds began to break up. When he made his final smoke and prayed towards the north-west, the clouds drew back and the blue sky was seen in all directions. Then Na-toia-mon himself hurried towards camp. He knew the Cold Maker was only holding the blizzard back. They crossed the plateau in safety and were descending towards the river, when the blizzard again enveloped them, and they could not see their way. But, the camp was not far distant, and they finally reached their lodges in safety.

"From that time the Blackfeet have always believed in Na-toia-mon's dream. But he could never again be prevailed upon to try his supernatural power. He always replied, that he knew the power to control the storms would not be given to him a second time."

Footnotes

^137:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

GHOST STORIES

Superstitious fears of my companions during the blizzard.--Story of Running Rabbit's ghost.--Old Person ghost story.--Strange story of Kattana's death.--Methods used by different medicine men during his last illness.--His visions and death-dream.--Startling apparitions after Kattana's death.--Story of Crow Eagle and the ghost.--Blackfeet beliefs as to the future life.--Disposition of the dead.--Burial customs.--Mourning customs.

WHEN Mad Wolf had finished the legend of the Winter Tipi, the beating of snow and sleet against the lodge signified the presence of the mysterious Cold Maker and filled everyone with awe and dread of His power. Mysterious sounds were in the air. The singing of the wood on the fire seemed like voices from the spirit world. The distant bellowing of the cattle and the barking of the dogs sounded weird and ghostly. Suddenly a furious gust of wind roared through the poles overhead, shaking the lodge violently, throwing the door-flap wide open and swirling the smoke. Mistina said, in awe-struck tones, that a spirit had entered because she had just heard the dogs giving the ghost-bark, a peculiar snuffling bark, which the Blackfeet say they use when spirits are about. Mistina was in a state of mind favourable for both hearing and seeing ghosts. She, like many others, had been deeply impressed by the fact that many well-known Indians had died during the summer and their spirits had been

[p. 140]

appearing to the living, bringing fear and sometimes even death. Itomina, the old deaf woman, however, was not disturbed by any of these fears. She sat near the door holding the baby in her arms, swaying slowly

Click to enlarge
ITOMINA AND LITTLE NATOYA IN A SNOWDRIFT.

backwards and forwards and singing to it softly an old slumber song.

Ika-sta-pina then told of Running Rabbit's spirit which had been harassing the Indians who crossed Two Medicine River at night, by frightening their horses.

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] Mistina interrupted to say, "It is strange Running Rabbit should have become so mean after death, he was such a kind, and good old man while alive. Not long ago we saw his ghost, when we were crossing the Two Medicine River. He was lying on the ground, but, as we drew near, he raised himself and stood in front of our horses. He came so near, we were frightened lest he might touch us (sure death). Not long ago while Two Strikes and her daughter, Soft Woman, were going to visit Bull Calf, they heard a voice from behind. Soft Woman told me that her mother turned to see who it might be. She fell instantly upon the ground and lay as if dead. When she came to herself, she explained to her daughter that, when she turned, she beheld the spirit of her father, Running Rabbit, who had touched her. Not long afterwards Two Strikes died very suddenly and her family believe that Running Rabbit took her with him to the spirit world."

Strikes-on-both-sides said: "There have been many ghosts this summer bothering people, who travel near the Two Medicine River at night. Old Person was recently riding down the river to Little Plume's. When he was passing the cottonwood trees, where the dead bodies lie in the branches, his horse suddenly reared and plunged, as if frightened by an apparition. Then Old Person heard a voice speaking from the trees, saying, 'Old Person! what has delayed your coming to the spirit world so long? I have been waiting for you a very long time.' He was so badly frightened he rode away at a gallop. Next day he was taken sick and in a few days he died. I also heard of another case. When Big Wolf Medicine and Buffalo Hide were recently camped on the Two Medicine with their wives, a ghost harassed them all night, so that they could not sleep.

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] They first heard something approaching their lodge from the north-west where there was a grove of cottonwoods. It awakened the dogs that were sleeping outside. They gave the ghost-bark and were badly frightened, snuffing the air and growling fiercely. The ghost moved around the lodge to the door, which it threw open. Then it went to the north-east side and hooted like an owl." The Blackfeet have a superstitious fear of owls, believing that the spirits of the dead often appear in that form. "Next morning, they discovered a death lodge in the cottonwood grove and recognised the body of a young man that had been murdered by his jealous brother. It is probably because he was murdered that he annoys the living."

Mistina then told some incidents of the last sickness and death of Kattana. "Many medicine men were present during his last illness. Ketopio, Ominamo, Imo-yis-ocasim, and Paks-ak-ikin. The women doctors were Nits-tos-ape, First Strike, and Snake Woman. The medicine men chanted and prayed night and day. When one was exhausted another took his place. Ketopio's power in doctoring came from the otter; Paks-ak-ikin's from the grizzly bear; Imo-yis-ocasim's from the mink and Nits-tos-ape's from the buffalo. Each drummed and danced in turn, imitating the movements of the animal he represented. Ominamo prayed to the Thunder. He wore a necklace of many coloured beads representing the rainbow which endowed him with supernatural power and wisdom. He blew water from his mouth in imitation of rain falling during a thunder storm. The drumming worried Kattana exceedingly, because he feared its effect on his Wing Medicine--a sacred bundle containing the feathers of many kinds of birds. Unfortunately, he had not taken

[p. 143]

the precaution to perform the ceremonial required by the Wings before any drumming would be permitted in their presence and he knew, if it were continued, his death would be the penalty. He begged the medicine men to cease, but they explained that their power was secured through the drums and disaster would surely come if they were stopped.

"Akoan, his wife, brought him back to life three times by rubbing his body with the sacred paint and holding the Medicine Pipe before his face. A Black Robe (Catholic Priest) came to the lodge and anointed his body with oil. He also baptised him and made prayers over him. The medicine men were very angry, declaring that the Black Robe was interfering with their supernatural power. But Kattana liked the priest's treatment. He fell asleep and dreamed that his dead grandmother came to him and, taking his hand, as she used to do, when he was a little child, led him away, but, suddenly realising that she was drawing him to the spirit world, he left her and turned back. At dawn a messenger from the Sun appeared to him in a dream, promising that his health would be restored, if one of his female relatives, who was pure, would make the vow to give the Sun-dance. Kattana besought his brothers to bear the message to Natoke, or Mist-chin-awake, either of whom could make the vow. But the brothers said it would be useless, because white men had told them that such a belief was foolish. Kattana replied, 'If my good old grandmother were only alive, she would be willing to make a vow which would save my life.' He then gave up all hope of living. He requested that after death his body might be placed on the summit of the high butte, where he had been accustomed to go to have his dreams. He

[p. 144]

again fell asleep and dreamed that the Black Robe was leading him to the white man's heaven in the sky. Looking back he beheld the watchers seated around his dead body. When he awoke and told his wife she exclaimed, 'It is your death dream!' and hastening to the doctors besought them to save her man. They again began their drumming, but before the sun had set Kattana was dead.

"One of the last requests Kattana made was that his old saddle horse and a mule which had ranged together for many years should not be separated. The day after he died they came into the camp. It seemed as if they must have known that Kattana was dead for they could not be driven away. They remained standing day and night close to his lodge. One night they disappeared and could not be found, but a rider discovered their dead bodies at the foot of a cliff. Some people believe Kattana's ghost drove them over the cliff that he might take them with him to the Sand Hills, but Akoan thinks they killed themselves in order to follow their master to the spirit world."

The Blackfeet believe that, when people die, their spirits do not start at once for the other world. They feel lonely and are unwilling to leave home and friends. They wander near their old haunts for about two months, when they seem to grow accustomed to the new conditions, and then start for the spirit world. Some spirits are never contented there, but keep returning to their old haunts and are often seen. The night Kattana died, Mistina declared that spirits were hovering near. "When A-koch-pisso, one of the women watchers, was seated near the body, she was alarmed by a cold blast of air. A spirit had entered the door and stood close to her. Later Nits-tos-ape,

[p. 145]

also a woman watcher, looked into the death lodge and beheld a person standing beside the body. She spoke and it quickly vanished. She knew it was her dead husband, and that he had remained near to protect and give her power, because she wore a lock of his hair in a buckskin sack attached to a necklace. When Akoan (wife of Kattana) came from the death lodge before daybreak, she beheld a ball of fire moving away from Ketopio's lodge. Ketopio declared that it belonged to the spirit world, denying that it could have been caused by his supernatural power, because his power was given to him by the animals. Kattana's body was placed on the high ridge as he had requested. The people who lived near objected because it was so close to their homes that Kattana's ghost would harass them at night."

Bull Plume, the visiting chief from the North Piegans, said that he had heard Crow Eagle, their head chief, relate the following story of his experience with a ghost.

  

CROW EAGLE AND THE GHOST.

"I was once leader of a war expedition that went south into the Yellowstone country. We were successful in securing many horses from the enemy and were on our way home when I was taken sick, and realising that I must die, I summoned my followers, and when they stood beside me said to them:

"'My children! I am very ill and know that my spirit will soon leave my body. It is now evening, but before the sun rises my body will be dead. I know that it is not yet time for my spirit to leave this world for ever. It will be gone for only a short time and I will come back again. I request, my children, that

[p. 146]

you will not leave my body here alone, but picket my horse near by and place my knife, bow and arrows, and some meat by my side. When I return again to this body, I will need all of these things, because my body is now thin and weak.' It was nearly daylight when I died and they left my body there, just as I had requested. They thought my prediction might come true. The sun was again setting when my spirit returned to my body. I was very weak, but I raised my head to look around, for I heard the sound of strange voices singing. I saw a flock of ravens standing in a circle, and also another circle of magpies. They carried small sticks in their bills, and seemed to be trying to raise me from the ground. They helped me to sit up, and when I was able to look about me I saw that my horse and weapons were missing. Having lighted a fire, I cooked and ate some meat. Then I lay down before the fire and, while I slept, the ravens appeared to me in a dream and gave me a dance (ceremonial), showing me the movements and the manner of dressing, and teaching me the songs to be used. They told me that if any sick person would make a vow to join the Raven society he would recover. Before the ravens left, they endowed me with their supernatural power. I then started north to look for the camp of my people. I travelled in the forest along the edge of the mountains that I might not be seen by an enemy.

"One evening, when a storm was gathering, I came to a fallen tree. The trunk, however, had not separated from the stump, which stood high from the ground. I built a shelter from the storm by placing poles against the tree and covering them with green branches. I made a bed of boughs and built a fire at the end of my shelter towards the top of the tree. Soon after lying

[p. 147]

down to sleep, I heard something moving through the branches and coming toward my bed. I thought it might be an enemy left behind, just as I had been, so I lay motionless. I did not move, nor turn my head. I thought if I were going to be killed, it would be better not to see my enemy. But this 'Thing' did not act like an enemy. It was making too much noise and sounded as if it had something dragging behind. I heard it creep slowly over to my fire, where it stopped, but when I did not move, it became restless, getting up, moving around, and then seating itself. I finally decided that I might as well take a look at this 'Thing,' whatever it might be. Turning my head, without moving my body, I saw what looked to be a ghost seated on the far side of the fire. It was clothed entirely in white, with white blanket--coat and leggings. There was a hood over its head, which completely hid its face. It was very tall, with long bony legs, which it kept stretching towards the fire, as if it were cold. It was very restless and kept pushing out its long legs, as if trying to touch me. I did not like this and besought it to go away and let me rest. When it paid no attention to my request, I said, 'Pity me for I am weak and sick. If you are still a living person, tell me your name, and we can travel together and be a help to each other.' It acted, as if it had not heard, so I said, 'If you are not a living person, but a ghost, I pray you go away and let me rest in peace, for I am sick.' It paid no heed whatever to my requests, but kept poking out its long bony legs, as if trying to touch me with its toes. They finally came so near, and it was acting so meanly, that I became angry. There was a long heavy stick lying by my side, which I used for a fire poker. Grasping it, I brought it down with all my

[p. 148]

strength across his shin bones. There was no sound following, for it was a ghost. He vanished so quickly, I could not see him go. I lay down and tried to sleep, but the ghost kept me awake the rest of the night, by sitting in a tree near my bed, complaining, crying like a screech-owl, and saying over and over again, 'You hurt me so badly, You hurt me so badly, You hurt me so badly.' He did not go away until day dawned. In the morning, when I was walking around, gathering sticks to make a fire, I discovered the skeleton of a man lying on the ground near the fallen tree. I understood, then, why the ghost was so restless and acted so strangely. His body had been buried in the branches, and when the tree fell, it had been thrown to the ground and his spirit could no longer rest in peace. I at once hurried away and started North to return to my people."

Crow Eagle died while I was among the Blackfeet, in the summer of 1903. They told me that his spirit left his body, just before daybreak, following the course of the Crow Lodge River eastward toward the Sand Hills. They heard his familiar voice from above, saying, "My children, do not quarrel among yourselves. Live at peace with all people."

The Blackfeet do not have a cheerful or hopeful conception of the future life. They believe that, after death, the spirit goes eastward to the Sand Hills, a very dreary alkali country on the plains. It is inhabited by the ghosts of people and of animals, which exist together, very much the same as in life. It is surrounded by quicksands, so that the living cannot enter. Departed spirits sometimes visit the Sand Hills and return again to remain among the living. Flat Tail once described to me his strange experience, after a

[p. 149]

severe illness. He felt his spirit starting for the Sand Hills. While departing, he turned and saw his friends and relatives mourning over his dead body. He did not remain long in the spirit world, but returned again to his body. Old Person also said that his spirit had once left his body for the Sand Hills, but had returned to

Click to enlarge
"THE DEAD WERE PLACED UPON SCAFFOLDS IN TREES."

it, having been turned back because his arrival was premature.

The dead were placed upon scaffolds built in trees, upon the summit of a high hill, or laid in a lodge pitched in a thicket. They were dressed according to their station when in this life, because they were believed to go to the Sand Hills in the clothes with which they were buried. All articles needed for the journey were placed beside the grave. A man would need his pipe, saddle, weapons and blankets and the personal articles

[p. 150]

he valued most. Often a number of his best horses would be sacrificed beside the grave of a prominent chief, so that they might serve him in the spirit land. Mad Wolf's wife told me that in accordance with his request, my letters and presents were buried with him. Strangely enough, this intention was announced to me by Mad Wolf several years before his death, while he was leading a ceremonial.

When No Chief's brother was killed in battle by the Crows, he ascertained from the war-party the location of the body. After making a journey of several hundred miles, he found it and brought it home. He carried the skeleton about with him in a raw hide case for many years and had it buried beside him when he died. No Chief's touching devotion to his brother was in keeping with the Blackfeets' high regard and care for the remains of dead relatives and friends, but such extreme manifestations of it were only shown by men towards men and not towards women.

When the Blackfeet went into mourning, they denied and tortured themselves to excite the pity of the Great Spirit, to display to the tribe their indifference to pain and to show their high regard for the departed. During this period which often lasted for several months, they withdrew daily at sunrise and sunset to the summit of a hill, where they wept and gashed themselves with arrow points and knives, until a relative, a man, or a woman, according to the sex of the mourner, went to urge their return to camp. They sometimes cut off a finger, generally the first joint of the small finger. As a special act of deep mourning, the men cut off a few inches of their hair, but the women made a much greater sacrifice by cutting theirs on a level with the eyes. Another act of mourning was to make their lodges smaller by

[p. 151]

Click to enlarge
"THE DEAD WERE ALSO PLACED UPON THE SUMMIT OF A HIGH HILL"

[p. 152]

cutting off a strip around the bottom, which would cause much inconvenience and discomfort to all of the occupants. When a prominent chief died, his family placed their lodge at a distance from the tribal camp for the sake of seclusion. If parents lost an adolescent son, they led his saddle-horse through the camp, loudly lamenting as they went. Those in mourning refrained from all personal adornment. They wore old clothes, gave up painting themselves, braiding their hair and all ornaments. They withdrew from social dances, and ceremonials. They went barefooted, wearing neither moccasins nor leggings. They also cut off the manes and tails of their saddle horses as a mourning sign, although they had a superstition against cutting off horses' tails.

When Wakes-up-last [*1] murdered all his children in October, 1903, their grandmother, who had made a vow in their behalf at the Sun-dance, sacrificed her ornaments to the Sun. She hung them in the trees close to our camp on Badger Creek.

New Breast mourned so deeply over the death of his daughter, that he decided to burn his Medicine Pipe, but was restrained by one of his friends, who warned him that such an act would be sure to cause the death of other members of his family. I once saw an elderly chief enter the sweat lodge at the Sun-dance to pray for his son, who was in mourning for one of his children.

Mad Wolf told me that, when his grandchild died, he found relief from his sorrow by withdrawing into the mountains, where he lay in the forest and fasted for several days.

When a man and his wife went into mourning it was customary to give their medicine bundles into the care

[p. 153]

of another couple, with the request, "We ask you to cleanse us." These friends must then make new clothes for the mourners, paint them, give certain ceremonials, and provide a sweat lodge for the man and a medicine smoke fog the woman. They were suitably remunerated for all these services. The friends of the mourners kept coming to see them until they finally forgot their trouble and returned to their ordinary life.

It was customary for a woman, who had lost a child, to come before the leader of a ceremonial to be purified with sage, or in the sacred smoke, as a sign that her sorrow was ended and she had begun life anew.

Ceremonials were sometimes postponed, on the death of a distant relative of the owner. On various occasions my work was hindered and I had many disappointments because of the interference of mourning customs. Wolf Plume, one of the Blackfeet judges, with whom I have had a strong friendship for many years, deliberated a long while before deciding that it was proper to allow me to take photographs of his Beaver Medicine ceremonial. After he gave his consent, the ceremonial had to be postponed so many times, that I waited two years before I finally secured the pictures. The deaths of relatives interfered on several occasions, or the weather was not favourable on others, and, at another time, there happened to be ill feeling among his relatives, who were to take part in the ceremonial, and it was not desirable to have them come together.

Footnotes

^152:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

CHAPTER X

  

REMINISCENCES OF FATHER DE SMET

Clearing skies.--Big game driven close to the ranch.--Tragedy of Red Rover, an Indian dog.--Bitter cold.--Starving cattle.--A Chinook.--Mad Wolf talks about former days.--Tells how the Blackfeet first met Long Teeth (Father De Smet).--He taught the people to rest every seventh day.--Fate of Motokis who scoffed at his ceremonial.--Its salutary effect upon the Blackfeet.--Two Black Robes took the place of Father De Smet.--One of them went to the Gros Ventres.--Was badly treated and returned to the Blackfeet.--Gros Ventres routed by the Blackfeet.--Legend of "The Yellow Buffalo Tipi."--Buffalo Bull bestows supernatural power upon Chief Mastopeta.--His death and farewell words.--His body disappears from the Death lodge.--Final message from his disembodied spirit.--Father De Smet's tactful use of occurrences for converting the Blackfeet.

A SUCCESSION of storms and blizzards followed each other during the entire moon. Old Indians could not recall another early winter of such severity. At the close of one of these gloomy days an unusual light appeared along the northern horizon and low hanging white clouds were rising from the plains. The Indians watched them at first apprehensively, thinking it might forebode another blizzard. But, when the strange light extended towards the zenith they said it indicated a change of weather.

On the following morning the clouds had rolled away and the sky was of deepest blue. The plains were an unbroken expanse of white, so dazzling in the brilliant sunlight, that I did not dare to remain outside for fear of snow blindness. Ah-see-tuck reported the

[p. 155]

tracks of two mountain lions that had passed during the night close to the ranch. Their tracks were like those of a large mastiff and there were signs of their long tails dragging in the snow. Antelope appeared in large numbers. They had been driven before the storm from the great plains of the North. Many were killed by the Indians for the sake of their meat and for their skins, to be soft tanned by the women for clothing. The big grey wolves and coyotes held nightly carnivals over the carcases of strayed cattle which had perished on the surrounding ridges. When their howling seemed close to the ranch I went after them with my rifle, but never succeeded in getting a successful night-shot.

Two Indian dogs, Isakami and Eko-ats-kene (Red Rover), disappeared--I finally discovered their warm kennel beneath the haystack and visited them daily with food. Isakami, who was accustomed to frequent the lodges, was friendly, but Red Rover was very wild. His father was a coyote, and he had been known to run with coyote packs. At first he slunk away, growling and showing his fangs. But, after several feedings, his distrust disappeared and his friendship was completely won. Whenever I wandered off with my rifle, he came along to join in the hunt. One day Ah-see-tuck and I went upon the hills with a supply of poisoned wolf-baits. Red Rover followed at a distance and, when I drove him back, kept slyly out of sight, behind the ridges. He found and ate one of the wolf baits, probably believing that I had left it for him. It was not very long before he came to me with a pitiful, appealing look in his eyes, staggering and running sideways. He followed me back to the lodge, where he had never dared to come before, and, struggling to a drift beside the door, lay down and died.

[p. 156]

The snow lay so deep on the plains, it became necessary to feed the famishing cattle. With the temperature at forty degrees below zero, Ah-see-tuck and I rode along the river, hunting for cattle among the willows, where they had sought shelter from the blizzard. We galloped swiftly along their deeply worn trails, heading off, rounding up and finally driving the bellowing herd, with clouds of steam rising from their nostrils, safely back to the ranch.

When heavy clouds piled up behind the Rocky Mountains, Mad Wolf predicted that a Chinook (warm wind) was coming. There was a sudden rise of eighty degrees in temperature, and, within a few hours, a strong warm wind blew from the west, carrying the snow before it in dense clouds. During the three days of violent wind that followed, when the snow melted so rapidly that it disappeared in streams of water from the ridges, we remained indoors, while Mad Wolf talked about former days, and told some interesting stories about the life of the Jesuit missionary, Father De Smet, among the Blackfeet.

"My mind reaches far back to the days before the white man came into our country. Then the buffalo were plentiful, and the rest of the game also. It is for this reason that we old Indians can neither read nor write, for we did not then need the talk of the white man. We were taught about the habits of wild animals, and how to cure their skins. We knew about the plains and mountains, and could read the voices of animals and birds. In those days the Indian tribes fought each other, and, in accordance with our custom, I was continually on the warpath. Then we killed white men, but, when the Great Father asked us to cease going to war, I advised the laying aside of our weapons. The

[p. 157]

old custom of killing our enemies is now under and the white man's way is on top. The only way white men now get killed in our country is by killing themselves. When my father died I looked up to the Sun and vowed I would give the festival sacred to him, not realising that I would one day become a leader of the Sun-dance. From that time I became interested in the mysteries of the medicines, and thoughtful concerning the future of my tribe, praying to the Sun and to the Morning Star, that we might have food to eat and that we might live to be old.

"When Big Lake was our head chief, an expedition, made up from the clan of Small Robes, crossed the Rocky Mountains to visit the Flathead Indians. They met there a Black Robe [*1] (Father De Smet). He was a good man, so they persuaded him to return with them. We named him Innu-e-kinni (Long Teeth), because of the appearance of his teeth. He lived with us for a long time, occupying a large tipi near the centre of our camp, in which he kept his religious outfit and held his ceremonials. He had a large bell which he always rang before beginning. Whenever our hunters or warriors returned to camp, he visited their lodges and taking them, with their wives and children, to his big tent, bade them all kneel down and give thanks to the Great Spirit for their safe return. He taught the people to rest every seventh day, and, on that day, to remain in camp, and not to go off on war and hunting expeditions. On the seventh day he always held an important ceremonial, which began in the morning and lasted until midday.

"One spring, just after the big rains, when we were camped close to the Rocky Mountains hunting grizzly

[p. 158]

bears, Long Teeth rang his bell and rode through the camp announcing that it was the seventh day, and he would hold a ceremony in the lodge of O-mis-tai-poye. It happened that a man named Motokis, when he heard the bell, began preparing for a hunt. His wife made objections, and said they should go together to the ceremonial. But Motokis derided her and scoffed at the ceremonial, declaring defiantly that he intended to go on a hunt to kill a bear. He ordered his son to bring in the horses and to go with him on the hunt. When O-mis-tai-poye saw these preparations he went to Motokis and requested him to wait until after the ceremony, saying, 'Even if you do not want to pray yourself, come over to my lodge and listen to what the Black Robe has to say. You can then go off on your hunt.' Long Teeth himself warned Motokis not to go. But it was in vain. Motokis laughed at them all and started with his son towards the mountains. Soon after the ceremonial, when the sun was high, the boy rode into the camp at a gallop, shouting that a grizzly bear was killing his father. He said that soon after he and his father had entered the mountains, they discovered a grizzly bear turning over stones and hunting for grubs. The bear did not see them, so Motokis directed his son to hold the horses while he crawled up to kill him. Motokis circled around for an approach through some trees. But the bear turned and made a sudden charge. The boy saw the grizzly bear rise on its hind legs and seize his father, who fell with the bear standing over him. He did not wait longer, but rode as fast as he could to camp. The men caught their horses and followed the boy to the place, where they found Motokis dead. The bear had killed him and then covering the body with dirt had gone away. They followed the

[p. 159]

bear's tracks to the heavy timber, where they hesitated to go further, fearing that the grizzly might have supernatural power. They firmly believed that death came upon Motokis because he had disobeyed the Black Robe. Afterwards Long Teeth made a speech, warning the people against disobedience, and declaring that Motokis had been punished by the Great Spirit for scoffing at the sacred ceremony.

"From that time, the Blackfeet believed Long Teeth was endowed with supernatural power. When some of the women saw that their lives were made easier by his good influence over their men, they said the Black Robe's power was very great and advised everyone to obey him. The three clans, Worm People, Buffalo Chips, and Small Robes became his followers and were obedient to his teachings. Little Plume, the great war chief and leader of the Worm People, was the first man to be baptised by him and many people then followed his example.

When Long Teeth left us and returned to the Flatheads, he sent two Black Robes (priests) to take his place. We named one of them Short Man and the other Scar Cheek because of a mark on his face. Short Man remained with the Blackfeet, but Scar Cheek went eastward to visit the Gros Ventres.

"When Scar Cheek appeared in the Gros Ventre camp he was set upon and roughly treated. They stripped him of his robe, making him wear a buffalo skin coat and leggings like themselves. Scar Cheek remonstrated with the Gros Ventres, saying he would rather be killed than stripped of his robe and have his ceremony ridiculed. The young men scoffed at him and treated him with so much indignity that Scar Cheek finally returned to the Blackfeet, after warning the Gros

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] Ventres that the Great Spirit would surely punish them for their wickedness.

"The things I will now tell you happened in spring, at the time we were beginning to gather buffalo tongues for the Sun-dance. Scar Cheek accompanied us to the Cypress Hills, where we went, because the buffalo were plentiful. Early in the moon when berries are ripe, according to our custom, the most prominent of our young men were sent on a buffalo hunt, to secure raw hide for binding together the poles of the Sun lodge. Among those selected for this honour were Seven Head, Lazy Boy and Prairie Chicken. They killed a buffalo bull and were taking off the hide when they were surprised and killed by a war party of Gros Ventres. When it became known that seven of our leading young men were killed, there was mourning throughout the entire camp. Our warriors held a council and decided that they would at once follow and punish the Gros Ventres. But Scar Cheek, the Black Robe, walked through camp admonishing the people:

"'My children, my heart is heavy because these brave young men were killed, and it makes me sad to hear the women mourning and to see them cutting themselves. But I warn you not to go to war against the wicked Gros Ventres. The Great Spirit is watching. He will punish them and help you if you remain here and pray.'

"The Blackfeet were afraid to disregard the warning of the Black Robe. They did not go to war, but continued their mourning for the dead warriors six days and six nights.

"Soon after this, a heavy fog settled down upon the plains. The war party of the Gros Ventres, surprised that we did not pursue them, returned. Four of their

[p. 161]

warriors, hidden in the thick fog, stole unobserved into camp. We saw them, when the fog suddenly lifted. They were in the very centre of the camp, and were preparing to drive away a herd of horses. We killed all four, but when we made no further sign of revenge, the Gros Ventres thought we were afraid, and became very insolent. One of their warriors rode to a butte overlooking our camp and called out:

"'You Blackfeet are cowards. You have short horns like buffalo calves, and are helpless and unable to fight. We intend to kill all of your warriors, and will take your women and your children prisoners.'

"The following day, when the sun was high, we saw objects moving on a distant ridge. At first we thought it was a herd of buffalo, but, when they came nearer, we saw that a large party of Gros Ventres were approaching. They flashed mirrors into our camp, making signs and daring us to come out and fight. Our people hurriedly prepared for battle. The warriors marched out fully armed, while our women followed, carrying additional powder and bullets. Scar Cheek, the Black Robe, also came upon the battle field to encourage the warriors, and to help our wounded. It was midday when we began the fight, but before the sun was setting the Gros Ventres were in flight. We followed them until dark, shooting them down like buffalos, and taking their scalps. Sitting Woman, who was their war chief, saved himself by hiding in the underbrush. We have always taunted him with this fight; even his own people ridiculed him. After this battle Scar Cheek had great influence over both Gros Ventres and Blackfeet."

The following story of the origin of Chief Ma-sto-peta's Yellow Buffalo Tipi indicates the tact with which

[p. 162]

[paragraph continues] Father De Smet utilised events and circumstances for converting the Blackfeet to Christianity.

  

LEGEND OF THE YELLOW BUFFALO TIPI.

"A large band of our people were once camped on the Okoan River hunting buffalo in the moon when the

Click to enlarge
YELLOW BUFFALO TIPI.

leaves were falling. Ma-sto-peta, a prominent chief, brought down a large bull with his spear. While he was removing the hide, the bull rose unexpectedly to its feet and, catching him upon its horns, tossed him many times into the air. The other hunters, hearing it bellow, and seeing it run with hide hanging loose, hastened to his aid. They found him lying as if dead, and carried him back to his lodge. While they were

[p. 163]

doctoring, Ma-sto-peta opened his eyes and said, 'My children, it is useless for you to try to cure these wounds. While I was lying on the ground the Buffalo Bull stood over me saying, 'My son, I have done this because you showed me no pity, and to prove to you my supernatural power. You must die from the injuries I have inflicted, but I will bestow upon you my power, through which your spirit will return to your body, if you follow my directions. You must be painted all over with yellow paint, which is sacred to me (the yellow paint was secured from the buffalo's gall). Your body must be wrapped with your pipe in a buffalo robe, coloured with yellow paint, and thrown into the river, where the current is swift and the water deep. In this way you will recover from these injuries, and you will come forth unharmed from the river.' When the sun was setting Ma-sto-peta's spirit left his body. The instructions of the Buffalo Bull were carefully followed by the Blackfeet. After painting Ma-sto-peta's body they wrapped him with his pipe in a buffalo robe painted yellow. Four noted warriors bore him to a place where the banks of the river were steep. They swung the bundle three times, and after the fourth swing tossed it far out into the stream where the current was swift and the water deep. The shores of the river were thronged with people. When they saw the bundle sink beneath the water many thought they would never again see Ma-sto-peta, but some ran to the summit of a ridge to look down the stream and see if he might appear. To their astonishment, they beheld him walk unharmed from the river. After this the Buffalo Bull continued to appear in dreams to Ma-sto-peta, giving him the Yellow Buffalo Tipi and instructing him in the ceremonial. The Yellow Buffalo Tipi can be

[p. 164]

seen in our big camps. It now belongs to Mu-koi-sapo. You will recognise it by two buffaloes painted yellow around the middle. A yellow buffalo calf skin is used for a door flap. The top is painted black to represent a night sky, with many small discs for stars, and around the bottom is a black band with a single row of dusty stars.

"Many years later, in the moon, when the grass is green (spring), Ma-sto-peta was taken very sick. Realising that he must die, he summoned his friends and relatives and bade them farewell, saying, 'My children, you may well feel anxious about me now, for I will not recover. My spirit has left my body three times during my life, but has always returned. This time I must go away for ever.' Ma-sto-peta died soon after daybreak. His wives made a Death-lodge to receive his body, pitching it in a dense thicket where it would not be disturbed by heavy winds. They used new poles, pinning the bottom of the lodge securely to the ground and tightly lacing the front with raw-hide so that no wild animals could enter. They dressed him in war clothes, decorated with porcupine quills, placing his spear and bow and arrows beside him, and tying his Pipe to the lodge poles over his head. All of Ma-sto-peta's possessions were distributed among his relatives. As a proof of their sorrow his wives gave away everything they had. They kept only the clothing they wore, also a robe and a travois. The youngest wife, because she had a young baby, retained also a parfleche of buffalo meat for food. Not long after Ma-sto-peta's death, when the tribe were preparing to move camp, Sa-koi-niski, his favourite wife, with her daughter, Akaniki, went to visit the death lodge. They found the door securely fastened, just as they had left it, but when they looked

[p. 165]

inside Ma-sto-peta was gone. The Pipe still hung from the lodge poles over the spot where the body had lain, and everything, including his spear, bow and quiver full of arrows, were undisturbed. The women aroused the camp and  joined in the search. They thought perhaps he had come back to life and wandered away. They examined carefully the thicket around the lodge, but could find no signs. Some rode far out on the plains and watched from the high buttes. After the tribe had moved camp, the relatives remained behind to continue the search, but it was in vain. No trace of Ma-sto-peta was ever found. Sa-koi-niski and Akaniki continued their mourning for Ma-sto-peta. By day, they walked through the camp, scourging themselves and cutting their bodies with sharp arrow heads and, at night, they went to the summit of a lonely ridge to cry and mourn.

"During the time of heavy rains (early spring) Sa-koi-niski and Akaniki were camped with the clan of Small Robes. They were alone in the Yellow Buffalo lodge and were startled to hear a long deep sigh as from someone with a heavy heart. They sat in silence and to their surprise heard the voice of Ma-sto-peta. It seemed to come from overhead down through the top of the lodge and said:

"'Tamasa! no-kok-siks ki-taki-ma-po-ans,' etc. 'Alas! my poor children, I pity you still living where you are. I do not desire to come back again to your life, for I would soon long to return again to the spirit world. There always will be trouble upon your earth, because the people who live there must suffer from famine and pain. Here is a beautiful country. It is neither too hot nor too cold. There is plenty of game here, and the people never suffer from pain. Your unhappiness alone troubles me. My heart is heavy when I see you cutting your bodies and when I hear you crying and mourning upon the ridges. I have now come to tell you that I am happy in the spirit world, and to ask that you mourn for me no

[p. 166]

more. If you lead straight lives and keep your heart good towards all people, when you die you too will come to this country where I now live. My Children! This is the last time I will come near you, and you will never again hear my voice. Farewell!'

"Sa-koi-niski and Akaniki told these things throughout the camp of the Small Robes, so that none of them mourned again for Ma-sto-peta. It happened that, at this very time, Long Teeth (Father de Smet) was living among our people. When Sa-koi-niski and Akaniki told these things to him, the Black Robe said, 'What the spirit of your father has told you is true. There is a beautiful country, where those who have lived good lives will go when they die and will be happy. Your father is there now and you too will go there, if you lead good lives just as he did.' Akaniki, with her children, and many of the clan of Small Robes were baptised by Long Teeth, the Black Robe. They and their children have ever since attended his church and believed in the white man's heaven after death."

Footnotes

^157:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 167]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

SUN WORSHIP

Religious beliefs.--Origin and meaning of "medicine" and "medicine-man."--The reasonableness of Sun Worship in the light of nature.--Religious significance of the Sun-dance.--Mad Wolf's letter inviting his white son to the Sun-dance.--Reason for the vow to give the Sun-dance by Mad Wolf's wife.--My return to attend Sun-dance.--First-night impressions in Mad Wolf's camp.

THE Blackfeet are firm believers in the Supernatural and in the control of human affairs by both Good and Evil Powers in the invisible world. The Great Spirit, or Great Mystery, or Good Power, is everywhere and in everything--mountains, plains, winds, waters, trees, birds, and animals. Whether animals have mind and the reasoning faculty admits of no doubt with the Blackfeet, for they believe that all animals receive their endowment of power from the Sun, differing in degree, but the same in kind as that received by man and all things animate and inanimate. Some birds and animals, such as the grizzly bear, buffalo, beaver, wolf, eagle, and raven, are worshipped, because they possess a larger amount of the Good Power than the others and so, when a Blackfoot is in trouble or peril, he naturally prays to them for assistance.

His ideas of the Evil Power are vague and undefined. That problem of all time, the origin of evil, its continuance, and the suffering in the world because of it,

[p. 168]

are mysteries to the Indian, as well as to the greatest minds of the Christian races. Without knowing why, he believes that bad luck or misfortune, such as accident and loss of property, sickness or death, is inflicted upon him as a punishment by the Evil Power because of his violations of the laws of the "medicines." A Blackfoot has no fear of the Good Power, because it is his friend; but he is an abject slave to his constant dread of the Evil Power, or Evil Spirits, who are ever ready to pursue and punish him. Death, like the fabled "sword of Damocles," is always suspended over his head, ready to drop in punishment for any one of the multitude of offences against the sacred medicines, which he is liable to commit.

It is impossible for the Christian races to understand, or estimate the powerful influence, which the "medicine" beliefs have for ages exerted upon the Indian character and tribal life. It being their universal belief that illness of the body signified possession by an evil spirit, their methods of healing, in common with those of all savage tribes, naturally took the form of incantation and occult ceremonies for exorcising it. No doubt the title of "medicine," by which their doctors were known in our early chronicles of the Indians, had its origin in this manner with the early French colonists. By a natural transition it passed into that of "medicine men," with English speaking people. A "medicine man" is believed to control the weather, to heal the sick and exorcise evil spirits by means of incantations and magic arts. He is really more of a magician than a medical doctor, although he constantly assumes the functions of the latter. His vocation is to instruct and guide in the avoidance of acts that are "bad medicine" and therefore unlucky, and in the use of the best means for propitiating the

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] Evil Power, because of unlucky acts already committed. When an Indian is "making medicine," he is performing mysterious ceremonies, or using other approved means for controlling the supernatural powers and averting the malevolence of the evil spirits. Some authorities have understood the word as meaning "mystery," and the medicine man as "mystery man." But this is not an adequate expression. While there is no corresponding word in the English language to express the equivalent of the Indian idea, the phrase "supernatural power" is probably the nearest equivalent to the word "medicine," in its common Indian use.

Without the medium of a divine revelation, through which the Christian races received knowledge of the true God, and with only their senses and reason, and the light of nature to guide them, the Blackfeet evolved a very reasonable form of pagan religion in their Sun-worship. Unaided, so far as we know, and circumscribed by the horizon of their own experiences, they determined the phenomena of nature, and connected causes and effects into a system of natural religion, which did credit to their reasoning powers, their piety and their imagination. Whether they derived any of it from the South, through the Aztecs, or from Asia via the Behring Straits, or otherwise, is, as yet, one of the unsolved problems of ethnology.

The Sun, as the great centre of power and the upholder of all things, was the Blackfeet's supreme object of worship. He saw that every bud and leaf and blossom turned its face towards the Sun as the source of its life and growth; that the berries he ate reddened and ripened under its warmth; that men and animals thrived under its sustaining light, but all perished

[p. 170]

when it was withdrawn. He saw that in the darkness and cold of winter, nature retired into silence and sleep; that when the sunlight and warmth of spring returned, all nature awakened and put on its robe of green; the bears left their hibernating dens and the beavers their winter lodges. The Sun made the grass to grow and the trees to be covered with foliage for the subsistence of birds and animals, upon which he himself in turn depended for food. The devout Blackfoot therefore called upon men, women and children and everything that had breath to worship the all-glorious, all-powerful, Sun-God who fills the heavens with brightness and the earth with life and beauty. To them, he is the supreme source of light, of life, and of power.

The Sun-dance was not, as has been commonly believed, "merely an occasion for the self torture of youths, who are candidates for admission to the full standing of warriors." It was, on the contrary, their great annual religious festival, their holy sacrament, the supreme expression of their religion. It must always have its beginning in a woman's vow, made to the Sun-God for the recovery of the sick. The entire tribe were accustomed to come together every summer for the Sun lodge, some to fulfil vows made for the recovery of the sick, some to fast and pray, others seeking diversion, while warriors came to inflict self torture in fulfilment of vows made to the Sun for deliverance from peril.

It was my good fortune to witness several Sun-dances and to have had exceptional facilities for their study and observation, especially in the one given by Mad Wolf and his wife, my Indian parents by adoption. I have been surprised that so little has been known as to the remarkable symbolism of the ritual and the elevated religious ideas and teachings contained in the ceremonial

[p. 171]

of the Sun-dance. Much stress has been mistakenly laid upon its demoralising tendencies, chiefly because of the self torture, which was formerly practised under an intense religious fanaticism, but now entirely suppressed and overlooking entirely the high morality it inculcated. The silence of literature as to its true religious significance and its highly developed symbolism, is doubtless owing to the barriers with which all explorers have found it surrounded. These have been a difficult and unwritten language; the Indian's natural reserve, especially concerning religion, and the impenetrable secretiveness of the medicine men, who were the custodians of the religious rites and mysteries. Their very livelihood depended upon a strict and jealous maintenance of that secrecy.

Early in the spring, I received the following letter from Mad Wolf, written through an interpreter:--

"MY DEAR SON:--

"I am now feeling good in my heart because I received a letter from my white son and read in it so much that I wanted to know. We are glad to hear that Ka-ach-sino (great grandfather, President) is a good man, that he cares for his red children and will protect them. We all feel good in our hearts, when you write telling us so many things from the outside that we do not know. After you left us, at the time of the first snowfall, some white men tried to take away our lands, but my people refused to allow it. We want to move away from civilisation, but there is no longer a place to which we can go. We have been continually driven westward, until the Rocky Mountains now face us like a wall and we can go no farther. We have made many mistakes, but I consider the greatest was when we allowed white men to live with us upon our lands. We were not satisfied with one trading store. There are now two stores, but the prices are even higher.

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] Why is it that the Great Father does not send us a good man for agent? He is wise and should know what his red children need. We have never had one whole-agent, they have all been half-agents. I have come to feel now, as if there was no one to trust except you, my son. I ask that you continue writing to me, even if you should not hear in reply. I am experiencing great difficulty in getting my letters written because there are so few white men, upon whom I can depend. Last winter, my youngest son was taken sick with a fever. When the Indian doctors said Little Crane must die, my heart was heavy. I went alone to the mountains and entering the forest, I fell asleep and had a dream. I saw you coming through the trees and walking towards me carrying two large birds. You came to my side, and said 'My father, you are in distress, but I have come to help you. These two birds I have killed are your troubles and they will no longer grieve you.' I awoke feeling relieved. You are far away towards the rising sun, but I know you have influence among the white men and can help us. When I returned from the mountain, my wife met me, saying, 'Little Crane will now recover because I have made a vow to give the festival sacred to the Sun God. I know it will cost us many horses and I must fast and suffer, but it was necessary to make the vow to save the life of our son.' Little Crane is well again, and in the coming summer, when the grass is green, we will give the Sun ceremonial. I ask that you come again soon to visit your brothers and sisters and Indian parents. Tell your white father that no harm will come to you in the Blackfeet camp, because you will be safe and at home with your Indian parents. I now feel good in my heart towards you, my son, and shake hands with you and with all your friends.

YOUR INDIAN FATHER,   
 SIYEH (MAD WOLF)."

Early in the moon of flowers (June), I rode across the plains towards Mad Wolf's home on Cutbank River.

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] The prairies were brilliant with wild roses in various shades of colour, and on all sides larks and Savanna sparrows were singing. I crossed a long and irregular procession of hills, sweeping northward to join their mighty leader the Hudson Bay Divide. Far to the north, as if rising from the plains, and separated from the main range of the Rockies, stood the sharp peak of Chief Mountain, a perpetual landmark of the Indians. I recognised the familiar scenes, the streams, the lakes, and the cut-banks, the piles of stones used for guidance and safety during storm and blizzard, and the lonely graves upon the ridges. I found Mad Wolf camped on the South Fork of Cutbank River. When I entered the lodge, he was seated at the back with Gives-to-the-Sun, his wife, their heads bowed in prayer. It was Gives-to-the-Sun who had made the vow, and around her, as the sacred woman, all the ceremonies would centre. Mad Wolf exclaimed, "It is my white son!" He gave me a warm hand-shake, and bidding me be seated looked me over searchingly. I was deeply touched by the evidence of his warm friendship for me, when he took a package from an old medicine bag, and unrolling the outside cover, which was decorated with sacred red paint, produced a number of my letters, the envelopes soiled and worn. He first passed them around the circle for examination, and then, after gazing at them for a moment in silence, returned them to the bundle, saying he would always preserve them carefully and they would be buried with him when he died. Sweet grass was burning on a hot coal, and as Mad Wolf saw me watching the smoke, he explained that it was incense rising to the sky, and said: "Ever since you went away, I have been praying to the Sun that you might return in safety, and now you are here. We are

[p. 174]

glad to have you present, and I will reveal many things in order that you may know there is nothing harmful in our worship. You can then explain our religion to the white people, for we know you are straight and will speak the truth.

"Last winter when Little Crane was sick and about to

Click to enlarge
A WOMAN'S VOW TO THE SUN.

die, it was very cold. For many days the sun did not shine and the snow lay deep over the plains. The medicine men, White Grass, and Bull Child danced and beat upon their drums, but the evil spirits could not be driven out. In vain Ear Rings sang his strongest songs and administered root medicine by means of hot stones. Our son only became weaker. One evening at sunset

[p. 175]

the clouds broke, and my wife seeing the bright rays coming into the lodge went outside, and prayed to the Sun:

"'Pity me, Great Sun God! for you know that I am a pure woman. Give back health and strength to my boy, and I promise to build a sacred Sun lodge for you before all the people.'

[paragraph continues] "She then stood beside Little Crane and said, 'Rise up, my son, for I am a pure woman and have vowed to give the Sun-dance that your health may be restored.' She then went to Bull Child, the medicine man and was painted by him. Next morning at daybreak they stood together facing the east. As the sun rose from the plains, Bull Child prayed,

"'Great Spirit in the Sun! I know that this is a pure woman. If her sick boy recovers, I promise you that she will give a Sun-dance and will eat of the sacred food with you and with the Underground Spirits.'

[paragraph continues] "Before the snow melted Little Crane was restored to health, and when the warm winds of spring began to blow and the grass was green, we began preparations for the Sun-dance in fulfilment of our vow. We are now waiting for Flat Tail to bring tongues from the south. When he arrives, we will hold a ceremonial, and will consecrate them as the sacred food."

There is always so much uncertainty in the movements of Indians, that, in order to be present without fail and miss nothing, I determined to stay night and day beside Mad Wolf's lodge. He gave me every facility for accomplishing my purpose. He even stopped the ceremonies that I might photograph the dances, write down the words of the chants and prayers and secure graphophone records of their sacred songs. He also made a speech into the graphophone, asking that it be sent as his message to the Great Father at

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues] Washington. My lodge was pitched by Strikes-on-both sides, my Indian sister. She was the Chief's favourite child, and with good reason, for she was skilled in the Indian arts and always thoughtful and considerate of others. It was she who gathered my firewood, called me whenever my horses strayed from camp, and showed where a cool spring lay just over the ridge.

When night fell, and a cold breeze blew from the

Click to enlarge
WHEN NIGHT FELL.

snow-covered Rockies, it was delightful to lie once more upon my comfortable bed of robes and blankets, watching the flickering light of my small inside fire, and to hear again all the well known sounds of lodge life. The gentle flapping of the lodge ears, when the wind changed, causing the smoke to swirl and even the mournful singing of wet wood on the hot embers were familiar sounds. It was interesting to distinguish the different odours of burning firewood, the sweet fragrance of birch and cottonwood, the resinous scent of pine, and

[p. 177]

the disagreeable odour of alder, called mic-cisa-misoi (stink-wood) by the Blackfeet, because of the offensive smell of its smoke. I went to sleep listening to the musical flow of the river upon its rocky bed, and it was the first sound to greet my ears when I wakened in the morning.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

BEGINNING OF THE SUN-DANCE

Preparations of Mad Wolf and Gives-to-the-Sun.--Rules and customs observed within the sacred lodge.--Ceremonial of consecrating the tongues.--Methods of Medicine Men for impressing their supernatural power upon the tribe.--Sudden death of Good Hunter, sacred woman at a former Sun-dance.

IN former days, when the Blackfeet were constantly hunting the buffalo, the man and his wife giving the Sun-dance would begin to collect tongues for the sacred food in the early spring, and continued gathering them until the sarvis berries were ripe (midsummer). They went on the buffalo hunts, but took no part in the killing. They sat upon a robe, watching from a distance the hunters run the buffalo, praying that there might be no accident.

When Mad Wolf and his wife began their preparations for the Sun-dance, she became the "sacred woman." In her tipi the ceremonials would take place. The fire burned day and night. It must not be allowed to die out, nor the door to remain open. A sarvis berry stick or buffalo chip [*1] must be used to light the pipes. No other fire was allowed within. Gives-to-the-Sun and Mad Wolf remained in fixed places, with heads bowed and blankets drawn closely around them, praying to the Sun by day and the Moon by night:

[p. 179]

"Great Spirit! have pity on me and my people. Help me to be pure and to lead a straight life. Grant that I may be kind-hearted to all my people, and may our children and relatives live to be old."

They seldom spoke to each other, and did not go outside, while the sun was above the horizon. Before sunrise and after sunset, a relative came in to assist them to rise. Before they left the tipi, they chanted a sacred song. Mad Wolf filled a pipe, and with Gives-to-the-Sun carrying many presents, they went together to the home of O-mis-tai-po-kah, the lodge maker of the year before, and presented the pipe to him. It was a custom of the Blackfeet that the lodge maker and his wife be instructed by those who had given the ceremonial the year before. The sacred bonnet, to be worn by the woman, was purchased from them and they were paid for their assistance. O-mis-tai-po-kah, 
Click to enlarge
THE SACRED WOMAN.
 Mad Wolf and their wives smoked together and prayed to the Sun. Henceforth, during the Sun-dance, Mad Wolf and Gives-to-the-Sun addressed O-mis-tai-po-kah and Natokema as father and mother, for, by smoking the pipe, they agreed to lead and instruct them. When the tongues were dried and ready for cutting, Mad Wolf invited to his tipi the Sun-dance priests, White Grass, Ear Rings, Curly Bear, Stock-stchi, Double Runner, Morning Plume and Blessed Weasel, with their wives; the men to help in chanting and praying, the women to assist Gives-to-the-Sun in curing tongues and other necessary preparations. When

[p. 180]

they were assembled, O-mis-tai-po-kah (as father or instructor) produced two buffalo chips, a bag of red paint and dried sweet grass. Placing the sweet grass upon a hot coal he started a chant. As the smoke arose, Natokema (the mother) took Gives-to-the-Sun s hand and held it in the sacred smoke for purification. She then gave her the red paint, which Gives-to-the-Sun rubbed over the buffalo chips. Natokema took a

Click to enlarge
"THEY PRAYED CONTINUALLY WITH HEADS BOWED AND BLANKETS DRAWN CLOSELY AROUND THEM."

tongue, which, during the ceremony that followed, was called "chief of tongues." Holding the end towards her, she painted the north side red and the south black, and handed it with a knife to Gives-to-the-Sun, who arose and prayed, holding the tongue before her. After placing the knife in the smoke of the sweet grass, she cut the tongue into thin strips for boiling. Tongues were then distributed to the other women, who arose in turn, and, after making confession, also cut them into

[p. 181]

thin strips. If a woman made a mistake, or cut herself, while preparing the tongues, the rest suspected that she was not pure. Two women were selected to go to the river for water. They carried a bucket painted with red and black bands, forming a cross on either side. While dipping the water with small shells they avoided careless splashes, which might bring on a sudden storm, and on the way back to the tipi stopped four times to pray. If a storm came, the people believed it was caused by an error in some part of the ceremonial. The women sang in unison while they placed the tongues in the bucket and hung it over the fire. When it boiled, Gives-to-the-Sun chanted

"I want to go to a sacred place,"

and threw in sweet grass that the meat might have a pleasant fragrance. The ceremonial of preparing the tongues was finished, when Natokema held the bucket in the fragrant smoke. The priests and their wives again assembled to place the sacred meat in parfleches. At this ceremony a feast was given, but before eating, a blessing was asked upon the food, not so simple in form as our Christian custom of giving thanks, but very devout and expressive as a symbolic act. Each broke from his portion a small piece, holding it up as an offering to the sun, all praying in unison to the Spirit for long life; then, after planting it in the ground, they supplicated Mother Earth for an abundance to eat. The sacred meat was then placed in parfleches in readiness for the Sun-dance, all the men and women chanting in unison

"The buffalo will wait for us."

The same ceremony was repeated for every lot of tongues secured, until a sufficient quantity had been

[p. 182]

prepared. Formerly about three hundred buffalo tongues were gathered for a Sun-dance. They now seldom secure more than thirty beef tongues. An occurrence at another Sun-dance, during the ceremony of preparing the tongues, illustrates the methods employed by medicine men to impress upon the people their supernatural powers and the importance of implicit compliance with their directions. An Indian from Canada named Big Swan, with his wife, Good Hunter, were giving the Sun-dance. Big Swan selected as his adviser for the ceremonies, Spotted Eagle, and invited, to assist him, Red Wing, Wolf Eagle and Big Moon, with their wives Strikes-on-top, Feather Woman and Calls Back. They camped together on Two Medicine River, and were preparing the tongues. Big Swan interrupted the services by going to Willow Creek. 'There he met Spotted Eagle, telling him that additional tongues had been secured and the ceremonial would be continued that evening. For a moment Spotted Eagle made no reply, but gazed intently at the distant Rocky Mountains where his trained powers of observation detected signs of a storm. He said to Big Swan: "When you return to your tipi, do nothing further with the tongues to-night, put them away." No more was said. Big Swan returned to Two Medicine River and told the waiting men and women of Spotted Eagle's warning. Thinking they had insufficient reason for delay, they continued the service. In the midst of the ceremonial, a violent storm from the Rockies moved eastwardly over their camp. A bolt of lightning struck the lodge, prostrating the three women, Good Hunter, Strikes-on-top and Feather Woman. The last two recovered, but Good Hunter, the sacred woman, was killed. Big Swan discontinued the service, and, after placing the body of his

[p. 183]

wife upon a high cliff, overlooking the river, returned to Canada. In telling me of the event Spotted Eagle said: "It cast a deep gloom over the entire Sun-dance. If Big Swan had followed my directions it would not have happened. I saw signs of a storm over the mountains at the head of Two Medicine Canyon. They were bad medicine, so I warned him." Some of the Indians, however, believed the Sun God had stricken down Good Hunter because she had falsely declared in her prayer that she was a pure woman.

Footnotes

^178:1 Dried buffalo dung.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

MARRIAGE CUSTOMS

Immorality rare among Blackfeet women.--Sanctity of marriage religiously taught.--Severe penalty for marital infidelity.--Purity of family life contributed to a high moral and physical development.--Curious marriage customs.--Wedding gifts and preparations.--Considerations influencing the choice of a husband.--Rules observed by the father-in-law and mother-in-law.--Strange mother-in-law customs.--Relations of a husband to his father-in-law.--Feast at the birth of a child.--Position of the first wife.--Polygamy a necessity of the social organisation.--Expedient to marry several sisters.--The use of love-charms to win the affection of others and of anti-love-charms to resist their effect.

IN former times immorality was rare among Blackfeet women. Chastity was held of supreme importance in their family life. It is remarkable how constantly the greatness of this sin was impressed upon women, both by the teaching of their religion and the severity of the punishment involved. Women's prayers uniformly began with the declaration of their purity. They believed that, without it, their prayers were in vain, and brought only a curse, if the declaration was false. Their most important ceremonial, the Sun-dance, began with the vow of a virtuous woman, made for the recovery of the sick. If the patient died, or if disaster came during the ceremonial, as in the case of Good Hunter, the sacred woman killed by lightning, the woman who made the vow was suspected of unchastity. Consequently an unchaste woman would have a superstitious

[p. 185]

dread of making a vow, or of assuming the part of a sacred woman in a ceremonial. Sickness and death were believed to be the penalties for false vows, visited either upon the woman herself, or upon her relatives. If a married woman was unfaithful, her husband had the right to kill her, or cut off her nose himself, or he could call a council of the head men to pass judgment. Immediately following a verdict of guilty, a powerful law-and-order society inflicted the punishment, by cutting off her nose. The woman generally chose death in preference to carrying such a hideous life-brand of disgrace. As in civilised society, so among the Blackfeet, the woman suffered, but the man went free. There are, to-day, some women without noses among the Blackfeet. They, however, live secluded lives and are seldom seen by strangers.

Besides the fear of punishment, there were other considerations for a Blackfoot mother's chastity. If her children were sick, she could then make the vow to give the Sun-dance and thus secure their recovery. She could become the sacred woman in that great ceremonial and be entitled to the respect and veneration of the tribe. Parents pointed to the sacred woman as a notable example for their daughters to imitate, that, like her, they might be esteemed as above reproach.

The sacredness of marriage and the purity of family life among the Blackfeet, before contact with the white race, doubtless contributed largely to the high average of mental, moral, and physical development, which characterised so many of their former leaders.

Marriage generally took place when a girl became about fourteen years of age, and sometimes as young as eight. When she attained a marriageable age, her

[p. 186]

parents selected a husband for her. If it happened that a young man fell in love with her, the proposal came from his parents. This, however, was unusual. It was not customary for unmarried girls to associate with men.

When a girl's parents decided upon a son-in-law, the father made the proposal by saying that his daughter would carry food to the young man's lodge. If he was favourable she carried food to him daily for a moon. Everyone would know of the girl's actions and the engagement would be talked of throughout the camp. During this period it was customary for the father, realising that his daughter would soon leave his control, to admonish her as to how she should conduct herself after marriage. When she became engaged, her parents were expected to give a pair of moccasins, ornamented with porcupine quills, to each member of her intended husband's family. They also arranged for a feast to be given at the lodge of their future son-in-law, to which his relatives only were invited. When everything was in readiness, the mother and daughter carried the food and moccasins to his lodge. The girl then entered alone. Without a word being spoken she took her seat on his right and distributed the moccasins and food. During the feast her mother remained outside. It was not proper for her to enter the lodge of her prospective son-in-law. After the feast the man gave to his prospective wife many presents, bidding her to distribute them among her relatives, who had given presents to his family. The girl's mother made a new lodge for the young people, preparing the poles and furnishing it with blankets, buffalo robes, lodge backs, parfleches, mountain lion skins, a buckskin dress for the girl and a buckskin suit, trimmed with

[p. 187]

ermine, for the young man. The mother waited until the tribe moved to a new camping ground, when she pitched the new lodge for the first time, and, with her daughter's assistance, completed the necessary preparations. When the first lodge was worn out, it was customary for the mother-in-law to make a new one for the young couple. If by this time they did not own a lodge decoration, the father-in-law, if able, might purchase one for them. When a girl married, she left the clan of her parents and lived among her husband's relatives, with whom she and her children became identified. It was not customary to marry within the same clan because of blood relationship. After their marriage, as long as their lodge remained beside her father's, he was expected to build their fire in the morning, and the mother-in-law to carry food to them. But, under no circumstances, could she enter the lodge of her son-in-law, or have any dealings with him. Even if he appeared unintentionally in her presence, it was a breach of etiquette and placed her in such an embarrassing position, that he must make amends by presenting her with a horse. It was proper for a mother to visit her married daughter, only during her son-in-law's absence. A man never spoke to his mother-in-law nor to her sisters. He must be careful of his conversation before his own sisters, not to offend their modesty, but he might talk as unreservedly before his cousins, or his sister-in-law as before his own wife.

It was the custom for a man and his father-in-law to have many dealings with each other and to be on the best of terms. At the marriage of his daughter, a father gave from thirty to forty horses as a present, but they were promptly repaid by a like number from the

[p. 188]

son-in-law, together with his best buffalo-horse, saddle and war bonnet. Whenever a son-in-law went on a hunt, he was expected to share the proceeds with his father-in-law. If he brought in three horses laden with meat and hides it was proper for him to direct his wife to take one of them to her father.

During the period of childbirth, when the young couple were usually camped beside her parents, the father-in-law recognised the event by inviting to a feast at his daughter's lodge his friends and relatives, whom he desired to make acquainted with his son-in-law. He furnished the food, also the pipe and tobacco. If the company remained long enough to smoke twice round, they were said to have enjoyed themselves. If, however, they were inclined to continue talking and joking, or became so interested in story-telling, that the pipe circulated three times, they were said to have had an exceptionally good time. When the host decided it was time for the feast to end, he rapped with the pipe saying, "It is burned out." The guests were then expected to depart.

The first wife sat on her husbands' right--the position of honour--and was called his "sits-beside-him-wife." She stood higher in his affection than his other wives and she was expected to direct them in their work.

The practice of polygamy by the Blackfeet may seem to the reader inconsistent with the spirit, which maintained their strict regulations upholding the integrity of the family. But it should be remembered that polygamy was a natural and necessary expedient, growing out of their tribal organisation.

The Indian division of occupations, between men and women, always made the men the providers and defenders against the enemy, and imposed upon the

[p. 189]

women a wide range of drudgery and manual labour, which included the rearing of children, the care and cooking of food, the tanning of skins, and the making of clothes and lodges.

All were joint owners of the resources of the tribal domain. All stood on an equality as to personal rights and the acquisition of wealth by hunting and warfare. There was no such thing as hired servants, their free and independent life making them too proud to serve.

Although a chief or successful warrior might secure orphan boys to look after their horses in return for their keeping, and could engage young men to hunt for them by furnishing their mounts, these were incidental and not a part of their system.

Of necessity women took the place of servants in the capacity of wives. Their number in each family would naturally be regulated by the husband's means and the requirements of his station. All his wives were under the direction of his first, or "sits-beside-him" wife.

A chief must be kind-hearted and open-handed, ever ready to share his food supply with the poorest of his tribe. His tipi must always welcome the stranger, and it devolved upon him to entertain generously the visiting chiefs and delegations from other tribes. One can readily see that such responsibilities required a family organisation that was not possible to the Blackfeet, excepting through polygamy.

Another condition, that operated strongly in favour of polygamy, was the preponderance of women over men, caused chiefly by the death losses sustained in the constant wars waged with surrounding tribes.

It was considered desirable for a girl to marry a chief with several wives, because the work would be divided among them. If a girl married a poor man,

[p. 190]

who could afford but one wife, her life would probably be filled with drudgery and hard labour. Frequently an Indian would marry several sisters. In such an alliance, there was not likely to be much friction, because sisters were already accustomed to living together. Parents naturally preferred such an arrangement, if they were satisfied with a son-in-law, because they would thus avoid the many complications involved in having several sons-in-law.

The Blackfeet had a Love medicine, which they called Ito-wa-mami-wa-natsi (Cree medicine), because it was generally obtained from the Crees, who were specialists in its manufacture. In talking with E-kum-makon about the Cree medicine, he said that he had used it to regain the affection of his young wife. When she left him and returned to her father's lodge, he made a long journey north, to visit a Cree medicine man, from whom he purchased some of the Love medicine. It consisted of a small beaded buckskin bag containing a sweet-smelling powder. As the Cree magician had directed, he secured one of his wife's hairs and, winding it with one of his own, placed them together in the medicine bag. He carried it with him everywhere, fastened around his neck by a buckskin string and wore it beneath his shirt. He firmly believed in its power, because his wife had returned and became so much attached to him, that she was unwilling to leave his side and they went everywhere together. Soon after this E-kum-makon had a severe illness, lasting so long he thought he must he bewitched by Little Plume, who owned a Porcupine-Quill medicine. It consisted of a small stone, or wooden image of a person, a porcupine quill and some red paint, by which the owner was able to cast an evil spell over people.

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] If he placed the red paint between the eyes of the image, the one whom he desired to injure became ill; if over the lungs, he had a hemorrhage; if on the top of the head, he became crazy; if over the heart, it caused death. E-kum-makon became so worried over his health, that he again sought the advice of the Cree medicine man, who informed him that his sickness was caused by the improper use of the Love medicine. It should not have been carried around with him, but left inside his tipi, tied to one of the lodge poles, where it properly belonged. The medicine man also explained, that it was wrong to put the hairs into the bag without the burning of incense, which was necessary to ward off the Evil Power.

There was also a medicine for counteracting the Love Power. This was employed, whenever it was discovered that the Love medicine was used by anyone who was unacceptable and therefore to be resisted.

The Blackfeet have always been ready purchasers of Love medicine, for which they paid the Crees a horse, or even more. They have also secured it from the Flatheads and Pend d'Oreilles. The Blackfeet say that the Sioux and Assiniboines also made a love medicine, but that the Crows and Cheyennes bought theirs from other tribes.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

FORMING THE SUN-DANCE CAMP

Mad Wolf announces time for moving to the Sun-dance camp.--Care of the sacred woman and the loading of her travois.--My journey with Mad Wolf and his clan.--An interesting and impressive procession.--Mad Wolf selects a site for the Sun-dance camp.--Formation of the camp according to clans.--Origin of clan names.--Pitching the Sacred Tipi.--Guests in my tipi.--Arrival of Running Crane with prominent chiefs from the south.--Visitors from many Indian tribes.--Mad Dog society as police.

IN response to the summons to prepare for the Sun-dance, the Indians north of Willow Creek continued to gather around the lodge of Mad Wolf, until the camp was widely spread upon the plain. For many days the sun had been hot, and the people waited impatiently for the signal to move to the fourth and last camp. Finally, when the evening sun was approaching the summits of the Rockies, Mad Wolf stepped from the sacred tipi. His strong voice rang far out over the quiet plain with the announcement:

"Hear, my children! The grass is now green and long upon the prairies, and the time has come, when we should move together to the big flat near Willow Creek for the Sun-dance. Be prepared to start at the rising of the sun! Let everyone go!

He sent a messenger to Badger Creek, where the southern division of the tribe had assembled, and were waiting under Seco-mo-muckon (Running Crane), to instruct them also to move at the appointed time to Willow Creek. On the following morning, the occupants

[p. 193]

of the sacred tipi were astir before daybreak. All the labour of moving was performed by the chosen assistants of Gives-to-the-Sun. She sat apart, behind the sacred travois, [*1] on a buffalo robe and a pillow stuffed with antelope hair. With head bowed in prayer, she faced towards the south, the direction in which they would move for the last camp. I heard Natokoma

Click to enlarge
"GIVES-TO-THE-SUN SAT APART, BEHIND THE SACRED TRAVOIS, HER HEAD BOWED IN PRAYER."

uttering a prayer, while placing the sacred travois before her, and then again while loading it with the ceremonial clothes of Gives-to-the-Sun. These were a buckskin dress, decorated with elk tusks, beaded leggings and moccasins, the medicine bonnet and robe of soft-tanned elk skin; together with parfleches of sacred tongues, juniper branches and the medicine

[p. 194]

bundles to be used in the Sun-dance ceremonial. Gives-to-the-Sun's own saddle horse was hitched to the sacred travois, which, as well as the harness, was painted red. She had become so weak and exhausted by fasting and close confinement that it was necessary for O-mis-tai-pokah and his wife to lift her into the saddle. The fasting of those who took a prominent part in the

Click to enlarge
GIVES-TO-THE-SUN MOUNTED ON THE TRAVOIS HORSE.

ceremonial was believed to excite the pity of the Great Spirit and to be of the greatest importance for securing a favourable answer to prayer.

All eyes were now fixed upon Mad Wolf's lodge, waiting for the signal to move. When it was taken down, the entire camp became a scene of confusion. Mad Wolf mounted his horse, singing a chant. He rode with O-mis-tai-pokah to a ridge near by and was closely followed by Natokoma and Gives-to-the-Sun with the

[p. 195]

sacred travois. There they waited till the rest were ready to start. Then Mad Wolf slowly led the way,

Click to enlarge
NATOKEMA AND GIVES-TO-THE-SUN WAITING WITH THE SACRED TRAVOIS.

following no trail, but directing his course southward across the open plains. He was followed by many well-known chiefs, among whom I recognised White Grass, Isso-koyi-kinni (Heavy Breast),
Click to enlarge
"O-MIS-TAI-PO-KAH WITH
 LONG GREY HAIR FALLING
 OVER HIS SHOULDERS."
 Ear Rings, Bull Child, Double Runner, Three Bears, Morning Plume, Bear Child, Maka, Stock-stchi, Blessed Weasel, Cream Antelope and Medicine Weasel. I rode with the clan of Hard Top Knots, the relatives and friends of Mad Wolf. Near by were Kionama and Menake; also Onesta and Nitana with their families. Directly in front rode Anatapsa, my pretty Indian niece (Mad Wolf's granddaughter), with Dives-under-water,

[p. 196]

a granddaughter of the head chief. They were both astride the same horse and greatly interested me, because of their vigorous conversation in the sign language. Anatapsa, gaily dressed, sat in front, her long black hair flying in the wind. Her blanket of brilliant scarlet fell loosely from her shoulders,

Click to enlarge
GIVES-TO-THE-SUN'S OWN HORSE WAS HITCHED TO THE SACRED TRAVOIS.

confined at the waist by a belt heavily beaded. Her small feet, clad in dainty moccasins, were continually kicking the horse's sides to urge him forward. Dives-under-water, clothed in a robe of soft-tanned fawn skin with beaded stripes, was seated behind. She was deaf and dumb but full of life and skilled in the sign language. Her busy hands moved gracefully

[p. 197]

while talking with Anatapsa. From their mischievous looks and frequent peals of laughter, I knew their jokes were at the expense of those around them.

I passed a travois bearing three aged squaws. They were berating their horse, a raw-boned, old cripple,

Click to enlarge
ANATAPSA AND DIVES-UNDER-WATER RODE ASTRIDE THE SAME HORSE.

trying to urge him from a slow walk, so that they could keep pace with the procession. One was vigorously beating him with a stick, but it was in vain, for he hobbled placidly along, with eyes closed and head

[p. 198]

hanging down, unmindful both of the stick and their execrations. The way led across rich meadows brilliant with roses and wild flowers, winding in and out among the ridges and through deep ravines.

Leaving the line, I rode ahead and climbed a high ridge, where I could have a better view of the interesting and impressive procession of Mad Wolf and his

Click to enlarge
"THE TWO NOBLE CHIEFS WERE IN THE LEAD AND WERE FOLLOWED BY THE MEDICINE WOMEN WITH THE SACRED TRAVOIS."

tribe, moving slowly across the plains. When the line crossed the summit of the ridge, the dark forms outlined against the sky made a striking picture. The two noble chiefs were in the lead, Mad Wolf gazing straight ahead, tall, erect, and with head thrown proudly back, and O-mis-tai-po-kah at his side, much older, somewhat stooped, his long grey hair falling over his shoulders. They were closely followed by the medicine women, with the sacred travois and its mysterious bundles, the

[p. 199]

poles crossing in front, high above the horse's head and their butt ends dragging behind on the ground. There was a long line of warriors, with rifles and war bonnets of eagles' feathers, and bearing the sacred Spear and Shield and also the Medicine Pipe. Bells fastened to the legs of the riders and around their horses' necks

Click to enlarge
THE THREE CHIEFS.

jingled at every step. Then came a number of travois, laden with lodges and supplies in charge of squaws. In the rear were groups of old men, women, children and young girls. Each family had its pack of dogs, all as gaunt and hungry-looking as prairie wolves. To the south lay Willow Creek and the broad plain selected by Mad Wolf for the camp, resembling an enormous

[p. 200]

arena with hills rising on all sides. It was covered with long prairie grass, still green from the many rains of spring. At one end was a small lake, and beyond, as far as the eye could reach, were green rounded ridges, closely following each other like great billows of the ocean. I overtook the procession while it was stopping

Click to enlarge
"THERE WAS A LONG LINE OF WARRIORS WITH RIFLES AND WAR-BONNETS AND BEARING THE SACRED SPEAR AND SHIELD."

at Willow Creek for the fourth and last time, as required by the Sun ceremonial.

Mad Wolf slowly advanced to the centre of the plain and all waited while he selected a site for the Sun lodge. There was no confusion. The site having been chosen, the camp circle was formed in an orderly manner, according to the different clans or blood relatives. Each family knew where they belonged, and took their accustomed positions. Mad Wolf as leader of the Nee-ah-kinna clan (Hard Top Knots), with his followers, occupied the north side of the plain. The

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] Hard Top Knots were so named because of the peculiar arrangement of the hair of the chief, who founded the clan. 
Click to enlarge
MOUNTAIN CHIEF. (A noted warrior.)
 There were also the Small Robes, Worm People, and Grease Melters, the last so called because they covered their roasted meats with melted grease. The Lone Eaters were so named, because one of their chiefs had been accustomed to rise early with his family and finish breakfast, before the rest of the tribe were astir, to avoid inviting guests. When his peculiarity was noticed, his clan became known as the Lone 
Click to enlarge
BIG MOON.
 Eaters. The Don't Laughs name had its origin in the eccentricity of one of their women who shunned men and was never known to smile. But to the astonishment of the tribe she suddenly fell in love with a young man and eloped with him. After this incident, the clan took the name, Don't Laughs. The name of the Skunks had its rise in an occurrence which caused much

[p. 202]

amusement in the tribe. A young man wanted to marry an Indian maiden, but his suit was refused, because of his slovenly habits. She made a song and sang it publicly with the words, "Young men appear well at a distance, but when you are close to them, they smell like skunks." From that time his band

Click to enlarge
PITCHING THE SACRED TIPI.

was named Ah-pi-ki-yix = Bad Smelling Animals (or Skunks).

Mad Wolf sat apart smoking, until everything was finished, but speaking to no one. Gives-to-the-Sun, too weak from fasting and the exertion of the journey to sit upright, leaned with bowed head and covered face against Natokema. The women assistants pitched her sacred tipi, before they attended to the wants of their own families. They scattered green branches

[p. 203]

around the outside as a sign that Gives-to-the-Sun, the sacred woman, must not i)e disturbed. The medicine

Click to enlarge
ARRIVAL OF RUNNING CRANE LEADING THE SOUTHERN DIVISION OF THE TRIBE.

bundles were placed inside and the sacred travois, with cottonwood branches, against the back of the lodge.

Click to enlarge
TEARS-IN-HER-EYES IN HER BLACKFOOT CRADLE.

[paragraph continues] My tipi was shared by Kionama and Menake, Indian friends, who later went with me on my expedition into

[p. 204]

the north, with their daughter Sinopa (Kit-fox), two sons, Emonissi (Otter) and Seeyea, and Isto-kopena (Tears-in-her-eyes), a baby six months old. Tears-in-her-eyes was a niece of Mad Wolf's.

When her mother died, soon after her birth, she was nursed by sympathetic squaws, but continued to waste

Click to enlarge
CHIEF OF THE MAD DOGS.

away, and would have died, had it not been for the motherly Menake. Under her watchful care she changed into a happy, healthy child, so pretty and lovable, that everyone was delighted to show her attention. Her cradle was a little hammock made of blankets, ingeniously folded over buckskin thongs and swung from the lodge poles. In the evening Menake rocked her to sleep, singing a Blackfoot cradle song.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] When buffaloes were numerous, the udders from dead buffalo cows have been taken for suckling babies, which had lost their mothers. There is a Blackfoot woman, now living, who was thus kept alive on buffalo milk.

Seco-mo-muckon (Running Crane) appeared later in the morning, leading the Indians from the south. He

Click to enlarge
MAD DOG LODGES (BLACKFEET POLICE).

took his position on the south side of the plain, opposite to Mad Wolf. With him were Neno-kyio (Bear Chief), Morning Eagle, Little Plume, Nena-estoke (Mountain Chief), Little Dog, Spotted Eagle, O-muck-ah-tose (Big Moon), Shoots-in-the-air, Brocky, Big Beaver, Flat Tail, Curly Bear, Stomick-onesta (Bull Calf), Elk Horn, Black Bear, Strangling Wolf, Kattana (No Chief), and

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] White Man. During the day, the Indians continued to come from all directions, until they numbered about two thousand. There were representatives from many leading tribes of the north-west, the Nez Perce, Sarcees, North Blackfeet, Bloods, Crees, Assinniboines, Gros Ventres, Flatheads, Bannocks, Kutenai, Pend d'Oreilles, Mandans and Sioux. The camp was formed in an enormous circle, with the site for the sacred Sun-lodge in the centre. Many tipis of the leading chiefs were strikingly decorated. They were pitched, for the most part, in the inner circle, the most conspicuous part of the encampment, while the small and inferior tipis were relegated to the outskirts of the great circle. The three lodges of the Mad Dog Society (Blackfeet police) were grouped near the centre of the great circle. To them the chiefs looked for the enforcement of their orders and the policing of the encampment. In moving camp, they saw that none lagged behind, and in making camp, that every lodge was in its proper place, and that the great circle was symmetrically formed. I have never seen an equally large gathering of white men where there was as little disturbance. Although I was continually present, I saw no fighting in the great encampment, and it was a rare occurrence to hear even angry words. In their largest lodge, the Mad Dogs kept their weapons and society clothes, and assembled to feast and to dress for their dances, which took place both day and night.

Click to enlarge
INNER CIRCLE OF PAINTED TIPIS

Footnotes

^193:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 207]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

PAINTED TIPIS

The tipi as a dwelling.--Impressive spectacle of the "White City" of the Blackfeet.--Protective designs of tipis.--Their sacred character and origin.--Strict secrecy of the owners.--I secure an Otter Tipi that was believed to have lost its protective power.--The ceremonial of transfer and its rules.--Special ceremonials and feast.--Transfer of the Cross Stripe Tipi to Wolf Tail.--Methods of painting tipis.--Kinds of paint used.--Manner of securing paints.--Medicine Weasel's superstitious fear of copying an Otter design.--Five different Otter Tipis in one camp.--While guest in an Otter Tipi, I learned the symbols of its decorations.--The War Tipi.--Description of its picture writings.--I secure a War and Hunting Tipi.--Relation of Painted Tipis to Sun-Worship.

OF all types of primitive dwellings, the tipi of the plains-tribes, with its conical shape, tapering poles and ingeniously devised "ears" for facilitating the upward draught for the inside fire, is one of the most picturesque and beautiful. It has been evolved in the distant past to meet the requirements of a nomadic people for shelter. Like the snow igloo of the far distant Esquimaux, it displays much skill in the adaptation of available materials to the necessities of their environment. It is a perfect habitation for comfort, convenience and good ventilation in both summer and winter. Its design and interior arrangements are so complete, they never change. In recent years canvas has been substituted as a covering in place of buffalo skins, because of the practical extinction of the buffalo.

No one who has seen the "White City" of the

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Blackfeet, during their annual Festival of the Sun, can ever forget the strange and fascinating beauty of the scene. With the snow-capped Rocky Mountains for a background, hundreds of white tipis, uniform in shape,

Click to enlarge
CROW TIPI IN 1896 (MADE OF SKINS). REAR VIEW.

and pitched in perfect order by clans, are spread upon the plain in a great circular encampment.

The rapidity with which such a great camp can be either "pitched" or "struck" is almost incredible. Catlin, in describing the sudden striking of a similar camp by the Sioux, says: "At the time announced, the lodge of the chief is seen flapping in the wind, a

[p. 209]

part of the poles having been taken out from under it. This is the signal, and in one minute 600 lodges (on a level and beautiful prairie), which before had been strained tight and fixed, were seen waving and flapping in the wind, and in one minute more all were flat upon the ground. Their horses and dogs, of which they had a vast number, had all been secured upon the spot in

Click to enlarge
CROW TIPI IN 1906 (MADE OF COTTON DUCK). FRONT VIEW.

readiness, and each one was speedily loaded with the burden allotted to it, and made ready to fall into the grand procession."

The tipi has received an added element of individuality and picturesqueness, originating, no one knows when, by the use of painted decorations in colours, representing prominent events in the history of the tribe, or of the owner, or symbolical designs of religious significance. The symbolical designs, medicine bundles

[p. 210]

and ceremonials attached to them, which are believed to secure for their owners and their families protective power from sickness and misfortune, suggest a large and interesting field for investigation and study. These designs and the make-up of the medicine bundles were always

Click to enlarge
BIG ROCK TIPI.

secured through dreams, after long fasting and solitary communion with nature. They thus became, by right of discovery, the exclusive property of their owners, who might transfer them to others, but there could be no duplicates. When a painted tipi became worn out, a new one, with the same decorations, could take its

[p. 211]

place, but the owner must destroy the original, sacrificing it to the Sun by spreading it upon a lake, and sinking it beneath the water. The Yellow Buffalo Tipi, also the Crow, Otter, Serpent, Cross Stripe, Black Buffalo, Big Rock and others, with their bundles and the legends of their origin have been handed down

Click to enlarge
SERPENT TIPI.

through many generations, and are considered preeminent in their strong protective power. Their ownership is still jealously guarded by the head men of the Blackfeet, who, because of their sacred character and power, and consequent value to the tribe, will not sanction their disposal to white men. Through several years of repeated failures, in trying to purchase a painted tipi, I was made to realise the force of the rigid

[p. 212]

customs governing their ownership, the religious barriers of ceremonial requirements and the strict secrecy of the owners. I finally secured an Otter Tipi from an Indian, out only because of the unusual circumstance, that he

Click to enlarge
CROSS STRIPE OR BEAVER TIPI.

believed it had lost its protective power, his wife and all his children having died.

Painted Tipis may change ownership, in the fulfilment of vows, made by either men, or women in time of peril, or in behalf of the sick. Anyone, who is willing

[p. 213]

to observe the rules of the medicine and to keep the secrets of the ceremonial, can make the vow. There are, however, certain penalties, in the form of sickness, or loss of property, which are believed will fall upon their owner, if the ceremonial is not carefully followed. Each painted tipi has its medicine bundle composed of the skins of birds and animals, or other articles, that

Click to enlarge
THUNDER TIPI (ON LEFT), RED STRIPE TIPI (IN CENTRE).
 (Thunder Tipi was painted blue, with Thunder-bird at the back.)

are used in the ceremonial of transfer, and at other times. The man, receiving the tipi, makes payment to the owner with horses and other gifts. His relatives generally contribute, to show that they take a deep interest in the transaction, and to demonstrate to the tribe that they are willing to sacrifice their property to help their clansman.

The ceremonial and feast are also given at a certain time of the year. The time for the Thunder Tipi is

[p. 214]

when the first thunder is heard in the Spring, and for the Beaver Tipi when the first grass is seen,--the time when the beavers are opening their winter lodges.

During a Sun-dance camp, Wolf Tail, in fulfilment of a vow to buy the Cross Stripe or Beaver Tipi, called upon Wipes his-eyes, the owner, and gave him a horse and a pipe as a retainer. According to the rules of the medicine, Wipes-his-eyes could not refuse to part with the sacred tipi. The ceremonial, with full payment, took place at a later time. On the day following, when I was told of the occurrence, I visited the Cross Stripe Tipi and saw Wolf Tail's horse tied outside, while the wife and children of Wipes-his-eyes were mourning because they must give up their home, to which they had become deeply attached, having lived in it for many years. Later in the day I saw the tipi taken down, to be pitched by Wolf Tail among the clan of the Skunks.

Although the use of paints as a preservative was unknown among the Blackfeet, the decorative painting of tipis and the symbolic marking of sacred objects, were in such general use, as to make the procuring and preparing of paints a business in itself. Onesta and his wife Nitana, my companions while visiting the Bloods and North Piegans in Alberta, were known as "paint gatherers." They traded in them with their own people and also with other Indian tribes. Onesta told me of the best places for securing the different coloured paints and their methods of preparing them.

There were formerly men who made a speciality of painting tipis. Their names were Marrow Bones, Calf Looking and Eagle Flag. Whenever anyone had a tipi to be painted, he gave a feast and invited his

[p. 215]

friends. After songs and prayers, all present would assist the leader chosen to do the painting. The pencils used for painting were made from buffalo bones, which were porous and readily absorbed and held the paint. A different pencil was used for each colour. Willow sticks were used for ruling the lines, which were first traced out with a white liquid scraped from a hide.

Click to enlarge
BLACK BUFFALO TIPI.

The paints were dug from the ground. The yellow and black colours were found at certain places along the Marias River. The yellow clay was first worked into a dough-like mass, and then roasted on a hot fire of coals, when it became a red powder. This is called the sacred red paint and is used in the ceremonials. Black was made from charred wood. The green paint was formerly secured from a large lake north-east of the Katoysix, (Sweet Pine Hills). It was made from the scum taken from

[p. 216]

the surface of the water and dried. Most of the yellow came from a place on the Yellowstone River near some warm springs, but was also made out of the buffalo's gall.

"There was once a large camp of Blackfeet at these springs. Some of them had made a tunnel into a high cut-bank and were hard at work getting out yellow paint. One old woman, who made a speciality of paints, was digging, while about eighty women, with their paint bags, were waiting outside. Suddenly, the old woman called from the cave that her arms were caught. She was frightened and said that she wanted to come out. An Indian, seated on a butte not far away, shouted to them that the bank was caving in. At first it came slowly, and then with such a rush, that the women could not escape. They were buried beneath great masses of earth. Almost all of the women were caught. The Indians worked night and day to uncover them, but many were taken out dead."

Nitana then said, "just before we started on our northern expedition, I was digging paint on Birch Creek. When I had finished, I prayed for the old chief, Many-white-horses, and then examined my paint, only to find it had turned to worthless dirt. I was so frightened that I hurried back to the lodge. Soon after this, we heard that Many-white-horses had died." Onesta replied to his wife, "If you had prayed for Heavy Breast, as you should have done, because he was then giving the Sun-dance, your paint would not have been changed to dirt." It was the custom, when a woman was digging paint, to offer prayers in behalf of some prominent medicine man."

No Blackfoot would venture to copy the design of a painted tipi, unless it had been regularly transferred to

[p. 217]

him, or been received in a dream, believing that such an infringement would incur the penalty of sickness, or death. I first realised the strength of this superstition when I attempted to have a tipi of my own painted. I went to Medicine Weasel--an old friend of Mad Wolf's--asking his assistance and promising to reward him for his trouble. He willingly agreed, not realising fully the character of my proposition. Next day, when I handed him the paints and suggested his making it into an Otter Tipi, he begged to be released, explaining that he had no right to copy the Otter design, and to do so might bring on a severe illness, or even cause his death. After several futile efforts I abandoned my purpose, because of the alarm it caused among my Blackfeet friends.

In the Sun-dance camp, consisting of three hundred and fifty lodges, I counted thirty-five painted tipis--one-tenth of the entire number. They included a great variety of designs, but lack of space forbids my taking more than a few descriptions from my notes. There were five Otter Tipis, each differing from the others, but all having a separate and distinct origin.

In nearly all of these painted tipis, there is an appropriate and logical arrangement of the decorations. There is generally, at the bottom, an encircling band of dark colour representing the earth. Within this band is a row of discs called "dusty stars." The Blackfeet have given the name "dusty stars" to the puff-balls which grow in circular clusters upon the prairies, because they are supposed to be meteors, which have fallen from the night-sky and spring up into puff-balls in a single night. They call them "dusty stars" because they emit a puff of dust when pressed. Resting on this lowest band, we often find a row of

[p. 218]

rounded, or of pointed projections, representing rounded ridges or pointed mountain peaks. Upon the broad central space above these is portrayed the protective design of animal, bird, sacred rock, thunder-trails, or other emblems, which imparts to the lodge its protective

Click to enlarge
OTTER TIPI.

power and from which it receives its distinctive title.

Surmounting all, and including the "ears," a broad encircling band of black represents the night sky, on which are portrayed the sun and crescent moon, the constellations of the Seven Brothers and Lost Children (Great Bear and Pleiades), and a Maltese cross, the

[p. 219]

emblem of the Morning Star. This cross is also said to represent the Butterfly (or Sleep Bringer), which is believed to have great power in bringing dreams to the owner.

I was once a guest for a week in an Otter Tipi, and had the opportunity of learning the symbolic meaning of its decorations, the ceremonial belonging to it and

Click to enlarge
WAR TIPI OF RUNNING RABBIT.

the pictures and signs which had been painted on the owner's body for the ceremonial of its transfer. A section of the top was painted black to represent the night-sky. On it the Morning Star was represented by a yellow cross, to the centre of which was attached a sacred buffalo tail. On opposite sides of the black band the two constellations were painted in yellow clusters. A procession of otters, painted on the middle space

[p. 220]

beneath, made it an Otter Tipi and gave it the protective power promised in the dream, which originally revealed the design. At the bottom of the canvas a broad band in dark colour represented the earth, and on it two parallel rows of discs were painted in yellow, to represent the "dusty stars" of the prairie.

For the ceremonial of transferring the Otter Tipi, all the painting on the face and body of the purchaser was made symbolical of the Otter. Parallel lines on both sides of his face represented otter trails. Upon his arms were painted otter paws. Over his body were otter tracks and upon his breast a circle representing an otter lodge on the river bank.

The painted War Tipi of Running Rabbit was of an entirely different character, being covered with picture records of tribal victories. It is an interesting fact that Indians never make records of their defeats. The War Tipi had a broad red band encircling the bottom. The top was painted black, with a red star at the back. The picture records in the central space, which were all in red, represented battles with the Crows, Sioux, Snakes, Cheyennes and Flatheads. There was depicted a daring horse-stealing expedition of a Blackfoot chief, who was in the act of cutting loose a horse, tied close to a lodge, in full view of the owner. A warrior was engaged in a fierce hand-to-hand conflict, while seizing his enemy's rifle. A number of successful scouting expeditions of a brave chief were marked, each expedition being portrayed by three sides of a square. A circle around a number of arrows pointing in all directions represented a small entrenchment where a Blackfoot warrior repelled the enemy after a desperate fight. On a long crooked line, representing the course

[p. 221]

of a river, was marked the bend, where a famous fight with the Crows took place. The brave act of a warrior was recorded, who saved the lives of two wounded comrades, by carrying one with him on his own horse

Click to enlarge
WAR TIPI (REAR VIEW).
 (The crooked lines represent rivers where famous fights took place.)

and leading a second horse carrying the other. The making of the first treaty with the whites, by a Blackfoot chief, was recorded as an event of great importance. A warrior stealing the first mule from the white soldiers was also regarded as an act of

[p. 222]

special renown, because mules had never been seen before by the Blackfeet.

My own tipi, which was made by Ips-e-nikki (Kills-close-to-the-lake), wife of Big Eyes, was decorated with symbols of the Blackfeet religion, and pictographs of

Click to enlarge
MY OWN DECORATED TIPI.

interesting events, both of war and hunting, in her husband's life. The top was painted yellow and had the usual stellar constellations on both "ears." The Sun and Morning Star were at the back with sun dogs at the sides and a rainbow beneath. In two perpendicular rows, one on each side of the door, were representations of Rocky Mountain peaks. At the

[p. 223]

bottom was a yellow hand, with a single row of discs for "dusty stars." Figures of men, animals and Indian camps were painted in yellow, black and red on the central space of the canvas. There was an attack by a band of Sioux upon Big Eyes, while travelling with his family, and also his hand-to-hand fight with the Sioux Chief. He was represented as stealing by night a horse picketed close to a Crow lodge, also a mule from a white man; also as suddenly descending at daybreak upon a white man milking a cow; and also in a desperate fight on horse-back with a band of Cree Indians.

On the north-side was depicted Big Eyes' thrilling fight in the Rocky Mountains with five grizzly bears (a mother bear with two large cubs and two other bears) in a berry patch,--his wounding the she-bear,--her charge and the desperate struggle, when he plunged his knife into her breast and she tore him with her teeth and claws, then, leaving him for dead, to attack and lacerate his horse.

A white man looking upon the inside circle of Painted Tipis, in the great encampment of the Sun-dance festival, would be impressed with their imposing array and with the spectacular effect of their novel colourings and fantastic decorations. But, it probably would never occur to him that he was looking upon pictorial representations of the tipi-owner's religion. As the wearing of the crucifix is the outward sign to the world of the inward faith of many Christians, so these tipi representations of the Buffalo, Beaver, Elk, Otter, Eagle and Antelope proclaim the belief of the Blackfeet, that these sacred animals and birds have been endowed with power from the Sun, and, therefore, that the owner and his family may secure from them aid in danger and protection from sickness and misfortune. Just as patron

[p. 224]

saints are worshipped to-day, and the Lares and Penates of pagan Rome were worshipped two thousand years ago for household protection, in like manner the spirit of the otter, or buffalo, or beaver, is worshipped and its visible representation on the tipi is held sacred by the Blackfoot family as their powerful protector.

These symbolic decorations, having a religious significance are an ever present reminder to the family of their obligations to their tutelary medicine, and of the protection they may expect as a reward for their strict observance of its rules. Wherever the ascending smoke of their fires denotes their abode, there they piously display the symbols of their religious faith.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THE SUN-DANCE CAMP

Camp scenes of the first day.--An Indian mother's happy disposition.--Manner of inviting guests to a feast.--Old Morning Eagle exhibits his war horse.--His medicine songs at sunrise.--Natosin, a visiting chief from the North Blackfeet.--A Blackfoot cradle.--Varied industries of the women.--Their antipathy to the camera.--Their manufacture of tipis.--Training of girls by their mothers.--Curing of meat and making of pemmican by the women.--Diet of the Blackfeet.--A dog feast by visiting Assinniboines.

THE first day in the Sun-dance camp was warm and pleasant. The Indians remained outside their tipis greeting their friends and watching for late arrivals. All were light-hearted and glad to be assembled in the great tribal camp. On all sides were scenes of activity, boys galloping bareback over the hills while rounding up the horses, men picketing their horses and driving large herds of them to the lake for water. Women were arranging the lodges, caring for the medicine bundles and bringing in wood and water in preparation for the evening meal.

An inseparable feature of an Indian camp is the large numbers of dogs of all kinds. They mostly run in packs, continually brawling, or, for the sake of excitement, racing after horsemen and riderless horses on the hills, or even worrying a single dog that had incautiously ventured out alone.

Little Owl's large family were seated about an outside

[p. 226]

fire in front of his lodge, while Poi-o-pa-ta-mach-ka (Coming Running) prepared their supper. She was young and very pretty, although the mother of a numerous flock of children. As my lodge was close by, I had an opportunity of observing her overburdened life. She was entertaining visitors from the Flathead tribe in her single-roomed home. A crowd of small children
Click to enlarge
COMING RUNNING.
 were hanging about her, demanding attention, one of them a young baby, and another, a little daughter, suffering from a dangerous abscess. But, in spite of her cares and labours, she was always smiling and in a good humour. I did not once hear her complain, or speak an angry, or impatient word. Her bright and cheerful disposition radiated sunshine to all around her.

Wolf Chief came from his lodge to announce that he was giving a feast. He invited his guests by shouting each of their names several times in succession. The simplicity of this Blackfoot custom of issuing social invitations contrasts with the complicated forms observed in civilised society.

Morning Eagle, a noted old warrior and the hero of many battles, led through the camp his old white war-horse, decorated with medicine emblems and picture writings, representing his achievements in early days, while, in a loud voice he called the people's

[p. 227]

attention to his "advertising horse," and proclaimed his deeds of valour. Although a very old man, he was still alive during the Sun-dance camp of 1909, when his lodge was close to mine. He was then nearly blind and had completely lost the use of his legs, but he still

Click to enlarge
LITTLE OWL'S FAMILY AROUND AN OUTSIDE FIRE.
 (Coming Running is surrounded by children.)

retained his old-time enthusiasm and love of excitement. He had the young men lift him upon his war horse, that he might ride through camp as of old and take part in the sham battles. He awakened me every morning at sunrise (4.30), when he began to chant his medicine songs, repeating the performance at precisely the same time each day. The songs seemed very similar, the

[p. 228]

principal variations consisting in changes of rhythm and in the different bird, or animal calls at the end of each. During a heavy storm, and in spite of his age

Click to enlarge
MORNING EAGLE AND HIS OLD WHITE WAR HORSE.

and feebleness, he crawled from the lodge on his hands and knees and seated himself in the pouring rain, with only a blanket thrown over his head, to pray and to chant medicine songs, for the purpose of driving away the storm.

[p. 229]

Standing before his small tipi among the North Blackfeet, was an elderly chief named Natosin (Sun Chief). His two travois, one with a wicker frame constructed over the seat as a protection from the weather, were ingeniously raised together for a sun shade over the door. He was over six feet in height and of dignified bearing. His long hair was tinged with grey and his

Click to enlarge
NATOSIN'S TIPI AND TWO TRAVOIS.

face manly and earnest. He seemed pleased, when I stopped to tell him that I had once visited his people. At that moment his wife came from the lodge and joined in welcoming me. Natosin said, "We have come here in fulfilment of a vow. During the past winter, when very sick, I vowed that if my health was restored, I would attend the next Sun-dance. When we heard the ceremonial was to be given here, we came

[p. 230]

from the far north, that I might fulfil my vow and that we might partake of the sacred food."

In another tipi I heard a woman singing softly. Looking within I saw a little hammock, ingeniously made by folding a blanket over two buckskin thongs, swinging from the poles. The baby slept, while its old grandmother gently rocked the hammock, singing a lullaby, just as our affectionate grandmothers do.

Click to enlarge
TWO WOMEN TANNING A GREEN HIDE.

Two women were tanning a green hide, which was pegged to the ground, hair-side down. They first fleshed it with large sharpened elk-bones, and then scraped it with an adze-shaped tool to make it of uniform thickness. An old woman was patiently softening a hide, which is the last step in tanning. She pulled and worked it against a raw-hide rope, fastened at both ends to an upright pole. When the hide became sufficiently soft and pliable, she whitened it by rubbing with a piece of fungus.

[p. 231]

Running Fisher's wife was making parfleches (rawhide cases) near the Otter Tipi. They were used by the Blackfeet as receptacles, and for packs on horses while travelling.

I found greater difficulty in photographing women than men. I was at a loss to understand the cause of my trouble, until I discovered that they were unwilling

Click to enlarge
OLD WOMAN SOFT TANNING.

to have their pictures taken dressed in their ordinary clothes, as I usually found them while pursuing their daily avocations. But they took an entirely different view of the matter when dressed in their finery. I was told, however, that some women believed that the machine had magical power, and were afraid of it. This belief was started by a medicine man who was jealous of his wife's frequent visits to a photographer's place. But he effectually stopped them when he

[p. 232]

explained to her that, by means of the camera, the white man was able to see through her clothes.

A group of women were seated on the ground, sewing a large tipi covering which was spread out before them. They seemed to be thoroughly enjoying themselves,

Click to enlarge
WOMEN SEWING A TIPI COVERING.

gossiping, smoking, and eating while at their work, much after the fashion of the neighbourly quilting bees of our grandmothers. The tipi coverings were so large and heavy that it would have been impossible for one woman to do the work alone. Joint labour was a necessity, at the same time furnishing a means of social enjoyment. When the group had finished one tipi they

[p. 233]

moved on to help another woman, who was waiting for their assistance on her tipi covering.

Not only the manufacture, but also the keep--the "pitching" and "striking" of the tipi, was the office of women. They became so expert in both, that either was the work of only a few minutes. In former days, when buffaloes were numerous, the Blackfeet made

Click to enlarge
WOMEN PITCHING A TIPI.
 (Lifting the covering into place.)

their tipis of buffalo skins. They now use canvas, or duck. The skins were tanned white but, in use, became smoke-coloured in the upper part of the tipi. When a lodge covering was discarded, it was cut up for moccasins, because they would not harden or shrink.

It required eight buffalo skins to make a small lodge, and from twenty to thirty to make a very large one. The average size was about sixteen feet in diameter

[p. 234]

at the base, while large ones measured twenty-five feet. From fourteen to twenty-six poles were used for the supporting framework, and two others as "ear-poles" for facilitating the escape of smoke. The best poles are made of the slim and straight mountain pines, which the women cut and peel and season slowly, to keep them straight. Their length varies from fifteen to thirty feet according to the size of the tipi. A good set of poles having been secured, it is carried everywhere in their wanderings.

The following method of pitching a tipi was taught me by the Blackfeet. Four poles of equal length were selected. Lashing them together near their tops with a strong cord, we stood them up like a tripod and spread out their butts on the ground, very much on the same principle as the stacking of arms, with fixed bayonets, by infantry. This made a firm basis or skeleton for the completed framework. The other poles were then placed around, equi-distant from each other, their tops falling into the forked seat, made by the crossed tops of the four poles first put into place. Then, spreading the canvas covering upon the ground, we tied a pole to its middle and raised it to its proper position against the standing poles. The covering was then drawn around the framework of poles and the two ends were pinned together above the door opening in front, with seven slender sticks, or keys. By spreading out the poles uniformly at the base, the tipi was made symmetrical and by pegging the canvas down tightly all around, it was made to fit snugly. Last of all the two "ear-poles" were put in position, suited to the direction of the wind, and regulating the draught of the smoke-hole at the top. Inside, the fire-place occupied the centre, being made of stones, to confine

[p. 235]

the fire in a small circle. Around it were placed the beds, provisions and cooking utensils. There was keen rivalry among the women in the matter of pitching the first new tipi in the spring, also as to who would excel in having the neatest tipi and the best tanned robes and skins.

Although it was customary for Indian women to

Click to enlarge
MAKING PARFLECHES.

perform the menial work, while men filled the more exalted vocation of providing and defending, yet it is a mistake to conclude that Blackfeet women rebelled against their lot. A Blackfoot mother conscientiously trained her daughter from childhood in the tanning of hides and converting them into clothes and shelter, the making of lodges and travois, and in the knowledge of herbs and wild vegetables used for eating and healing.

[p. 236]

[paragraph continues] Women considered that this work was their rightful vocation and allowed no interference from the men of the family. In fact as the men lacked the necessary training they naturally were unfitted for these tasks.

The superiority of women in all household arts, which was developed by careful training from childhood, was

Click to enlarge
WOMAN CARVING A POLE.
 (Used inside as part of a lodge-back.)

a marked feature of their social life. The same idea is suggested in a very primitive and curious Blackfeet legend, which tells of a period before the institution of the family, when men and women lived in separate camps. It describes the clothes and lodges of the men as poor compared with those used by the women, and

[p. 237]

alludes to the great benefits resulting to the men, after the women chose them as mates.

In front of the war-tipi several women were engaged in drying and smoking meat upon poles erected for the purpose. From the time, when the men killed the game, the cutting of the meat, packing it on horses into camp, curing it, and finally cooking it, all was the work

Click to enlarge
WOMEN DRYING AND SMOKING MEAT UPON POLES.

of women. The preparing of pemmican, the Blackfeet's "staff of life," a palatable form of condensed food, which was used for long journeys and for winter supplies, was also their duty. Their method of preparing it consisted, first, of cutting the meat into strips and drying it in the sun. It was then well pounded in a mixture together with wild cherries. To this was added

[p. 238]

shredded meat, forming a kind of mince-meat, which was again dried and stored in parfleches for future use.

The Blackfeet subsisted mainly upon buffalo meat, when it could be secured. They also used sarvis berries, wild cherries, buffalo berries and vegetables such as camass, wild turnips, wild onions, wild potatoes, bitter root and wild rhubarb. They secured wild ducks and geese by striking them over the head with long sticks. Beaver tails were considered a great delicacy. They

Click to enlarge
MY PUPPY NEIGHBOURS ASLEEP IN THEIR SMALL TIPI.

snared rabbits with willow sticks and fish with horse-hairs, but did not often eat them, because they preferred meat, which was abundant. They ridiculed the custom of eating dogs practised by the Crees, Gros Ventres and Assinniboines. The Cree Indians were not particular as to their diet for they are said to have eaten skunks, badgers, prairie dogs and even wolves and coyotes.

I once had an opportunity to witness the preparation of a dog feast by a band of Assinniboines, who were visiting in a Blackfeet camp. It happened that my

[p. 239]

lodge was next to Eagle Child's, who was the owner of a litter of fat puppies. He had erected close by, a small tipi where they slept, and they played daily before my door. One night the puppies suddenly disappeared, Eagle Child himself could not explain what had become of them. The mystery, however, was solved when I went to call upon the Assinniboines. I saw that some of

Click to enlarge
ASSINNIBOINE WOMAN MAKING SOUP OUT OF MY PUPPY FRIENDS.

my puppy neighbours had already been cut up and were boiling in a large pot, while others lay in the hot ashes to have the hair singed off. Nothing was wasted. Near by was a collection of small legs and feet which were to be used for soup and was afterwards described in jest by my Blackfeet friends as "the puppy paw soup of the Assinniboines."

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 240]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

EVENING SCENES IN THE CAMP

A wonderful prairie sunset.--Distant view of the big camp at night.--Young men and women singing Riding songs.--A Love song and the rendezvous of the lovers at the river.--Ceremonial chants and Dance songs.--Wolf song and an ancient war custom.--The Kissing dance.--Visit to the lodge of a sick friend.--Scenes by the lodge fire.--A pet coyote.--Gossip of the women.--I assist a medicine man and his wife in doctoring their patient and have permission to photograph the performance.--Indian methods of doctoring.

WHEN the sun was setting, I walked through the camps of the Lone Eaters and Don't Laugh bands along the shore of the lake. The picturesque lodges, with their painted decorations and blue smoke rising from their tops, were perfectly reflected on the surface of the quiet lake. I crossed a rich meadow, very beautiful in the soft evening light, with its long waving grass and brilliant wild flowers, and climbed to the summit of a neighbouring butte, where I had an excellent view of the entire encampment. On all sides larks, thrushes, and Savannah sparrows were singing. In the surrounding meadows, large herds of horses were quietly feeding, while upon the summit of a ridge was a solitary horseman, who had left the noisy camp for quiet and meditation. He stood gazing out over the vast expanse of country towards the mountains. The sun, sinking behind the Rockies, lighted up the sombre cloud masses with a splendid colouring, while its pencilled rays, streaming to

[p. 241]

Click to enlarge
IN THE SURROUNDING MEADOWS LARGE HERDS OF HORSES WERE QUIETLY FEEDING.

[p. 242]

either side and extending to the zenith, formed a magnificent "sun-burst," with Mount Rising Wolf for its centre. Later in the deepening twilight the great cluster of Indian lodges showed a ghostly white against the darkening blue of the eastern sky. When the tipis were lighted by bright inside fires, the circular encampment looked like an enormous group of coloured

Click to enlarge
UPON THE SUMMIT OF A RIDGE WAS A SOLITARY HORSEMAN.

[paragraph continues] Japanese lanterns, and the flickering lights of the man: outside fires resembled fireflies in the summer's dusk.

Young men, with their wives, or sweethearts, were making the rounds of camp on horseback singing Riding songs in unison. I heard the plaintive voice of young brave singing a Love [*1] song near the lodge of hi sweetheart, begging her to come forth and meet him

[p. 243]

Click to enlarge
WAR PARTY SINGING "WOLFSONG"

[paragraph continues] It was probable the girl alone knew for whom the song was intended. He stood waiting in the meadow and she soon joined him, both going together to the river for water, the common rendezvous of Indian lovers. The sound of beating drums came simultaneously from six different lodges, where dances and ceremonials were taking place. In Mad Wolf's sacred tipi a solemn chant, accompanied by heavy and regular beating of rattles on the ground, was being given as a preparatory ceremonial of the Sun-dance. In the clan of the Grease Melters a group of young men and women were singing and dancing round an outside fire. The Brave Dogs were assembled in their big lodge drumming and singing a society song. A group of Crazy Dogs were dancing in front of the lodge of a chief, who was under obligations to their society and from whom they expected a feast.

Beside O-mis-tai-po-kah's tipi, a band of young men were singing a Wolf [*1] song together, reviving the custom of former days, when an expedition was starting upon the war path. They stood in a circle, holding a raw hide between them, upon which they beat time with sticks. They sang no words, but gave the wolf howl at regular intervals, the young women, who stood near, joining in the wolf howl. They said this song was very ancient, having been handed down through many generations. It was sung in time of danger when hunting, or upon the war path, in the belief that the wolf would inspire the singer with his cunning.

In another part of the camp a large throng was gathered about Sepenama's tipi to see the Sina-paskan (Sioux dance). [*2] The men and women dancers stood in opposite lines, the women advancing towards the men.

[p. 244]

[paragraph continues] Each woman singled out the man of her choice and, dancing towards him, kissed him on the face. For this favour he was expected to give her a handsome present. The people always attended the Sioux dance in great numbers, because of their curiosity to see who would be chosen. The story was told of a woman who became so infatuated with the Sina-paskan that she danced every afternoon and evening. Her husband becoming tired of her neglect of their tipi, and jealous of her favours to an old rival, appeared unexpectedly one night at the door of the dance-lodge and killed her before the assembled people. After this tragedy, the Sina-paskan was discontinued for several years.

When I descended from the butte, and again entered the camp circle, twilight had faded into darkness. The bright inside fires revealed upon the canvas of the tipis their weird decorations and the moving shadows of those within. But I soon became confused in my wanderings and lost my way. In the darkness, the tipis all looked alike. There were no streets nor paths, nor any landmarks on the plains, by which I could identify my lodge. Fortunately I met Awunna, the medicine man, with Ekitowaki, his wife. He was carrying his drum, while she bore her medicine sacks of herbs and paints. I joined them, for they were on their way to doctor Stuyimi, whose tipi was close to mine. He was the father of Menake, who, with her family and Kionama, her husband, shared my lodge. Stuyimi had been sick for many months. He had grown steadily worse, and his robes and horses were rapidly dwindling to pay the Indian doctors. We found him looking very weak and sick, with sunken eyes and emaciated body. He was an old friend and, when I entered, looked up with a smile of welcome. Awunna

[p. 245]

the medicine man seated himself at the back. He was a large man with a pleasing personality, and yet with an air of self-confidence and importance. He held his head erect, and his long thick hair fell loosely upon his shoulders, like the mane of a lion. Fresh wood was thrown upon the fire, the brightening flame showing many women present--Stuyimi's mother, his wife,

Click to enlarge
AT TWILIGHT THE TIPIS WERE LIGHTED UP BY BRIGHT INSIDE FIRES.

[paragraph continues] Akoan, and their two daughters; also Menake and her daughter Sinopa.

A beautiful little coyote puppy, with long sharp nose and bright sparkling eyes, suddenly emerged from the blankets, where I had taken my seat. I put out my hand to feel its soft, fluffy coat, but drew back quickly, when it turned and snapped at me, opening and closing its jaws like a steel trap. It resented my intrusion, snarling and threatening me with its shining fangs,

[p. 246]

until one of the little girls called to it by name (Apis), when it hopped across to her on three legs, dragging its tail, after the manner of coyotes, and went to sleep in her arms. They also had a dog named Sa-sak-si (Freckle Face), which seemed to understand the Blackfeet tongue, for, when Stuyimi, his master, called "ha-im-mit" (laugh), he lifted his upper lip, as if smiling, and, at the same time, wagged his tail. When he said "iks-skat-sit" (watch the door), the dog took his seat by the entrance, to defend it against any corner. The Blackfeet make pets of all kinds of birds and wild animals. In former days they tamed and kept in their tipis cranes, hawks, eagles, beavers, wolves, antelopes, and even grizzly bears.

The women were earnestly discussing the runaway match of young Mountain Chief and the sixteen-year-old daughter of a visiting chief from the north. She had been last seen with a party of children gathering berries. Her mother and father opposed the match, because they did not consider the young man able to provide for their daughter. But, as is often the case in civilised society the world over, the young people decided the question for themselves by a runaway match, and went to live in a remote spot in the mountains. Awunna sat in silence, taking no interest in the gossip about the elopement. The pose of his head and the expression of his countenance indicated unmistakably his impatience for the women to finish, yet he was too dignified to interrupt their conversation. Meanwhile Ekitowaki had placed four round stones in the fire to be used in the doctoring. While waiting for them to become heated, Akoan passed around a small parfleche containing sarvis berries for refreshment. When Ekitowaki pronounced the stones sufficiently hot,

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] Awunna removed the cover from his medicine drum and warmed it over the fire. Its head was painted yellow to represent a clear sky, with a red ball in the centre for the sun. Beating the drum was believed to bring him power in doctoring the sick.

The Blackfeet have a superstition that a doctor should not relate his dreams (sources of inspiration),

Click to enlarge
DOCTORING THE SICK.
 Ekitowaki taking herbs from medicine sack.

nor reveal his methods, nor hand them down to others. On the other hand, leaders of religious ceremonials were expected to teach their rituals to anyone who made a vow to purchase them. Sometimes a doctor was a specialist, his power being confined, by the command received in his dream, to a certain form of sickness.

Because the presence of spectators is believed to weaken the doctor's power, even the patient's family

[p. 248]

are ordinarily excluded from the ceremony. As I had never been permitted to witness a medicine man's methods of doctoring, I fully expected to be asked to withdraw. To my surprise, Awunna called upon me to assist in the incantations, saying that if I would join in the chants it would give him greater power in his doctoring. I consented, but asked for permission to photograph the ceremonial during his visit on the following morning. Awunna hesitated and Ekitowaki, his wife, at once raised objections, but it was decided in my favour by the patient himself, who requested that the pictures be taken, so that I could explain to the white people the Blackfeet methods of doctoring.

Stuyimi's shirt and blanket being removed, he lay upon the bed stripped to the waist. Awunna then signed to his wife to begin. She took some herbs from her medicine sack and threw them into a pot, which she placed on the fire to brew into a hot drink. Removing a coal from the fire, she placed dried sweet pine upon it, and holding her hands in the smoke, prayed to the Spirit of the buffalo that she might be endowed with power to discover the place where the disease lay. Kneeling by his side, she placed her hands upon his body, feeling gently with the tips of her fingers until she announced that the trouble lay in the breast and was worse on the left side. She took a hot stone from the fire and placed it in a kettle of water. As the steam arose, she dropped roots into it, one by one, and prayed:

"Hear us, Great Spirit in the Sun! Pity us and help us! Listen and grant us life! Look down in pity on this sick man! Grant us power to drive out the Evil Spirit and give him health!"

At this point, Awunna raised his drum and signed to me that we should begin the chant. With eyes closed

[p. 249]

and head thrown back, he started the chant (in which I joined), accompanying it with his drum. Ekitowaki brought from her sack a small disc of buffalo raw hide. She held it towards Stuyimi, with many mysterious motions in imitation of the buffalo, breathing upon it, swaying her body, keeping time with the drum and also joining in the chant. She laid the disc upon the hot

Click to enlarge
DOCTORING THE SICK.
 Awunna drumming.

stone and placed it quickly upon his breast on the left side. She wet both hands in the root medicine and laying the tips of her fingers upon a stone, so hot that I heard them sizzle, she then placed them, with a quick movement, upon the body of the patient. In this way, she used three hot stones, one after the other, and then, turning Stuyimi over, proceeded to make hot applications to his back in the same manner. When Ekitowaki

[p. 250]

retired, Awunna knelt beside the patient, beating rhythmically upon his medicine drum, while I united with him in his chant, praying for power from the eagle. Taking yellow paint from a small sack, he sprayed it through his medicine whistle over Stuyimi's breast, arms and back. Grasping a large eagle wing, he imitated the motions of an eagle flying, and beat the

Click to enlarge
DOCTORING THE SICK.
 Awunna spraying patient with yellow paint.

wing against the patient's body. When the doctoring was finished, and I was taking leave of Stuyimi, he suggested that I should accompany his clan on the third day of the Sun-dance, when they went to the river valley to secure their share of the branches and poles for the building of the Sun lodge, explaining that, as he was sick, he desired me to go as his substitute.

Footnotes

^242:1 Song 1. See page <page 283>.

^243:1 Song 2. See page <page 513>.

^243:2 Song 3. See page <page 514>.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 251]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

AN INITIATION INTO THE MEDICINE PIPE SOCIETY

Mysterious methods used in securing a new member.--Medicine Pipe given to the Blackfeet ages ago by the Thunder Chief.--Disturbing sounds in the big camp at night.--Excitement at daybreak caused by herald announcing an election to the Medicine Pipe Society.--Initiation of the new member.--Initiation ceremonial in Tearing Lodge's tipi because of a superstition.--Large fee for membership.

As I walked through the camp of the Grease Melters, bright inside fires lighted up the Otter, Elk and Antelope Tipis, revealing the characteristic animal paintings in soft Indian colours on the canvas. A fresh breeze blew from the mountains, gently moving the lodge ears, and tinkling the small bells attached to their decorations of buffalo tails. Hearing strange noises from a tipi, I went near to listen. The fire had burned so low that I could see nothing, but from the grunting and blowing sounds I knew that a medicine man was doctoring within, by invoking the power of the grizzly bear.

While standing in the dark shadow I noticed two men, with blankets drawn closely over their heads, moving stealthily towards Big Spring's lodge. A bright fire was burning inside. When they drew near, they stopped, as if listening. One of them approached cautiously to peer inside, and then both hurried away. When I told Mad Wolf, he explained that they were

[p. 252]

two members of the Medicine Pipe society, choosing a new member in place of Lone Chief, who had kept his Pipe for four years and was ready to give it up. He

Click to enlarge
MEDICINE PIPE BUNDLE OVER LODGE DOOR.
 (Position when in a permanent camp.)

said, "It is a difficult matter to secure an acceptable member, because the society can only take in prominent men, who can afford to pay well for the Pipe, and

[p. 253]

to give the customary feasts and ceremonials. It is always known when a member is to be taken in, so that those who are unwilling to be chosen can sleep away from their lodges. Big Spring is sleeping to-night on a ridge to the west of camp, because he is unwilling to stand the expense and trouble of keeping a Medicine Pipe. The society is now assembled in Lone Chief's lodge, singing Owl songs and drumming. They will keep representatives out all night, with Lone Chief as leader, carrying the Pipe hidden beneath his blanket and endeavouring to find a prominent chief inside his lodge. If they catch a man unawares and offer the Pipe to him, he dare not refuse, lest sickness or even death come to him, or to some member of his family. The Medicine Pipe was given to the Blackfeet long ago, when the Thunder struck down a man. While he lay on the ground, the Thunder Chief appeared in a vision, showing him a pipe, and saying, 'I have chosen you that I might give you this Pipe. Make another just like it. Gather together also a medicine bundle, containing the skins of the many animals and birds, which go with it. Whenever any of your people are sick, or dying, a vow must be made and a ceremonial given with a feast. The sick will then be restored to health.' The Grizzly Bear afterwards appeared to this same man, and said to him, 'I give you my skin to wrap around the sacred bundle, because it is larger than the skins of other animals. Whenever you transfer the Pipe to anyone, steal quietly upon him just before daybreak, the time I am on the move, and take him by surprise, just as I do, chanting my song, and making the sound of a bear charging. When you catch a man and offer him the Pipe, he will not dare to refuse, but must accept it and smoke. It is sure death to refuse,

[p. 254]

because no one may dare to turn away from a grizzly bear.'

"The Owl is also a prominent figure in the Pipe ceremonial, because he is a bird of the night. When the society are after a new member, they chant Owl songs and pray to the Owl for power to enable them to catch him in a deep sleep. In this way a spell is cast over him and he cannot escape. In order to propitiate the Owl they also, in the ceremonial, make use of the Siksocasim-root, which is his favourite food. The Indian made the Medicine Pipe, just as the Thunder and the Bear had instructed him. It is wrapped with raw hide and decorated with feathers and the winter skins of weasels. He also gathered together many animal and bird skins for the sacred bundle, wrapping them in a large grizzly bear skin. In the spring, when the first Thunder was heard, the Pipe was brought forth and held up. The Blackfeet had never before seen a Medicine Pipe, but they have ever since continued the ceremony."

When I finally lay down upon my blanket-bed, it was not to sleep. All in our lodge were disturbed by the many different sounds and even little Tears-in-her-eyes was restless in her hammock cradle. There were numberless dogs throughout the camp, fighting and barking. Some were on foraging expeditions, sneaking silently into the lodges in search of food. Menake saw a thieving dog in the act of making away with a side of bacon from our lodge. She made such an outcry, that he fled through the doorway with frightened yelps.

Although it was late at night, two small boys, the sons of Running Fisher and Long-time-sleeping, came to our lodge and sang a Night song as a serenade.

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] According to the Blackfeet custom, it was expected from me to go outside and give them food.

In Morning Plume's lodge near by, a small boy was very restless. The night air was cold and, when the fire burned low, he kept begging his old grandmother to cover him more warmly. She finally went to him, but had no sooner returned to her own bed than he began to whimper that the robes were not tucked underneath.

Click to enlarge
THE DAY HERDER.

[paragraph continues] As he was the old woman's pet, she went to him again, but said very sharply, that the night was not cold and she would do nothing more for him. Then his baby brother cried violently and I heard his mother softly crooning as she rocked him to sleep.

Beyond Morning Plume's was the small tipi of a poor young Indian named Okio. His only child, a young baby, was very sick. During the night a medicine man was sent for. The monotonous drumming, so different in sound from the dance drum, began after

[p. 256]

midnight. It was not loud but rapid and regular, like the beating of a human heart. With the first grey signs of dawn the drum suddenly ceased, and I knew the little life was gone. For a brief moment there was a deep stillness. The mother sobbed violently, as she took the lifeless body to her breast; then, suddenly realising that it was dead, she broke into a mournful

Click to enlarge
THE NIGHT HERDER.

wail, the universal utterance, the world over, for a mother's grief over a dead child.

Such incidents in the daily life of an Indian camp are like the human experiences we constantly find in the compact cities of civilisation. Though the striking extremes of wealth and poverty are absent, the lights and shadows of domestic joy and sorrow, of health and sickness, of pathos and humour, of the grave and the gay, of love and hate, of the old man's wisdom

[p. 257]

and thoughtfulness and the young man's folly and recklessness--all of these are present in an Indian camp, with even sharper and more impressive contrasts, because of the close association of the people.

With the dawn, a light breeze came from the Rockies, making a low humming sound in the tightly stretched canvas and causing the lodge ears to flap gently like a loose sail. The quick movement of horses' hoofs, passing in the direction of the meadow, where the herd of horses was feeding, meant that the day-man was going to the relief of the night-herder. A sudden beating of many drums, accompanied by shouting and singing, came from the clan of Grease Melters. When I opened my door, the morning star had risen above the plains. In the uncertain light, I could distinguish a crowd marching through the camp. People in the surrounding lodges were talking excitedly and I knew something unusual had happened. Then the powerful voice of Elk Horn, the herald and a leader of the Grease Melters was heard, as he rode around the camp circle beating upon a drum. He called upon all members of the clan to build their fires and prepare the morning meal, announcing:

"The Medicine Pipe men have caught Mu-koi-sa-po, one of the leaders of our band. He has smoked the Pipe and will now become a member of their society. I call upon all of you to do your share towards the expense, for it is a great honour and will cost many horses and blankets. Do not delay for day is breaking, and the sun will soon rise. Let each one of you carry what you can give to Mu-koi-sa-po's lodge, whether it is a horse, robe, blanket, or provisions. Let everyone come."

The drums began again and Mad Wolf called to me that the society had clothed Mu-koi-sa-po in his ceremonial dress. It was the signal for them to appear and, if I did not hasten, I would be too late

[p. 258]

to see them march through the camp bearing the Medicine Pipe. I hurried forth with my camera and was just in time to see them emerging from Lone Chief's lodge. I was fortunate in securing several photographs of this unusual and interesting ceremony. The light, however, was very weak. It was between three and four in the morning and the sun had not

Click to enlarge
ELK HORN, THE HERALD, AROUSING THE CAMP.

yet risen. Lone Chief and Mu-koi-sa-po were in the lead, the latter bearing the sacred Pipe covered with weasel tails and feathers. Etomo-waki, his wife, accompanied the wife of Lone Chief, bearing together the medicine bundles and the tripod. Then came the drummers with the rest of the society and their wives.

Before entering the lodge, prepared for their reception, they paused to perform certain rites. I noticed

[p. 259]

[paragraph continues] Mu-koi-sa-po's old mother standing near the door, waiting to receive them. She was bent with age and leaned heavily upon her staff. As they marched up with Mu-koi-sa-po bearing the sacred Pipe, singing in unison and with the beating of drums, the old woman was so overwhelmed with delight that she waved her staff in the air, calling loudly to her son, and joining in the chant. Then the society slowly entered and took

Click to enlarge
WOMEN CARRYING MEDICINE PIPE BUNDLES.

their accustomed seats. The ceremony was performed in the tipi of Tearing Lodge, Mu-koi-sa-po's father-in-law, because Mu-koi-sa-po owned a Beaver Bundle, which did not permit of drums. The beating of rattles on a buffalo hide was required in the Beaver ceremonial, because it was supposed to resemble the striking of the water by the beaver's tail. The Medicine Pipe, on the other hand, required drums, because they imitated the drumming of the grouse, which had given its power to the Pipe. The drums were decorated with symbols

[p. 260]

representing the sun, moon, and stars. The figures also of birds and animals were used as decorations, in accordance with the requirements of the dream, which originated the ceremonial.

The women deposited the sacred bundles against the back of the lodge. Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife, with the wife of Lone Chief and other women, sat on the right, while Lone Chief, who was giving up the Pipe, and the members of the society, were on the left of the medicines. Mu-koi-sa-po was dressed in the ceremonial clothes by Lone Chief, and Etomo-waki (his wife) by the women. Mu-koi-sa-po wore around his head a decorated band of buffalo hide and a feather in his hair, a beaded buckskin shirt, fringed with scalps and ermine; also beaded leggings with ermine tails and moccasins to correspond. His blanket was decorated with red marks to represent the stars. In addition to the clothes, Lone Chief gave him the horse, saddle, bridle, whip and lariat which belong to the sacred Pipe. Etomo-waki, his wife, received from Lone Chief's wife the buckskin dress, beaded moccasins and leggings, and the soft tanned elk-skin robe decorated with red paint, which were to be worn by her, only during the Pipe ceremonials. Spectators from all sections of the camp thronged about the lodge. The clan of the Grease Melters came, leaving their presents with Tearing Lodge, who announced them and the names of the givers in a loud voice. Menake brought my gift of a blanket in bright colours, which was announced with the rest. Because of the high honour conferred on one of their clansmen, the Grease Melters gave to Mu-koi-sa-po forty horses and an enormous pile of clothing, blankets, and provisions. These, with many additional presents were all turned over by Mu-koi-sa-po to

[p. 261]

[paragraph continues] Lone Chief as his fee for transferring the Medicine Pipe.

The Blackfoot esprit de corps and large-hearted generosity were strikingly displayed on this occasion. But, it was not unusual, for they were characteristic of the tribe. The support of their Sun-worship by offerings, always of their best; their generous gifts to their chiefs, medicine men, and leaders of their societies, and their open-handed hospitality to visiting tribes, were always conspicuous when the opportunity offered. The aged, the fatherless and widow, the sick and helpless, and those who had no one to hunt for them, were not allowed to suffer for want of clothing, or meat, or a place by a lodge-fire. The strong and successful hunters were always ready to give of their abundance to those who lacked.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 262]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

CEREMONIAL TRANSFERRING THE MEDICINE PIPE

Bird and Animal dances.--The Grizzly Bear dance.--Many varieties of songs.--The Woman's Pipe.--Four chants towards the cardinal points.--Rules governing ownership of the Pipe.--Care of the Pipe a heavy burden.--The Indian firmly held in mental slavery by his medicine superstitions.

THE ceremonial transferring the Medicine Pipe from Lone Chief to Mu-koi-sa-po began just as the sun rose from the plains. Its bright rays streaming into the open lodge, fell upon the priests chanting the seven Thunder songs, beating on their medicine drums, and burning sweet pine as incense. After the Thunder songs, Lone Chief, as the giver up of the Pipe held it in his arms singing:

"I am now moving around."

The Pipe was laid down during the tenth song, all chanting in unison:

"I will sit down."

In the eleventh, or buffalo song, all chanted:

"I will take away the Chief's (Pipe's)) robe,"

and made the sign of the buffalo with their curved forefingers, while Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife opened the outside cover of the medicine bundle. They chanted the Antelope song and imitated with their hands the motions of an antelope walking, while the strings

[p. 263]

of antelope raw-hide were being loosened. It was explained that the antelope is supposed to be opening the bundle with his hoofs. While loosening an inner wrapper, bound by strings of elk-hide, they chanted an Elk song and made the Elk sign, holding their hands open on either side of the head with fingers extended to represent antlers. They imitated the actions of an elk as if loosening the wrapper with his hoofs. The time had now come for the dances to be held over the

Click to enlarge
MEDICINE PIPE PRIESTS WITH DRUMS.

skins representing the spirits of the birds and animals included in the medicine bundle. Only members of the society danced with the Pipe, although it was customary for anyone, who made a vow, to fulfil that vow by dancing with a skin provided for that purpose. Whenever a prominent chief arose to take part, or an Indian who had performed some unusual feat, he was applauded by the spectators. Mu-koi-sa-po, as the recipient of the Pipe, did not rise to dance, but remained seated beside the medicine bundle, receiving

[p. 264]

the skins as they were turned over to him by those taking part in the ceremonial. For the Grizzly Bear dance, the drummers chanted

"I begin to grow restless in the spring,"

representing a bear making ready to come from his winter den. Lone Chief drew his robe around him and arose to dance, imitating the bear going from his den and chanting,

"I take my robe.
  My robe is sacred.
  I wander in the summer."

[paragraph continues] Placing both hands upon the Pipe, he chanted,

"Sacred Chief, (Pipe)! Every one, men, women, and children will now behold you."

[paragraph continues] Slowly raising the Pipe, he sang,

"The Great Mystery beholds our Chief arise.
  The Chief is sacred."

[paragraph continues] He shook the Pipe in imitation of a bear, but was careful not to handle it roughly, lest a storm should come, nor to make a miss-step in his dance, nor allow a skin, or feather to fall, lest some misfortune would befall him. He again laid the Pipe down, with the chant,

"This lodge is sacred; the ground, also, where the Chief lies is sacred."

[paragraph continues] While Lone Chief danced with the Pipe, the drummers beat time and chanted Bear songs. He imitated with his hands a bear holding up its paws, and, placing his feet together, moved backward and forward, with short jumps, making the lumbering movements of a bear running, breathing heavily and imitating his digging and turning over stones for insects. Then he blew shrilly upon his medicine whistle, representing the sounds made by

[p. 265]

the wings of the Thunder Bird, which comes forth in the spring at the same time that the bear leaves his winter den. He held the Pipe in his right hand, spreading out the fingers of his left in imitation of the wings of the flying Thunder Bird.

During the Swan song, Bear Child danced alone, representing the chief Swan, the leader of the flock. He made the Swan sign, with both hands held before him, palms out and fingers spread in imitation of a swan sailing through the air with extended wings.

In the Antelope dance, Red Fox made motions with his hands, in imitation of an antelope walking, moving the Pipe in the same manner and looking keenly alert, as if watching for an enemy.

During the singing of the Crane song, the dancers imitated the motions of flying Cranes and gave the crane call. There were no dances for water birds, but the people remained seated, while songs were sung for the ducks and geese. Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife were painted, during the four Horse songs, sometimes called Resting songs. It was necessary to sing all the words and notes of these four songs accurately, because, if anyone made a mistake, misfortune would surely come to his horses. After a short rest, during which a pipe was passed around for a smoke, seven Owl songs were sung. They were followed by seven Buffalo songs, in honour of the power that went with the band of sacred white buffalo skin, which was to be worn around the head of the Pipe owner. Seven songs were also sung to a water bird called Good Rusher, because it runs so fast along the surface of the water and is believed to possess great power. It is said to drown people by dragging them beneath the water. The muskrat skin was used

[p. 266]

by its owner to wipe the paint from his face accompanied with the song,

"All the water birds and little water animals are my friends."

[paragraph continues] The Bee songs are sung by the owner of the Pipe as a warning, when he is angered, because anyone that angers a bee will be stung. The Bee songs are also believed to possess, not only power for making the owner proof against any spell, or evil charm, but also to cause the evil power to react upon the enemy that is trying to injure him. The woman's pipe, which goes with the Medicine Pipe, has a plain flat stem and is not decorated. During the ceremonial, it was unrolled by Etomo-waki and was smoked only by the women. The Medicine Pipe is decorated with feathers and weasel tails. The owner begins smoking it by blowing a whiff first towards the sky and another towards the ground. The closing song of the ceremonial was the Good Luck song, which should bring good fortune to Mu-koi-sa-po. Whenever he might wish for anything, as owner of the Medicine Pipe, it would only be necessary for him to sing this song to have his desire fulfilled.

At sunset, Lone Chief led Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife, Etomo-waki, from the lodge and, facing in turn the four directions, chanted first towards the West,

"Over there are the mountains. May you see them as long as you live, for from them you must receive your sweet pine as incense";

then towards the North,

"Strength will come from the North. May you look for many years upon 'the star that never moves'" (North Star);

then towards the East,

"Old age will come from below (East) where lies the light of the sun";

[p. 267]

then towards the South,

May the warm winds of the South bring you success in securing food."

There were many rules in which Lone Chief and his wife--the former owners, must instruct Mu-koi-sa-po and his wife, when transferring the Pipe. The long category of musts and must nots taxed both their memories and consciences to carry the burden of their observance. If not obeyed to the smallest detail, misfortune would come upon them and their family. They were as follows:

"You must not lie down until we chant the Bear song and place you in certain positions, to be retained until morning, when we will assist you to rise. You must not paint your clothes with the sacred red paint, until we first perform certain rites and chant the Buffalo song. You must not smoke a pipe, or remove your moccasins before we have given you proper instructions. You may not enter the river to wash, without having sprinkled yourself and chanted the Water Bird song. You and all your family should wear necklaces of small shells because they will bring you long life. When you enter a lodge, always take seats at the back, no matter how crowded it may be, and under no circumstances take seats near the door. No one should be allowed to sleep in your bed Firewood and burning embers must not be taken away from your lodge, because they belong to the Pipe. The firewood must lie in the same direction that the Pipe hangs. Ashes must not be removed, until the Pipe is first taken outside of the tipi. You must not be present while the ashes are being taken out, lest you become blind. When you return do not fail to burn sweet pine as incense. Permit no one to curse, or talk loud, or aim a gun inside the tipi, where the sacred pipe is kept. Allow no one to strike the tipi, or throw anything towards the owner. The word 'bear' must never be

[p. 268]

named before the Pipe, lest it cause bad dreams and bring sickness upon your family--the word 'badger' should always be used instead. The Evil Power in such a violation may be averted by burning sweet pine as incense. You must not reply to anyone, who stands on the outside of your lodge. Insist that everyone, who wishes to speak to you, must enter. Every morning, when you arise, burn sweet pine as incense before starting the fire. When you are in a permanent camp, the Pipe may be tied over the door, but, if you are soon to move, from the tripod behind the tipi, one leg of the tripod must point in the direction you intend to go. Never allow the Pipe to hang outside in bad weather. Carry it out every morning after sunrise and hang it from the tripod behind the tipi. Always take it out on the right hand side and bring it back on the left side. Allow no one to ride, or place meat upon your Medicine Horse, or borrow its bridle and saddle. It once happened that our people captured a herd of horses from the Crows and loaded them with meat. Some of the herd suddenly sickened and died. We could not understand it, until the Crows told us, a long time afterward, that they were Medicine Horses. People should not dare to pass in front of a sacred horse. An accident is sure to befall anyone who follows its trail. Never strike a dog or horse. I once whipped my favourite horse and as a result he was afterward fatally injured. Do not cut a horse's tail. This act once caused a Pipe owner to lose five horses. You must not drink from a blackened bucket. Dangerous storms will arise if you do not drink properly, or if you throw water upon children. Never allow a dog to leap against you, for it will cause your body to ache. You must not scratch yourself with your fingers, lest it bring on a skin disease--use the sharpened stick provided in the medicine bundle. Never curse, nor swear, nor say anything injurious against the character of anyone. Never touch a dead person. Never point toward anyone with your fingers, always use the thumb. Never move anything burning with a knife,

[p. 269]

lest it start your teeth to ache. Never pick up a lost article, without first taking care to chant,

"The earth where I walk is sacred: this article lying on the ground is sacred: I therefore take it.

[paragraph continues] "If you neglect to do this you will be sure to lose something. If you invite anyone to smoke, you must always furnish tobacco for four pipes. If you are not satisfied then, you must smoke four more. If you have not time for four, explain this to your guest and let him smoke alone. Never light your pipe with willow--always use cottonwood, or sarvis berry. As a member of the Society, the Pipe must be handed to you bowl first. You must always take hold of it with both hands, just as the bear does. Never smoke with a woman, nor with anyone who presses the tobacco into the pipe bowl with his fingers. A special stick must always be used for this purpose. If anyone seeks to borrow tobacco, or asks you four times for a pipe, he runs the risk of your turning the Medicine Pipe over to him. It must then be transferred with the ceremonial and paid for by him, just as if it had been taken because of a vow. The Medicine Pipe must not be opened in winter, while the snows are deep. But, in the spring, at the time of the first thunder, the Pipe should be opened and held before the people, and the tobacco changed in the Bundle."

The ceremonial and instruction by Lone Chief continued through four days. During this period Mu-koi-sa-po and Eton] o-waki learned the ceremonial prayers, chants and dances. They also fasted, that they might have dreams by night.

The Pipe ceremonial is generally given in fulfilment of a vow. If a child is sick and the father makes a vow to the Pipe, he makes his vow known and fulfils it, after the child is restored to health, by giving a feast with the ceremonials. Payment

[p. 270]

must also be made to the owner of the Medicine Pipe. If the vow maker is not a member of the Society, he cannot dance with the Pipe itself, but he may dance with the Eagle Feathers, which are provided in the Bundle for such a case. Much of the knowledge of the Pipe is unknown to members of the Society, because they are unwilling to pay for the instruction. This knowledge is of great advantage to him who cares for his Pipe, for he, who carefully follows its laws, will have abundance, while he may lose everything, if he is negligent of its rules. In the case of Lone Chief, the knowledge he had gained about the Pipe proved to be a good investment, because his property meanwhile increased and Mu-koi-sa-po also paid him well for his instruction.

Mu-koi-sa-po was not gratified, but rather depressed, with the honour conferred upon him by the Medicine Pipe Society. Of all the Blackfeet medicines, the Pipe is believed to have the greatest power, but it also brings the greatest burden. Mu-koi-sa-po was already the owner of the Yellow Buffalo Tipi and a Beaver Bundle. It depressed him to think of the additional burden his wife would have, in caring for the Medicine Pipe, and observing its rules, during the four years it must be retained. The heavy burden, involved in Mu-koi-sa-po's acceptance of the Medicine Pipe, illustrates the mental slavery with which the Indian is bound, hand and foot, to the superstitions, exactions and penalties of his medicines. A proper consideration of these conditions should not only mitigate our race prejudice, but also convince us of the injustice of judging the Indian by our own standards of right and wrong, without allowing for the influence of his mental environment.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 271]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

DANCE OF THE KISAPA SOCIETY

Striking costume of Elk Horn the herald.--Fine dress of the Kisapa (Hair Parters).--Figures of the dance.--Black Weasel, an efficient dance leader.--Dance of little Nokoa.--Speech of Running Crane to the dancers.--Mountain Chief urges generous gifts to the Sioux.--Return of a victorious war expedition.--Warriors re-enacting former battles.--An exciting horse race.--Parade of the Sioux warriors.--They dance at Ahkiona's lodge.--The great camp at night.--Riding songs.--Travelling song of the Sioux.--Celebration songs.--Sepe-nama and his wife mounted on the same horse sing a Night song of remarkable beauty.--Originality of Blackfeet music.--Importance of its preservation.

ON the morning of the second day of the Sun-dance, Elk Horn, the herald, rode through camp, announcing with his powerful voice that the Kisapa (Hair Parters, a social organisation composed of young men) were preparing for a dance and invited everyone to be present. In his left hand he carried a long spear. At regular intervals along its staff, eagle feathers were attached, falling free and fluttering in the wind. Coyote tails, representing his medicine animal, were fastened to his stirrups. He wore a buckskin shirt and a blue beaded necklace of many strands. About his waist was draped a red blanket decorated with a band of white beads. His leggings and moccasins were ornamented with porcupine quills, and large pieces of cottonwood punk were fastened to his blanket for their sweet perfume. When the young men, coming from different

Click to enlarge
RETURN OF A VICTORIOUS WAR PARTY

[p. 272]

parts of the camp, assembled for the dance, they were dressed in their gayest and finest clothes. They wore war-bonnets of eagle feathers tipped with coloured horsehair, and ornamented with beads and porcupine quills, and caps made by winding otter and mink skins around their heads, the tails hanging down behind. Some were stripped and their faces and bodies were painted; others had war-shirts and leggings of soft-tanned deer 
Click to enlarge
TWO BEARS WITH WAR BONNET
 OF EAGLE FEATHERS
 TIPPED WITH HORSE HAIR.
 skin heavily beaded, or decorated with coloured porcupine quills and trimmed with ermine along the shoulders and leggings. They wore necklaces variously made of beads, small bones, elk-teeth, shells and grizzly bear claws. They also had dog-skin ankle-bands with bells attached and arm-bands of deer skin and brass, with pendants of grouse and woodpecker feathers. They carried shields, spears, bows and arrows, tomahawks and rattles made of deer and elk-hoofs tied together in bunches.

All sat down in a semi-circle, and when forty or fifty had arrived, the singers began, accompanied by the drums.

First came the dance of the warriors, in which everyone who took part had been in battle. A prominent chief had eight parallel black lines on his leggings, representing the number of chiefs, or medicine men he

[p. 273]

had killed; another had a war-shirt covered with marks representing picket pins with short lariats attached. These signified the number of horses, picketed close to the lodge of the enemy, he had cut loose, with great risk of being captured. This was followed by the dance of those who had been wounded. Wolf Eagle, a fine looking fellow,
Click to enlarge
MAKA WITH
 BUFFALO HIDE SHIELD
 DECORATED WITH
 EAGLE FEATHERS
 whose arm had been shot off by the enemy, entered into the dance with great energy, carrying in his single hand the feather-decorated bone of his missing arm. One dancer, named "Behind-the-ear," continually aimed his rifle, as if in the act of shooting. He had received his name from shooting an enemy behind the ear, and was now going through the motions which recalled the deed. Another warrior, who had been a noted stealer of horses from the enemy, carried a horse carved out of wood. Others had tomahawks, spears, arrows, feathered shields and war-bonnets. Every movement of the dance and the distinguishing marks of the dancers had a significance, which it is impossible for an outsider to understand.

When an eagle feather fell from Sepe-nama's war-bonnet, he selected Bear Chief, a noted warrior, to pick

[p. 274]

it up, because it would bring him bad luck to do it himself. With Bear Chief as their leader, they danced in single file three times around the feather. When passing it the fourth time, Bear Chief picked it up and they returned to their seats.

The leader was Black Weasel, a tall and handsome
Click to enlarge
WOLF EAGLE DANCING.
 Indian, whose seat in the surrounding circle was marked by a feathered wand driven into the ground. He wore a large war-bonnet of selected eagles' feathers, and a soft-tanned buckskin suit trimmed with ermine tails. It was decorated across the shoulders and along the arms and legs with coloured porcupine quills, beautifully laid. When it was time to commence a figure, he moved about the circle, wand in hand, hustling the dancers out and giving sharp raps to those who lagged behind. He was as considerate, however, as he was energetic, in enforcing discipline, for he devoted part of his efforts to seeing that visiting Indians were comfortably seated, and that the women and children were supplied with drinking water.

The most interested of the large circle of spectators seemed to be Nokoa, the small son of Wolverine. He

[p. 275]

was seated beside his mother, watching with filial admiration every movement of his father, who was taking part in the dance. Nokoa wore a beaded necklace of many strands and a fringed buckskin suit. His

Click to enlarge
LEADER OF KISAPA DANCE.

bright eyes fairly danced with excitement, when his father led him out before the company. He stepped forward fearlessly, swaying his small body to and fro, aiming his stick as if it were a gun, while his little moccasined feet kept perfect time with the beating of the drums.

[p. 276]

While they were feasting, Running Crane addressed the people:

"I am now glad in my heart to see you gathered together. The young men are dressed in their beautiful clothes, and they dance well. It is not often that we have such a good time,--only once a year. Lawless shooting has all been stopped, and we have ceased to count coups, yet we are all happy. I hope that the Great Father (the President) will not stop our coming together, for it

Click to enlarge
RUNNING CRANE ADDRESSING THE PEOPLE.

does not last long. Let the old people restrain the young men, so that we may break camp and return to our homes without having any disturbance. I have now finished. My name is Seco-mo-muckon (Running Crane)."

Nena-es-toko (Mountain Chief) then arose to tell of the old days and how he used to dance. He urged the people to be generous and give many horses to the Sioux, because they were visitors, and had come on a long journey from the far east. He held a small stick,

[p. 277]

which represented a horse, and, when he had finished speaking, stepped across the circle and handed the stick to a Sioux Indian. From the crowd of spectators there came the voice of another old chief singing, "Good man, giving away your horse so generously."

A band of Indians, under Chief Little Plume, appeared on a high ridge to the north, representing a victorious war party returning to the tribal camp with spoils. Their faces and horses were decorated with paint, and they were dressed in beaded buckskin clothes

Click to enlarge
SHAM BATTLE BY HORSEMEN.

and war-bonnets. They rode rapidly across the plain in single file, and entered camp at a gallop with war whoops and piercing yells. Then, forming into line, with Little Plume in the lead, they marched slowly around the camp circle, with rifles in the position of firing, holding aloft the sacred Spear and singing their song of victory. [*1] The warriors then gathered together in the large open space in the centre of the camp, where they gave exhibitions, before the tribe, of sham battles,

[p. 278]

both on horseback and on foot, re-enacting their victories of former days.

I also witnessed some exciting horse races. The course lay over a level stretch and along a low ridge, where crowds of Indian spectators were seated. On one side was the tribal camp of picturesque lodges. The surrounding prairies were dressed in the living green of spring, embroidered with wild flowers. The distant snow-covered peaks of the Rocky Mountains furnished a magnificent background, at the head of the course. The young riders were completely stripped. They were excellent horsemen, riding fearlessly the wildest bronchos, using no saddle, and, for a bridle, only a rope passed through the horse's mouth. I secured an excellent view of the most exciting race of the day, by standing near the finish, where a large crowd of Indians had gathered, wagering, instead of money, horses, cattle, robes, blankets, and even provisions upon the result. At the start, the horses could be seen rearing and plunging, until a loud shout was heard, and we realised that they were off. As they passed us in a cloud of dust, the riders, excited by the shrill war whoops of the spectators, shouted in turn to their horses for greater speed, lying low upon their backs and beating them with raw-hide quirts. They finished amid intense excitement and rejoicing by the Indians, who bet on Bull Shoe, their horse, which won by a narrow margin.

While eating our evening meal, Strikes-on-both-sides suddenly opened the door, exclaiming, "Come quickly A-pe-ech-eken, and see the Pena-pes-ena Warriors (Below People or Sioux)." I was just in time to photograph them passing in a long line. They were led by Lone Dog as chief, and riding beside him were Red Boy, Bear Paw, and White Eagle. They were dressed in beaded

[p. 279]

Click to enlarge
THE HORSE RACE.

[p. 280]

clothes of bright colours, with horned head-dresses and feathered shields on their backs. Many tinkling bells were attached to their horses, which were also painted and otherwise decorated. They marched slowly through camp, holding their spears and feathered ensigns aloft

Click to enlarge
PARADE OF SIOUX WARRIORS.

and singing in unison a striking Celebration song [*1] with the words:

"Oh, Blackfeet! we have heard you boast in the past that you were becoming like white men. We now behold you taking part in these ceremonials, poorly dressed, and with few of your Indian clothes left."

In accordance with a time-honoured Indian custom, it was expected that those before whose lodges they stopped and sang would give them presents. If the Blackfeet were not generous, they could not expect many gifts, when the return visit to the Sioux would be

[p. 281]

made. After completing the circle they dismounted at the lodge of Ahkiona, where they gave a ceremonial. When Ahkiona had visited the Sioux they presented him with a Medicine Pipe. On this occasion the Pipe was to be returned to its former owners.

Exhausted by the excitement and heat of the day, I returned to my lodge and was soon asleep in spite of the singing and drumming of the dancing Sioux. But it was not long before I was rudely awakened by the fierce snarling and yelping of a vicious dog-fight near by. The fight of this single pair quickly roused other dogs and they rushed together to engage in a mass fight. Soon hundreds of dogs in all parts of the camp, excited by the uproar, united in a great deep-throated mournful howl, such as is only heard in a large Indian village, and resembles the howling of an enormous pack of wolves.

When their dismal chorus had finally died away, I stepped outside the lodge. The full moon was rising from the plains, flooding the camp with its light. The lodges with their crowns of tapering poles stood out in sharp relief against the burnished eastern sky. To the west were the dim outlines of the rugged Rockies, behind which a large planet was slowly sinking. The constellation of the Northern Crown (called "The Camp," by the Blackfeet, because of the suggestiveness of its outlines) had passed over into the west, while, in the east, the sparkling Pleiades (Lost Children) were rising above the plains. Although it was late, the camp was still so throbbing with life that sleep was made impossible. Many young men were on horseback, singing Riding songs [*1] as they rode around the circle of the encampment. The dance at Ahkiona's

[p. 282]

lodge was finished, and the Sioux were returning to their quarters, singing a Travelling song in their own tongue. When they had finished, the answering notes of a Night song [*1] were heard from a small band of Blackfeet, sitting on the shore of the lake. A large company of men and women on horseback, having learned a Celebration song [*2] from the visiting Sioux, rode slowly through the camp singing it at intervals. Red Fox and his young wife, riding the same horse, made circuits of the camp, singing a Night song of remarkable beauty. I saw them very distinctly, when they passed, their strongly coloured Indian clothes showing in the bright moonlight. The woman rode in front, wearing a magnificent bonnet of eagle feathers, belonging to her husband, and a buckskin dress heavily beaded across the shoulders. Red Fox wore a band of weasel skin around his head, with an eagle feather erect in his back hair. A beautifully tanned elk-skin robe, decorated with red stripes of porcupine quills, extended in graceful folds from his shoulders backward over the horse's tail. He carried a string of bells, which he used in marking time for their singing. Their song had a very pronounced rhythm, which was in perfect time with the slow trot of their horse. They continued their striking duet at intervals through the night, not stopping until day began to dawn.

When I first heard the Blackfeet singing together in unison, with untrained voices, the women's an octave higher than the men's, my impressions were not pleasing. But, having learned several of their airs, and mastered the peculiar intervals and difficult voice vibrations, so that I could join in their singing, the wild beauty of their music dawned upon me. Their music seemed so

[p. 283]

thoroughly original in its conception, and so unique in the method of expression, that I became filled with the desire to do something for its preservation. It strongly appealed to me, that its development through past ages had been independent of all sources of inspiration or colouring, other than those of their natural environment of mountains, forests and plains, their wild life of hunting and warfare, their Sun-worship, and those emotions and passions which are common to the human heart the world over.

I also felt that the beautiful motives of their sacred hymns, war-songs, love and night songs, springing from these aboriginal sources, like pure water from a mountain spring, were so entirely original and thoroughly American, that they ought to be rescued from oblivion and permanently preserved. [*1]

Click to enlarge
LOVE SONG

Footnotes

^277:1 Song 4. See page <page 514>.

^280:1 Song 5. See page <page 514>.

^281:1 Song 6. See page <page 514>.

^282:1 Song 7. See page <page 515>.

^282:2 See page <page 514>, footnote.

^283:1 See [*Appendix], pp. <page 513>-15.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 284]

  

CHAPTER XXI

  

CEREMONIAL OF THE SUN-DANCE

The Mad Dogs build the sweat lodge.--Ceremonial of the sweat lodge.--Tribal parade of men and women on horseback.--Elaborate and interesting costumes.--Impressive evening ceremonial in Mad Wolf's tipi.--Prayer of the head chief.--Indian humour.--Practical jokes.--Dance of the Brave Dogs.--Bringing in the poles and branches for constructing the Sun lodge.--Ceremonial of felling a tree for the Centre Pole.

TEN of the Mad Dogs rode to the river to cut one hundred long willow branches for the large sweat lodge. On their return, they entered from the side that faced the setting sun. Forming in line, they marched slowly round the camp circle, holding the green branches high in the air, and singing their society song in unison. When they returned to the place where they had entered, they built the framework of the lodge there, by firmly setting the willow branches in the ground, and bending them into the form of an ellipse, about four feet high, facing the entrance toward the rising sun. The north side was painted red and the south black. When the sweat lodge was finished, other Mad Dogs were called upon to gather one hundred stones of the size of a man's hand. If a stone were to fall, it foreboded misfortune, and if, during the day the men building the lodge either drank, or washed, it was believed to bring rain, which would interfere with the ceremonies. A fire was built for heating the stones.

[p. 285]

Blankets and robes were thrown over the framework of the sweat lodge and, when all was in readiness, the occupants of the sacred tipi came forth. Mad Wolf led, followed by O-mis-tai-po-kah, Bull Child, Spotted Eagle and Natosin. Then came Natokema and Gives-to-the-Sun.

Click to enlarge
FRAMEWORK OF THE SWEAT LODGE.

[paragraph continues] They walked once around the sweat lodge and Gives-to-the-Sun took her seat on the west side. She sat smoking and praying, while the priests, with their helpers the Mad Dogs, stood on the south side. A hole was dug inside the sweat lodge to receive the heated stones. The earth was carefully placed on one side, because it symbolised the earth thrown up by the

[p. 286]

underground animals (beaver, otter, badger, and coyote). Mad Wolf then arose and, taking off his blanket and moccasins, placed them beside Gives-to-the-Sun. He entered the sweat lodge followed by O-mis-tai-po-kah, Bull Child and Spotted Eagle, for inward purification and to pray to the Sun, Moon and Morning Star in behalf of their people. The paint was blessed

Click to enlarge
MAD DOGS RIDING WITH WILLOWS.

by Gives-to-the-Sun and along with a buffalo skull was handed to Mad Wolf. He placed the skull beside the hole, the nose pointing toward the west. It was laid upon the Soyotoiyis, a luxuriant meadow grass gathered from beside springs. Spotted Eagle worked the paint in his hands arid, using the tips of his fingers, marked black spots on the north side of the skull to represent stars, and red for the sun on the south side. While all were chanting in unison,

"I now put you into the sacred place,"

[p. 287]

[paragraph continues] Spotted Eagle stuffed the grass into the nose and ears of the buffalo skull and tied it around the horns, symbolising the feeding of the buffalo. The Soyotoiyis (Carex Nebraskensis praevia) was the favourite food of the buffalo. Those inside the sweat lodge waited until they saw smoke rising from the sweet grass burning

Click to enlarge
PRIESTS WALKING AROUND SWEAT LODGE.

outside, a sign that the stones were fully heated. They then sang four songs, the fourth being,

"This spot is a holy place,"

and handed out the buffalo skull to the Brave Dogs, who reversed the head, pointing the nose towards the east, and laid it upon the pile of earth, which represented the underground animals. One by one the heated stones were passed into the sweat-lodge and dried sweet grass laid upon the stones. Mad Wolf placed his hands in

[p. 288]

the rising smoke and, rubbing them over his body, chanted and prayed to the Sun:

"May our lives become as strong as the stones we have placed here."

[paragraph continues] Water was thrown upon the hot stones, and, as the vapour arose, he prayed again:

"May our lives be as pure as the water, that we may live to be old and always have water to drink."

Click to enlarge
SPOTTED EAGLE PREPARING BUFFALO SKULL FOR SWEAT LODGE CEREMONIAL.

[paragraph continues] The Mad Dogs uncovered the sweat lodge four times, that those inside, dripping with perspiration, might cool off. Each time it was closed, water was thrown upon the hot stones. While the priests inhaled the vapour, they chanted and prayed to the Sun, Moon and Morning Star, that their children might live to be old, and always have plenty of food. When the Mad Dogs

[p. 289]

uncovered the sweat lodge the fourth time, the priests came out. They were given meat, but before eating, a blessing was asked upon the food, each breaking off a small piece and, with a prayer, planting it in the ground. The ceremonial was finished, when the Mad

Click to enlarge
LITTLE PLUME.

[paragraph continues] Dogs tied the buffalo skull, with strips of bark, to the framework of the sweat lodge, the nose pointing towards the rising sun. Mad Wolf then arose, and, followed by the priests and medicine women, led the way back to his tipi. They walked slowly and in single file, with heads reverently bowed, carefully avoiding the crossing of the trail, by which they had left the tipi.

[p. 290]

[paragraph continues] A sweat lodge had been built in each of the four camps, made previous to the large encampment, in which the Sun-lodge was constructed. In the first camp, it was built on the east side; in the second, south; in the third, west and in the fourth, on the north side, following the course of the sun through the sky in summer.

Preceding the "Raising of the Pole," it was

Click to enlarge
BLACKFEET ASSEMBLING FOR TRIBAL PARADE.

customary for the tribe, both men and women, to dress in their finest clothes and to paint and decorate their horses with feathers for a parade through the camp. On this occasion the women, who were to take part in the Scalp-dance that followed the parade, were permitted to wear their husbands' eagle feathers in their hair. There were many elaborate and handsome costumes. Little Plume, a leading chief, wore a

[p. 291]

hat made of a beautiful red fox-skin wound round his head, the tail of the fox hanging down behind. The crown of the hat was decorated with pieces of white weasel-skin, and two large eagle feathers stood erect at the back. His shirt and leggings were of soft-tanned buck-skin, heavily beaded and ornamented with many black-tipped ermine tails. The wife of Mikosta

Click to enlarge
THE WAR CHIEFS, LITTLE PLUME AND LITTLE DOG, LEADERS OF THE PARADE.

wore an otter-skin hat, with many shells as ornaments; a buck-skin dress with two hundred and fifty elk tusks attached and an otter-skin across her shoulders. Her saddle had deer-antler pommels with beaded pendants and a beaded buck-skin crupper. Brightly coloured feathers were fastened to her horse's tail and a large cluster of eagle feathers hung from his neck. One young man was dressed as a clown, or jester. He

[p. 292]

Click to enlarge
TRIBAL PARADE.

[p. 293]

rode a black horse, his face and hands painted black, and he wore a long black robe, which extended from his shoulders over his horse's tail and flowed out behind when he galloped. All marched slowly around the great circle of the encampment, singing in unison, some holding aloft scalps tied to long willow sticks,

Click to enlarge
SACRED TIPI WITH GREEN BRANCHES OUTSIDE.

others long streamers of eagle feathers and feathered shields fastened to poles. On the evening of the third day, the Sun-dance priests came, one by one, to Mad Wolf's tipi. In this service O-mis-tai-po-kah and his wife gave final instructions to Mad Wolf and Gives-to-the-Sun, concerning the important ceremonial of "Raising the Centre Pole," which would take place on the following day. Green branches had been

[p. 294]

placed around the lodge on the outside, as the sign that only those bidden should enter. I stood near the door listening to a weird chant led by Mad Wolf. At intervals the low monotone of the priests was joined by the shriller voices of the women. Gradually the chant died away and there was silence, finally broken by Mad Wolf's voice directing that the fire be replenished. When a brighter flame lighted up the lodge, I decided that this was the opportune moment for entering, and so opened the door. In the uncertain firelight I was not recognised and two priests motioned me away. When I gave my Indian name, they bade me enter. On Mad Wolf's left were O-mis-tai-po-kah, Natosin, the chief from the north, and the Sun-dance priests; on his right, Gives-to-the-Sun, the sacred woman, Natokema and their assistants. All the women wore gray blankets coloured with dull red paint. Apisaki, daughter of Natosin, alone wore a blanket of brilliant colours. She was unmarried and had accompanied her father, that she might witness the medicine-lodge and become familiar with its ceremonials. Over the head of Mad Wolf hung the Medicine Pipe, and near by were the sacred bundles of the Beaver Medicine and Medicine Bonnet, the latter to be worn by Gives-to-the-Sun, during the ceremonial of "Raising the Pole," on the following day. In front of Mad Wolf was an altar, or holy place, made by cutting out the grass and smoothing the soft earth. It was lined with juniper (red cedar). At the foot, and bending towards the west, was a single stalk of wild rhubarb (cow parsnip), with an eagle plume fastened to the top. The wild rhubarb and plume were used by the Indians in the Sun-dance ceremonial as symbols of lightness, and were believed to favour the safe raising

[p. 295]

of the Centre Pole. A young warrior was chosen to secure a rhubarb plant in bloom. Carrying it to the sacred tipi, he stood outside and announced,

"Here is the wild rhubarb."

When Mad Wolf bade him enter, he passed on the south side of the fire, laying the plant across the altar.

Click to enlarge
INTERIOR OF SACRED TIPI WITH SUN-DANCE PRIESTS AND MEDICINE WOMEN
 (Altar is in foreground.)

[paragraph continues] Mad Wolf rubbed it with black paint, and, tying an eagle plume to one of the stalks, placed it upon the altar. Soft tanned buffalo and elk-skins were spread out, and rattles for beating time were distributed, Mad Wolf directing that two be given to his white son. Two redstone pipes were passed around, one for the men and the other for the women. It was Morning Plume's duty to see that the pipes were filled, and by

[p. 296]

his side lay a large beaded tobacco bag, extra stems, and a tobacco board for cutting. O-mis-tai-po-kah, as the father or instructor, gave directions for conducting the ceremonies, the way the medicine bonnet should be worn, and the songs that should be sung, while placing it upon the head of Gives-to-the-Sun. He warned Mad

Click to enlarge
SACRED WOMAN AND HUSBAND WITH RHUBARB STALK.

[paragraph continues] Wolf that if the ceremonials were not accurately performed, misfortune would follow. He advised him to refrain from the use of sweet pine (balsam fir), as incense during the Sun-dance. He made this injunction because in the tradition the Sun instructed Scarface to use sweet grass as incense. He also cautioned all to use great care in "Raising the Centre

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] Pole," and in building the Sun-lodge, reminding them of the well-known chief, who had died soon after the Pole had been carelessly allowed to lean towards him, and warning them that, if any part of the sacred lodge should fall, sickness and death would result. O-mis-tai-po-kah then prayed:

"Great Sun Power! I am praying for my people that they may be happy in the summer and that they may live through the cold of winter. Many are sick and in want. Pity them and let them survive. Grant that they may live long and have abundance. May we go through these ceremonies correctly, as you taught our forefathers to do in the days that are past. If we make mistakes pity us. Help us, M other Earth! for we depend upon your goodness. Let there be rain to water the prairies, that the grass may grow long and the berries be abundant. O Morning Star! when you look down upon us, give us peace and refreshing sleep. Great Spirit! bless our children, friends, and visitors through a happy life. May our trails lie straight and level before us. Let us live to be old. We are all your children and ask these things with good hearts."

During the prayer of the head chief, all heads were reverently bowed, and at the close they joined earnestly in an Amen. While inside the sacred tipi, I took part in the ceremony, beating time with my rattles and joining with the priests in the solemn chants.

Sounds from the outside attracted my attention and led me to leave Mad Wolf and his company. They were so deeply engrossed in their solemn service that they did not seem to notice my withdrawal.

Going out from the dimly lighted sacred tipi, I met a group of young men dressed in their gay trappings on their way to a dance. They were singing a Society song in unison, the bells fastened about their legs jingling at every step. A horse passed, ridden by two young fellows, singing together the "Black Tail Deer" song, while making the rounds of the camp. Suddenly a band of Indians rushed out from behind a lodge.

[p. 298]

[paragraph continues] With piercing war whoops they closed around the two singers and beat their horse, causing it to buck and plunge, but the riders pluckily held their seats. Finally, amid laughter and shouting, they distanced their pursuers, galloping off over the prairie.

Gaiety and humour are unexpected qualities to find concealed behind the habitually stoical and solemn exterior of the Indians. But, when one has been intimately associated with them in their camp life, he will find many indications of their playfulness and keen sense of humour, and that, when free from care and enjoying plenty, they are as light-hearted and as happy as children.

While passing a lodge, I heard a man's voice calling loudly, "What has become of the fellow that went after my horse?" When he repeated it, those in the near lodges took up the cry, as a joke. One clan after another quickly joined in the clamour, until the entire encampment was in an uproar, to the great amusement of everyone.

Awunna told me of one of his pranks when a youth. With some companions they captured a wild yearling colt, and pushed it into the lodge of one of the older chiefs, who was unpopular, tying down the door flap. The thoroughly frightened colt bucked and squealed, scattering the inside fire, upsetting everything and kicking at the occupants, who almost overturned the lodge in their mad scramble to escape.

It was considered a practical joke for young men to lasso and overturn the tipis of old women at night, especially those of elderly single women, who lived alone near their relatives. One of them passing on horseback, would skilfully throw his lariat over the tops of the poles and, with the other end securely

[p. 299]

fastened to the horn of his saddle, would start off at a gallop. The tipi would be jerked from its fastenings, the old woman would be startled from her slumber by the disappearance of her home, as if struck by a hurricane, and she would be left sitting up among her

Click to enlarge
OLD WOMAN'S SMALL TIPI.

belongings, frightened and embarrassed by her sudden exposure to the public view.

The sounds of drums came from the large lodge of the Mutsaix (Brave Dog Society), where a crowd was gathered to watch their dance around an inside fire. Crawling beneath the side of the tipi, I found myself among the squaw spectators, who were so completely absorbed in the dance, that they took no notice of my sudden appearance in their midst. The dancers laid

[p. 300]

aside their blankets and their naked painted bodies looked as savage and frightful in the firelight, as they could make them. All had eagle-bone whistles in their mouths, which they blew while dancing. They wore belts, made of grizzly bear skins, with the tails hanging behind. Mikasto, as the chief of the band, had other distinctive marks. He alone carried a rattle. On his head was the scalp of a large gray wolf, the skin of which was split and hung down his back with the tail almost touching the ground. Four of the dancers were painted black. Four others, as gray wolves, were covered with white clay, and had black streaks painted under their eyes, also a black circle on the back. They carried long spears painted white, with four eagle feathers attached to them at regular intervals. They circled around the other dancers imitating wolves driving together a herd of buffalo. Two other dancers sat in a hole, near the door, representing grizzly bears in their den. Their bodies were painted red and they had black streaks downward across the eyes. Whenever the wolves herded their band together, the grizzly bears jumped from their den, and pushing to the centre of the throng, drove the dancers out and scattered them. The bears returned to their den, while the wolves again began herding. After the dance was finished, the Mutsaix marched through the camp, singing their society song and calling out, "Let everyone be quiet to-night, because the sacred woman is going through her ceremonial and should not be disturbed. Let all rest well, for to-morrow we will build the Sun lodge." After completing the circle of the camp they separated.

The labour of securing poles and branches for the Sun-lodge had been evenly distributed among the tribe. Each clan was required to furnish and put

[p. 301]

its share in place. Women mounted on horseback carried the poles to camp, riding on either side of them and holding them up from the ground with lariats fastened to their saddles. The men also walked beside the poles, as an extra precaution to prevent their touching the ground, which was considered unlucky. Followed by a large crowd, singing war songs and with the Mad Dogs shooting their rifles, they entered camp from the north, south, east and west, carrying the poles to the place chosen for the Sun-lodge. Mad Wolf selected the tree to be cut for the Centre Pole. He struck the tree four times, and then handed the axe, which was painted red, to Gives-to-the-Sun. While she chopped, she prayed,

"Oh tree! I ask that you will fall easily. I promise to plant you in a new place and to give you many presents. May you stand firmly in your new home."

A large crowd watched the cutting of the tree, praying to the Sun that it might fall with its prongs flatwise, and not be broken. The crowd cheered, when it swayed, and, while it was falling, many of the warriors fired guns into the branches. When it struck the ground, they jumped from their horses, and with shrill war-whoops broke the branches, "counting coups," as if it were an enemy. After they had trimmed the tree, its forked top was lifted upon a double travois. It was then borne to camp and laid beside the open hole made to receive it.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 302]

  

CHAPTER XXII

  

RAISING THE CENTRE POLE

Ceremonial of painting Mad Wolf and clothing the sacred woman.--The priests and sacred women appear before the tribe.--The Feast of Tongues.--Making vows in behalf of the sick.--Awasaki's prayer for her grandchildren.--Ceremonial of "Cutting the hide."--Warriors assemble according to clans.--They march holding long poles aloft.--The tribe sing the Hymn to the Pole in unison.--An impressive scene.--The priests and sacred women bless the Centre Pole.--The warriors raise the pole and complete the Sun-lodge.--Points of resemblance in the Feast of Tongues to feasts of the Jewish and Christian Churches.

ON the morning of the fourth day many assembled to witness the ceremonial of decorating Mad Wolf with the black paint and clothing the sacred woman. As Gives-to-the-Sun put on the ceremonial dress, made from the skins of antelope and black-tail deer, the women assistants sang and made signs in imitation of deer and antelope. While putting on her medicine bonnet they sang:

"I want the weasel tails."

[paragraph continues] When the elk-skin medicine robe was thrown about her they sang the Elk song, making signs with their hands, imitating the movements of elk, swaying their bodies like trotting elk and giving the elk call.

Food was carried to the side of the Sun lodge, where the entire tribe assembled for a feast, seating themselves in long rows upon the ground. When the waiting people heard the Elk song, they knew the ceremonial in

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] Mad Wolf's tipi was nearly finished, and some eagerly exclaimed, "It is now time for the sacred woman to come forth." Gives-to-the-Sun, her face completely hidden by the medicine bonnet, was lifted to her feet by Natokema. She waited, leaning upon her cane for support. A line was formed, led by O-mis-tai-po-kah. Then came White Grass, Natosin, and Mad Wolf,

Click to enlarge
PROCESSION OF PRIESTS AND SACRED WOMEN.

carrying the wild rhubarb stalk with eagle feathers attached. He was followed by Natokema, Gives-to-the-Sun and their assistants. The procession moved slowly to a temporary shelter, or "lean-to" of canvas, near the site selected for the Sun-lodge, where they seated themselves. The parfleches of sacred tongues were opened. At this time, if there were any sick among the people their female relatives or friends came forward to pray to the Sun for their recovery. They

[p. 304]

took pieces of the consecrated meat and came before the tribe, the priests, and the givers of the Sun-dance. On all sides women were standing and facing the setting sun, each with right hand upraised, holding aloft portions of the sacred food, making vows,

Click to enlarge
PRIESTS AND SACRED WOMEN BENEATH THE SUN SHELTER.

confessing aloud and praying for their relatives standing beside them.

Awasaki, an old woman, the wife of Painted Wing, came forward with the children of Wakes-up-last, [*1] her son. When the small line was properly formed, Awasaki, raising her voice, called upon all to hear. The silence and respectful attention of the spectators, the grandmother, and the children by her side, standing before the venerable chiefs and medicine women, made

[p. 305]

an impressive scene. Awasaki said, "I now give Spotted Eagle a good horse, and ask him to pray for my sick grandchild." Spotted Eagle arose and prayed,

"O, Sun! I am praying for this woman because she is pure. She will take some of the holy food and will eat with you and with the Underground Spirits that her sick one may recover. Listen, Sun, and hear us! Grant us all life and health!"

[paragraph continues] Awasaki having taken a piece of tongue, broke off and

Click to enlarge
AWASAKI PRAYING FOR HER GRANDCHILDREN.

ate a morsel of it, facing the sun. Holding up another piece, she prayed,

"Great Sun Power! I give you my life to-day, because I have always been a pure and honest woman. I promise now to eat with you and with the Underground Spirits, that my grandchild may recover. I am praying also for these children standing before you, that they may grow and be strong, that they may have long life and may never suffer from hunger. Hear us and pity us!"

[paragraph continues] She planted another piece of tongue in the ground, and divided the remainder among her friends, to help them lead good lives.

[p. 306]

A green hide was stretched and pegged upon the ground, to be cut into strips for binding the framing poles together. For this ceremony, Three Bears, a noted warrior, was chosen, because he had once killed an enemy with his knife. He was selected by Eagle Head, the cutter of the hide of the year before. It

Click to enlarge
WOMEN MAKING VOWS HOLDING UP PIECES OF SACRED TONGUE.

sometimes happened that men cut the hide because of a vow. Three Bears sat beside a fire, in which sweet grass burned as incense, and was painted by Eagle Head--red over his body, and a black circle around his face. Eagle Head also prayed to the Sun that he might cut the hide properly. Three Bears stood before the assembled people with a painted knife, half red for the Sun and half black for the Moon. He first prayed

[p. 307]

to the Sun for power, and then, holding the knife high in the air, he called out, "Hear! men and women, for what I speak is true. Once I made an expedition against our enemy, the Snakes; I captured a band of horses and killed two men." He then cut several strips from the hide. Again he said, "I 
Click to enlarge
THREE BEARS
 "COUNTING COUPS"
 WHILE CUTTING HIDE.
 was on the warpath in the north, and fought with a chief of the Crees. I killed him and brought his scalp back with me." In this manner Three Bears cut as many strips as were needed, "counting a coup" [*1] before each cutting. Each time his wife was heard singing, and after he had finished, his relatives arose and danced, because their brother had gone through many dangers and had returned safely to his people. For. conferring upon him the honour of cutting the hide, Three Bears gave to Eagle Head the customary gift of several horses. Many presents of moccasins, blankets, and old clothing were fastened to the Centre Pole, as sacrifices to the Sun and Moon. It was explained that articles, which

[p. 308]

had been worn, were used as gifts, because the Sun and Moon expected offerings, but never made use of them.

When the Sun was setting, O-mis-tai-po-kah, the head chief, arose and in a loud voice directed the people to prepare for the ceremony of "Raising the Centre Pole." The men dispersed to their lodges, but soon reappeared, dressed in paint and war clothes. They

Click to enlarge
WARRIORS WITH POLES SINGING TRIBAL HYMN.

formed in four lines towards the north, south, east and west according to the clan, or camp to which they belonged. They held aloft long poles lashed together near the top, for lifting into place the heavy timbers of the Sun-lodge. The camp of Chiefs-all-over was first in line. They led off in singing the grand old hymn, "Raising the Pole," [*1] I given to the Blackfeet by the Sun through Scarface, and sung by them, in order that

[p. 309]

the Centre Pole might rest firmly in the ground. The singing was taken up by the different camps as they formed in line, the Bloods, Big Top Knots, Buffalo Chips, Don't Laughs, Skunks, Lone Eaters, Grease Melters and Small Robes. The lines moved forward from the four points of the compass towards the centre. Mad Wolf, with the priests and medicine women, passed slowly and in single file into the Sun-lodge. Gives-to-the-Sun

Click to enlarge
THRONG OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN SURROUNDING WARRIORS WHILE RAISING "CENTRE POLE."

took her position with Natokema beside the forks of the Centre Pole. Four times the lines of warriors advanced and stopped. On the fourth advance, they stood in a large circle around the unfinished Sun-lodge, singing in unison. The solemn and inspiring notes of their great "Hymn to the Pole" floating out over the quiet plain, the light of the evening sun, now sinking behind the Rocky Mountains, falling upon the strong and earnest faces of the chiefs and medicine women and

[p. 310]

the religious dignity of the occasion, combined to make the scene most impressive, one never to be forgotten. When all was ready, O-mis-tai-po-kah called in a loud voice, "Hurry! raise the Centre Pole quickly, that the sacred woman may eat and drink, for she is famished."

A bundle of willow branches was tied in the forks of the Centre Pole, representing the nest of an eagle. Mad Wolf stood upon the branches waving his robe in imitation of an eagle about to fly. When the priests shook the branches as if driving the eagle from its nest, Mad Wolf blew shrilly upon his medicine whistle, in imitation of an eagle screaming, and jumped from the Pole. The eager throng of women surrounding the lines of warriors closed in, shouting, "Hurry!" and praying,

"Great Sun Power! May our part of the sacred lodge go up safely, for we do not want to lose any of our relatives."

The lines broke and the warriors rushed towards the Sun-lodge, with shrill war-whoops. The Centre Pole was quickly raised by means of lariats. The young men with poles lifted the girders into place and branches with foliage were placed against the sides.

A small opening towards the west was left free from branches. These were secured and put in place by Mad Wolf and Gives-to-the-Sun, at dawn on the following day, that they might do their share in the labour of building the sacred lodge. The Sun-lodge was thus completed and ready for occupancy. In it the entire tribe assembled, during the remaining days of the festival, to witness the ceremonies and dances under the leadership of Spotted Eagle, Bull Child, and other medicine men.

Gives-to-the-Sun's fast was now ended. She returned

[p. 311]

to her tipi and was given a small quantity of nourishing soup, while Mad Wolf again entered the sweat-lodge to remove the black paint, and to pray for his people.

The preparatory services, the consecration and setting apart of the food before its distribution, the religious assembling of the people, the symbolic act of eating a small portion of the consecrated food by each, the giving of thanks and prayer before partaking and the purification beforehand of those conducting the ceremonies,--all these impressed me by their religious significance, and the many respects in which this Blackfoot Feast of Tongues resembled the Jewish feast of the Passover and the Lord's Supper of the Christian Church.

Click to enlarge
TRIBAL HYMN, "RAISING THE POLE"

Footnotes

^304:1 See [*Appendix].

^307:1 See [*Appendix].

^308:1 Song 8. See <page 311>.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

  

CHAPTER XXIII

  

INSIDE THE SUN-LODGE.

Three medicine men have charge of ceremonies.--Bull Child's famous medicine robe.--Sacred booth of the medicine men.--Great crowd of people at Sun-lodge.--People are painted by medicine men.--Society dances and "counting of coups."--Big Beaver tells of his vow.--Kit-sta-ka's song to her dead lover and suicide from a high cliff.--Self-torture by warriors at the Sun-dance in former days.--Story of the fulfilment of a vow by Two Bears.--An approaching storm.--Interesting contest between two medicine men as weather-makers.--Mad Wolf's farewell speech.--The tribe breaks camp.--Death of Mad Wolf.

SPOTTED EAGLE, Mas-te-pe-ne and Bull Child, prominent medicine men, were chosen by the chiefs to take charge of the ceremonies to be given inside the Sun-lodge. On the morning of the fifth day they walked slowly through camp, dancing and blowing their medicine whistles as a signal to the tribe that they were proceeding to the Sun-lodge.

Bull Child wore a robe, [*1] famous among the Blackfeet, and purchased by him from "Brings-down-the-Sun," a celebrated medicine man of the north. Many bird and animal tails were attached, including those of the eagle, owl, weasel, mink and gopher. It had also a small bell, two shields and several pieces of fragrant punk from the cottonwood tree. There were paint marks on the back of the robe to represent stars. One group of seven, across the shoulders, to represent the

Click to enlarge
BLACKFEET CAMP IN MOONLIGHT

[p. 313]

[paragraph continues] Great Bear, and, under the right shoulder, a cluster of six to represent the Pleiades. In the centre of the back, the Sun was represented by a double circle in black and red, and there was also a small Maltese cross for the Morning Star. Before entering the Sun-lodge, Bull Child gave a long dance outside. In one hand he held owl and crow tails, which belonged to the medicine of his robe; and, in the other, an eagle wing that went with his medicine bag.

The symbolic designs 
Click to enlarge
BULL CHILD WITH HIS
 CELEBRATED MEDICINE ROBE.
 painted upon his face and body had been revealed to him by the Sun in a dream, while sleeping in the medicine booth of a former Sun-dance. The marks upon his arms represented the rainbow, those upon his cheeks stars. Across his mouth was a red cross, the sign of fasting. Upon the centre of his forehead was a red disc for the Sun and upon either temple two yellow streaks for sun dogs. Upon the front of his otter-medicine-hat was fastened a white shell representing the sun, and above it was painted a crescent for the Moon. At the back of the hat were two spotted eagle feathers, and in his hair a single red eagle plume.

When he danced, he faced first towards the rising sun, blowing his medicine whistle and making mysterious

[p. 314]

motions with both arms extended towards the sky. Then he danced facing the west and waving the eagle wing in the direction of the setting sun.

The door of the Sun-lodge faced towards the east. Opposite the entrance upon the inside, was a small booth for the exclusive use of the medicine men. It was closely interwoven at the sides and back with ground-pine to bar inquisitive eyes from the outside. The

Click to enlarge
THE SUN-LODGE.

floor was made of earth taken from the foot of the Centre Pole. It was hardened by wetting and then covered with white clay. Pine boughs were spread within upon which they slept. When the medicine men entered the booth they announced that they would fast four days, which meant to the tribe that the Sun-dance would continue four days longer. During this time the medicine men ate but four bites of dried meat before sunrise and four more after sunset, with an

[p. 315]

allowance of but one small shell of water. They might eat gooseberries and sweet cottonwood pulp, provided they were brought to them. They could not gather them, nor leave the booth during their fast.

The Indians surrounded and crowded into the Sun-lodge in such numbers that it was almost impossible for more to enter, or for those that were within to withdraw. Seats were reserved for the lodge-giver with

Click to enlarge
THE THREE MEDICINE MEN IN THEIR BOOTH.

his wife and their assistants. Gives-to-the-Sun was indeed highly exalted among Indian women, when she entered the Sun-lodge with Mad Wolf, O-mis-tai-po-kah and Natokema, for she was the object of honour and veneration from the entire tribe. Robes were spread, and they took their seats near the Centre Pole, on the north side of the medicine booth. The people brought offerings, which they presented with a filled pipe to one of the medicine men. After smoking he painted the faces of the givers and blessed them with "long life and

[p. 316]

good luck." Many women carried young children to Bull Child to receive his blessing. He took them in his arms, and, holding a bunch of eagle feathers in one hand and a buffalo tail in the other, gazed intently at the bright sun and prayed, that "they might be endowed with power, and have an abundance to eat throughout their lives."

The space in the centre was kept open for the different societies. They were recognised, as they entered, by their characteristic dress and the painting of their bodies. Hanging their shields and weapons upon the Centre Pole, they sat down in rows to the north and south of the fire and later gave their different dances. Warriors also "counted coups," narrating their deeds of bravery and illustrating them by their sham battles.

The Blackfeet believe that men, who have been brave in battle, have acquired extra merit and, by recounting their deeds publicly in the Sun-lodge will thereby help their sick relatives and friends. One of these was Mukoi-sa-po who arose and prayed,

"O Sun take pity on my sick mother and restore her to health."

[paragraph continues] He built a miniature lodge of branches to make more realistic his description of his attacking alone a Sioux lodge, and securing two scalps.

Big Beaver, dressed in a buckskin suit, decorated with weasel skins and holding a piece of the sacred food, stood before the people saying:

"Hear me! my brothers and sisters. During the moon, when snows are deep (February), I went with Esto-ko-atto to visit the Crows. On our way home, at the time of the big Chinook (Warm Wind), we were crossing the Yellowstone River. The water was high and carried us against an ice-jam. Esto-ko-atto went under and was drowned, but I crawled out upon the ice, which floated down the river. I then vowed to the Sun that, if I escaped alive, my sister would partake of a tongue for me at the time of the

[p. 317]

next Sun-dance. I jumped from one ice-cake to another and escaped to shore, reaching my home in safety."

He handed the tongue to his sister, who held it up, praying to the Sun Power for all of the people. Breaking a small piece from the tongue, she buried it in the

Click to enlarge
MEDICINE MAN PRAYING FOR BIG BEAVER AND HIS FAMILY.

earth, praying to the Underground Spirits that all might have plenty to eat. Big Beaver then said to his sister, "Here is my horse and the clothing I wear. Give them to the medicine man, Spotted Eagle, and ask him to pray for us."

The entire assembly became hushed, when Kit-sta-ka

[p. 318]

arose from a group of squaws and, with trembling voice, sang to her dead lover,

"This is the sacred place where I was last with my lover. Now I am left alone, for he has gone to the Spirit World where I hope to join him soon."

[paragraph continues] After the Sun-dance, Kit-sta-ka was camped with the clan of Lone Eaters on Two Medicine River. One evening she was seen standing on the edge of a high cliff in full view of the camp. The Indians heard her singing this same song to her dead lover, and then saw her jump to her death.

Many years ago, when the Indian tribes were at war, it was customary for warriors, who had made vows, to fulfil them at the time of the Sun-dance. These acts were not performed, as is sometimes asserted, for the making of warriors, nor were they regarded as deeds of bravado, but as religious expiations to the Sun, in return for favours granted. The vows were made under various conditions. For instance, a man, starting upon an important war expedition, would pray to the Sun, promising self-torture, if he could be successful and return home safely. Sometimes a warrior, hard pressed in battle, or a hunter in a desperate conflict with a wild animal, vowed that, if his life were saved, he would cut himself at the next Sun-dance. The devotee, in fulfilling such a vow, would choose a friend to do the cutting and have charge of him during the ordeal. Having made the incisions and thrust wooden skewers under the muscles, on both sides of his breast, he made them fast to the loose ends of one of the half dozen raw-hide ropes suspended from the top of the Centre Pole. He then danced around the pole until the skewers were torn loose. The spectators spurred him on by loud and continual singing, shouts of encouragement and admiration,

[p. 319]

and violent beating of the tom-toms. Weakened by previous fasting, he would often fall senseless to the ground, to be revived and started again, until his flesh was torn loose, when he would withdraw within the tipi of a relative for healing treatment and a feast. In their frenzy greater tortures were often voluntarily undertaken. Extra incisions would be made in their shoulders and back, from which buffalo skulls, guns, saddles and other heavy articles were suspended. The dancers would run about, dragging these heavy objects after them, until torn off by the violent strain.

Once, Two Bears, a young chief in a desperate battle with the Sioux, was surrounded and cut off from his comrades. When death seemed certain, he made a vow to the Sun and escaped. The next summer, he rode through the Sun-dance camp, telling the story of his deliverance and announcing that he was ready to fulfil his vow. He presented himself before a medicine man, who covered his body with white clay, painted black streaks on his cheeks, representing tears, and a black shield on his back,--the emblem of war. A wreath of juniper was placed upon his head and sage leaves tied around his wrists and ankles. He chose a noted warrior, who had done great deeds in battle, to cut the incisions in his back and breast. In these slits skewers were inserted, to which lariats were attached. During the ordeal Two Bears displayed no sign of pain. He directed that a herd of his own horses be sent for; that the lariats be fastened to them, and that they be stampeded by the waving of blankets. He announced also, that he gave these horses as an offering to the Sun. The young chief was dragged a long distance before the last skewer was pulled through his flesh and he lay as if dead upon the plain. He was carried on a litter to his

[p. 320]

tipi, and root medicine was applied to his wounds. Next day he returned to the Sun-lodge, bringing a present and a filled pipe for the medicine man, who smoked and prayed for him. It is said that those who underwent self-torture generally seemed to recover, but not many of them lived long afterwards, because of the severe nervous shock sustained.

The medicine men were believed to have power over the weather, and at the time of the Sun-dance were expected to drive away all storms. The following incident illustrates the extraordinary skill with which they acquire and maintain a reputation with the tribe for supernatural power.

A dark cloud, with its eastern side extending far out over the plains, was seen slowly advancing along the main range of the Rockies towards the encampment. The people anxiously watched the medicine men, who were quick to realise that the occasion had great possibilities of success, or failure for their office. Spotted Eagle and Mastepene standing in front of their people, entered into a sort of competition as weather-makers, but with much better success than the competing prophets of Baal. Mastepene, blowing his whistle and facing the black cloud, called in a loud voice,

"Behold! A storm comes from the mountains, and you people would get wet, but I am powerful and my medicine is strong. I will now dance to keep the weather clear."

He left the booth, and stepping forth into the circle danced alone. He was short, but sinewy, and as he danced, circling around with agile step, he held an otter skin towards the north, south, east and west which, with a final gesture, as if driving back the clouds, he waved over his head. A sudden change in

[p. 321]

the wind averted its course and it divided, as Mastepene predicted. Spotted Eagle, jealous of the success of his rival, then left the booth. He wore the powerful medicine handed down to him by Four Bears. On his head was an otter-skin cap to make him strong and active; in his hair an eagle feather to preserve him in battle; while around his waist was a medicine belt to keep his body free from sickness. In one hand he

Click to enlarge
A MEDICINE MAN MAKING INCANTATIONS TO DRIVE AWAY A STORM.

carried a magpie and in the other a mink skin. Standing before the waiting people, he said,

"Mastepene, you are wrong, for my supernatural power over the weather comes from the Sun, and is therefore stronger than yours. The storm has indeed separated, but it will again unite and return to wet the people."

Again the eyes of the Indians eagerly watched the divided clouds, which actually came together and

[p. 322]

continued to spread until they passed over the encampment with a heavy rain.

The Sun had set on the last day of his Sun-dance, when Mad Wolf, the greatest orator of the Blackfeet, arose to make a farewell talk. A deep stillness fell over the assembled people as the venerable chief, with hand upraised to command attention, stood before them. He spoke with a strong full voice, saying:

"Hear! my children, for I speak to you with a good heart. It does us all good to assemble every summer around the Sun-lodge. We have smoked the Medicine Pipe, and the rising smoke has carried away all of our bad feelings. Many have given presents to the Sun, and some have fulfilled their vows. The old people have fasted and prayed, and now feel better in their hearts. The young men have listened to the wise counsels of the chiefs, and the young girls have seen the medicine women, chosen to fast and pray, because their lives are pure and their hearts are kindly disposed towards everyone. The Great Sun God is our father. He is kind, for he makes the trees to bud and the grass to become green in the spring-time. He gave the people good hearts, that they also might be kind and help each other. The grass is now long, and the sun is bright and warns upon the prairies, but the cold and frost of winter, with its deep snows and biting winds, will soon come, and I know not where our women and children will get their food. We are not moving; we are just standing still. The buffalo are all gone, the antelope and the rest of the game also. The white men have continued driving us westward, until now the Rocky Mountains face us like a wall and we can go no farther. I care not for myself, for I will soon go to the Great Spirit. I am anxious for the little children, for I know not what will become of them.

"You have all heard of our Ka-ach-sino (Great Grandfather, President), who calls us his red children. He is the only one upon whom we can depend, and we must now look to him, as in the past we have prayed to the Sun God. All of you my children should obey his laws and give heed to his advice. He lives far away towards the rising sun, but I shake hands with him now, for our hearts feel good toward him. Prepare to return to your ranches and look well after your cattle, for, with diligence and perseverance, you can make a good living. Let everyone keep away from fire water, and send your children to school. If they can learn the talk of the white men, they will be a great help to us, for the white man's way is now on top. I shake hands with all of you, my

[p. 323]

children. I wish that you may feel the sunshine of joy in your hearts and that you may have no trouble. What I speak with my mouth I feel in my heart. Farewell!"

Early on the following morning, Running Crane, followed by his band, departed for the south, and on the next day Mad Wolf also departed, followed by the rest of the tribe. I remained alone in the midst of the recent encampment, watching them as they slowly

Click to enlarge
MAD WOLF WITH His BAND DEPARTING FOR THE NORTH.

made their way northward. When they disappeared over a distant ridge, I turned for a last look at the Surf-lodge, which was now the one conspicuous and solitary object in the midst of a broad and desolate plain, surrounded on all sides by the smoking embers of the deserted lodge fires.

Mad Wolf died, May 28, 1902, during the moon, when the grass is green. Just before his death, four large crosses of light appeared about the moon, the sign a great chief is about to die. He was ill but three days. Ear Rings and White Grass, skilled

[p. 324]

doctors of the Blackfeet, were called without avail. Mad Wolf grew steadily worse. It was the second night of his illness, when Ear Rings said, "Mad Wolf, you should make your farewell talk, for your sickness is hard to cure and it is doubtful if you will recover." The chief would not think of death. He directed that Snake Woman, a celebrated herb doctor and medicine woman, be consulted, but her remedies brought no relief. At early dawn of the fourth day, Mad Wolf suddenly raised himself. He said, "I want to go alone into the open, that I may see the blue sky and breathe again the fresh air."

He walked slowly to the door, and when outside, the watchers heard him speaking. Gives-to-the-Sun, hastening to him, found him kneeling, his face towards the rising sun, with arms outstretched and praying to the Morning Star, which had already risen and was shining upon the face of the dying chief. She heard him exclaim, "Wait!" and when she hurried to his side, he said, "Do you not see, standing there, the ghost of my old friend Double Runner? He says he is waiting for me, and it is now time for me to go with him."

Morning Plume ran out and caught the dying chief in his arms. Mad Wolf sank back as if tired. Reaching out, he took the hands of his wife in his own, and looking up tried to speak. She leaned close to his face and heard him whisper, "I love you and I love Morning Plume also." With these last words, Mad Wolf passed to the Spirit World over the "Wolf Trail" (Milky Way), the path worn across the heavens by the travelling spirits of many generations of the Blackfeet dead.

Footnotes

^312:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

  

CHAPTER XXIV

  

ALONG THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

Our camp on Two Medicine River.--Sudden plans to start for Canada.--Members composing our expedition and its object.--First camp at foot of Hudson's Bay Divide.--Evening visit to tipi of the widow of Screaming Owl, a former head chief.--She talks about former days and of her dead son.--His ghost makes a night visit to our camp.--Crossing the Hudson's Bay Divide.--Descent of its northern slope into the beautiful valley of the North Fork.--Arrival at Spotted Eagle's camp on St. Mary's River.

IN the early summer of 1905, I was in camp with Kionama and Onesta on Two Medicine Lake in northern Montana. The sun had set behind Mount Rising Wolf. The rugged summits of the Rockies were silhouetted in sharp outlines against the golden light, which still lingered in the western sky. The distant snow-capped peaks, the intervening forest-covered ridges and the silver crescent of the new moon hanging over all, were reflected in the quiet lake. Menake and Nitana, their wives, were busily engaged preparing our evening meal, over an outside fire. They were, at the same time, taking a prominent part in discussing with their husbands a proposed trip across the border into Canada, to visit relatives and friends among the northern divisions of the Blackfeet.

Menake was in favour of starting at once, urging that the weather was undoubtedly settled, and that it was the best time of year for travel. But Kionama doubted

[p. 326]

Click to enlarge
TWO MEDICINE LAKE (Mount Rising Wolf in the distance.).

[p. 327]

if permission to leave the reservation could be secured from the Kino (father or agent), and besides, we would not be able to get through the "Red Coats" (the Canadian North-western Mounted Police). He knew permits to go north had been refused to Ne-sots-kena, Ketamoken and many others. I reassured them by saying that I was a friend of their agent, and as I had

Click to enlarge
LODGES OF KATOYA AND HER SON.

come into their country with the permission of Ka-ach-sino (the Great Grandfather, or President), I could secure the permit, and we would go together. All were greatly pleased, and Onesta said, "We will not only visit our relatives and friends among the Blood Indians, but we will also see my uncle, Natosin Nepee (Brings-down-the-Sun). He is a noted authority upon our ancient customs and religion. He lives in a camp with

[p. 328]

his children and grand-children near the Porcupine Mountains, on the Crow Lodge River. If you will go with us on the north trip, we will make you chief of our expedition. We will take you to Brings-down-the-Sun as our friend, and will persuade him to tell you about the old days." When I agreed to their plan, all doubts as to our ability of making the expedition were removed, and they decided, in characteristic Indian fashion, to start at once.

Next morning the horses were driven in at daybreak, and soon after sunrise we were on our way towards the north, over the Old North Trail, which has been trodden by unnumbered generations of Indians, and used long before the white race came to divide the country and to fix a border line. We had two teams, Kionama driving the first wagon with .Menake, his wife, Onesta following with Nitana, their little daughter, O-tak-kai, (Yellow Mink), and Moiyami (Woolly One), the dog. I rode on horse-back in company with Sinopa (Kit Fox), daughter of Kionama, and her two brothers, Emonissi (Otter) and Seeyea.

We camped, for the first night, in a meadow of tall bunch grass, at the foot of the Hudson's Bay Divide, and near a stream of cold and sparkling water, fresh from the snow peaks of the Rockies. Not far distant, were the black timbered slopes of the mountains from which came a gentle breeze laden with the fragrance of the pine forest.

The Indians were delighted to be upon the trail again. They were as light-hearted and happy as children. When we gathered around the fire, Menake and Nitana busied themselves preparing the meat for our long journey, cutting it into broad strips and hanging it to dry upon poles near the fire. Thin strips

[p. 329]

were roasted on the hot embers for supper, and the "boss ribs" boiled in a large kettle for the morning meal. Not far distant, up the river, were two lodges, where lived Katoya, widow of See-pis-tok-komi (Screaming Owl), former head chief of the Blackfeet, and her married son Ekum-makon.

In the evening Kionama and I went to pay our

Click to enlarge
OUR CAMP NEAR THE HUDSON'S BAY DIVIDE.

respects to the old woman. There was no apparent sign of life about her tipi, save the blue smoke, slowly curling from the top, and carrying the sweet scent of burning cottonwood. Katoya was at home and bade us be seated. I leaned against the comfortable lodge backs, made of small pine branches skilfully woven together, and sat gazing at the medicines and the other objects of interest in the lodge, revealed by the cheerful

[p. 330]

firelight. I broke the long silence, by asking her to relate the circumstances that brought her husband into prominence before the tribe. She lapsed into a reverie, but finally, after filling her pipe, began:

"Many years ago, when we were at war with the whites, and in great dread of them, our tribe was camped near the Cypress Mountains. It was then that my husband, Screaming Owl, made a treaty with the white men. Early one morning he awoke me, saying, 'Catch our best horses and dress in your finest clothes, for I intend to start to-day for the camp of the Long Knives' (United States Cavalry). When this news had spread throughout the camp, there was great excitement. The people thought we were going to certain death and, crowding round our lodge, urged us not to go. But Screaming Owl said to them, 'Are you all women, that you should so fear the Long Knives? I know the whites will do me no harm, for I go to make friends with them. Many times in the past I have advised you not to fight. It does no good to kill them, for they are as many as the grass on the prairies. Whenever we have taken their scalps they have brought bad luck and caused us much trouble.' We started off on our long journey and travelled towards the south for many days. When we drew near the white settlement, my husband rode to the summit of a high butte. He made signals with a mirror, flashing it into the fort, and then walked four times along the butte, backwards and forwards. The white chief rode towards us with some other men, making signs of peace. My husband also made signs to them that his heart was good, and we rode together down the hill. They shook hands with us, and, having entered their camp, we smoked a pipe with them. We remained there ten days, and

[p. 331]

then returned again to our people. We found the Blackfeet camped on Milk River. They were anxious for our safety and had followed our trail, but turned back, when it approached the white settlement. Screaming Owl told them of our journey, and how kindly the white men had received us. He finally persuaded the whole tribe to return with him to Fort Benton, where they camped many days. The great treaty was then made. My husband was given a medal by the Great Father, and he was also made head chief of the Blackfeet."

It was late when we returned to camp. The night air was cold, and we sat closely around the fire, built at the edge of the willows. Menake was relating the story of a ghost, which took the form of a large owl, and harassed a camp of Blackfeet. In the midst of her story, she abruptly stopped, and, turning, gazed intently towards the meadow. For a moment there was a deep stillness. Then a rustling was distinctly heard in the long grass, just beyond the circle of firelight. We all rose to our feet, while Kionama reached for his rifle. The strange object continued to move stealthily through the grass of the meadow and glided into the thick willows. Onesta said, "It must be a cougar, or a lynx." But Menake thought it was an Indian watching our camp. Before retiring to my blanket-bed, I stood, for a moment, looking up at the bright moon, and again closely scrutinised the dark line of the willows where the mysterious visitor had entered. As the sequel proved, it was my first meeting, face to face, with a real ghost, which has always remained a mysterious and inexplicable experience.

The following morning, when we went back to Katoya's tipi, she unconsciously furnished us

[p. 332]

with a startling explanation of the apparition. She said:

"Our talk yesterday brought back to me many things, and, since you left, I have been going over in my mind the happy days of the past. Last night I did not sleep, but lay thinking until the darkness became pale, and I watched the dawn as it came into the tipi. The spirit of my dead son, Pakapse, came here. He is my protector, and often visits me. Whenever he comes he is hungry; and last night, while eating, he said: 'My mother, there are strangers near you, but you need not be afraid, for they are good people and will do you no harm. I have been watching their camp and recognised Kionama, A-pe-ech-eken (referring to myself), and Menake. They were seated by the fire, talking together. I went too close, for they heard me, and Kionama picked up his rifle. I feared lest he might shoot and alarm you, so I went away. I then met the ghost of my dead father, Screaming Owl, coining down from the ridge, where his body lies. He said he was coming to watch over you, my mother. I advised him to go back and rest quietly, because I would see that no harm came to you.'"

Katoya continued in a reminiscent mood, "I was seven years old when I became the wife of Screaming Owl. I lived with him until death separated us. During our married life I gave the Sun ceremonial three times; the first, when I was fourteen years of age. The vow for our last Sun-dance was made by my son, Pakapse, when he was living on Badger Creek. I had been very sick, and some one brought to him word that I was dying. It was night when he received the message, and the moon was in the sky. He had always before prayed to the Sun, but, that night,

[p. 333]

he stood before his lodge, and looking up to the sky, prayed,

"'Great Spirit in the Moon and in the Stars! Have mercy on my mother that she may live. Pity her, for she is a pure woman, and I vow that if she recovers from the sickness of this night she will give the festival sacred to the Sun.'

"When Pakapse came in the morning he kissed me, saying, 'Rise up now and get well, because I have made the vow and have prayed for you.' I became strong again, and in midsummer, we gave the Sun-dance, as our son had promised. Since my husband died, I have been very poor. The agent has taken away my ration ticket, and I know not where I will get food. I would not have clothes, if my son Ekum-makon, did not provide for me. He is also poor and has a wife and family to care for. The agent now says he must take me from my home and send me, with other old Indians, to the 'Country of the Dead' (referring to the 'Old Agency,' which was so named by the Blackfeet because of its dreary surroundings, the many graves on the hills and the quantity of bones lying around, bleaching in the sun). If this is done there will soon be no old people, for we shall all die of loneliness. We need our children around us. They provide for us, when we are in want, and care for us, when we are sick. I wish to live always on the banks of this river, where I lived with my husband, where his body now lies, and my children and sister are buried. When I die, I want my body to be placed beside theirs, on the summit of yonder ridge." When Katoya ended her talk, she bowed her head in silence, allowing her long hair to cover her face in order to hide her tears. We quietly left her to the companionship of

[p. 334]

her ghostly dead and returned to our camp, for we had a long drive ahead of us.

Heavy clouds settled down so low over the divide, that our camp was enveloped in a thick fog. Fearing that a heavy storm was gathering, we hurriedly finished breakfast, packed our outfit, and started in the face of a cold north wind. I lagged behind to get out my thick gloves and heavily lined leather coat. Closely muffled in their blankets the Indians made an interesting procession, moving forward through the heavy mists, and slowly climbing towards the summit of the divide. While we were descending its northern slope, a magnificent view was spread before us. The clouds were lifting from the Rocky Mountains, and the higher peaks stood out sharply in the clear sunlight. When we at last rode down into the broad valley of the North Fork of Milk River it was a lovely summer day, with balmy air and sky of deepest blue. At the head of the grassy valley, the sharp peak of Chief Mountain rose like a great pyramid. On either side of the stream the luxuriant meadows were radiant with masses of sweet-briar roses, and its course was marked by green groves of balsam poplars and willow thickets.

Arriving at the Green Banks (St. Mary's River), we camped beside the lodges of Spotted Eagle and Big Smoke at the edge of a grassy plateau overlooking the river. Spotted Eagle, a medicine man of the South Piegans, was recrossing the border with his wife and family bound south, having made a long stay among the northern divisions of the Blackfeet in Alberta. Big Smoke was a Blood Indian. He and his wife were on their way to visit their daughter who had married among the South Piegans.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 335]

  

CHAPTER XXV

  

SPOTTED EAGLE'S MYTHICAL STORIES OF OLD MAN

The camp of Spotted Eagle, a noted medicine man.--His jovial disposition and reputation for wit and humour.--He relates mythical adventures of Old Man.--Old Man plays with the ground squirrels.--Punishes the lynx and the birch tree.--Takes part in an elk dance.--Joins in the mouse dance and gets into trouble.--Travels with a fox and punishes a rock.--His adventures with coyotes.--He flies with the cranes and falls to the earth.--He is tricked by a small bird.--He dives after berries reflected in the water.--Starts the custom of scalping dead enemies.--Induces men and women to mate.--Steals the magical fire leggings.--Spotted Eagle's morning bath.--His remarkable weather prediction followed by a violent electrical storm.

WE found Spotted Eagle reclining on his bed of robes and blankets, fanning himself with a large eagle wing. He was a noted medicine man, who made a speciality of the Sun-dance ceremonial. He was generally chosen to sit in the sacred booth of the Sun-lodge, to pray for those who came before him. If the man and his wife, who gave the Sun-dance, were not competent to lead in the ceremonial, Spotted Eagle was their paid adviser, to guide them through the long and intricate rites. Commanding in person, and with a face indicating much force and strength of character, he had an imposing presence--a most valuable qualification for a medicine man. His hair, now streaked with grey over his temples, was separated into braids by bands of otter skin.

Because of its supernatural power, the use of otter-skin

[p. 336]

for all sorts of ornamentation of their tipis, war dresses and articles used in the ceremonials was very general among the plains-tribes. It was also prized as a handsome article of personal adornment, especially in wrapping their hair braids, and twisting it into their hair and scalp locks. "Otter-skin twists" were fashionable among the young men and were generally admired.

Spotted Eagle was accustomed to give special
Click to enlarge
SPOTTED EAGLE.
 attention to making his toilet. We found him pulling out straggling hairs from his face with a small pair of tweezers (the Blackfoot substitute for shaving), and dressing his hair with a comb made of a porcupine's tail, ornamented with bead work, and a hair brush made of the skin of a buffalo tongue. Its pointed papillae, when carefully dried, made a good substitute for bristles. These toilet articles were not modern, but they served the purpose equally as well. The making use, or wearing as an ornament, of any part of an animal, was often the Indian's way of honouring that animal. Spotted Eagle's comb and brush (especially the latter) had a superior value for a medicine man's toilet over the best comb and hair brush to be had from the Indian trader's stock.

He complained to Big Smoke of the extortion of white traders, when he tried to barter some of his horses for provisions. But he had such a jovial disposition that he soon forgot the white traders and began telling

[p. 337]

stories. Spotted Eagle had quite a reputation as a wit, and was widely known as a joker. When startled by a sudden noise, such as the barking of a dog, or the whinney of a horse, he had a comical way of giving an odd cry, made more ridiculous by the peculiar intonation of his voice and the expression of his face. After each of his jokes, he would turn towards me, winking vigorously, and was greatly pleased if I laughed at them, which I did at every opportunity.

He was specially fond of telling stories about the marvellous adventures of Old Man (Napi), a mythical character of the Blackfeet, whose contradictory qualities are difficult to understand, or reconcile. Old Man was also known to other plains-tribes and by different names.

Some of these myths are fragmentary and incomplete, but all bear an unmistakable stamp of the primitive and childhood period of Blackfeet history.

Others are samples of Indian humour, told as we tell fairy tales and using Old Man for their central figure.

Many of them were vulgar and even obscene, which have an ethnological value, but cannot appear in a book for general circulation. Spotted Engle had a fondness for them because they had been handed down from the ancients, and he also had that common trait, which finds enjoyment in hearing and telling such stories, because of a keen sense of the humour in them.

The character of Old Man as revealed, even in the more serious of these myths, is a strange composite of opposing attributes, of power and weakness, of wisdom and passion, of benevolence and malevolence. He associated intimately with the birds and animals. He

[p. 338]

conversed with them and understood their thoughts and language, and they understood him. Although believed to be the creator of all things, and as having omnipotent power, he was often helpless and in trouble, and compelled to seek the aid of his animal friends. He was, in fact, like an animal in his instincts and desires, which, strange to say, were exercised in conjunction with his supernatural power.

Old Man, like Hercules of Greek and Roman legend, and Thor of the ancient Scandinavians, was the personification, in human form, of strength and supernatural power. But it was a power uncontrolled by reason, and wanton in its exercise. He was a deceiver and a trickster and his name was a synonym among the Blackfeet, at least in later years, for mischievous and immoral adventure.

Spotted Eagle said of him: "Old Man first came to the Blackfeet from the south. The last we heard of him, he was among the Crees, and disappeared towards the east, whence he is not likely to ever return."

In the following myths about Old Man, related by Spotted Eagle, the reader will observe the striking contrast between their crude character, and the beauty of conception, dignity of imagery and vividness of description, characterising the star-legends as told by Brings-down-the-Sun. [*1]

Old Man Plays with the Ground Squirrels and Punishes the Lynx and the Birch Tree.

"Old Man came to a place, where many ground squirrels were seated around a fire, playing a game.

[p. 339]

[paragraph continues] They would bury one of their number in the ashes, until he squealed, when they pulled him out. Old Man said that he would like to learn the game. The squirrels explained that it was very easy, and invited him to take part. He asked them to bury him first, but, as soon as he was covered over, he yelled, and they quickly pulled him out. Old Man then said that it was the squirrels' turn, but since there were so many of them, it would save time to bury them all at once. They agreed, so he covered them all over with hot ashes, excepting one mother squirrel, who was afraid. He warned her to run away, so that there might be other squirrels, but left the others in the ashes, until they were well roasted. He ate so many of the roasted squirrels that he fell asleep, when a lynx came along and ate up the others. Old Man followed the lynx, until he came upon him fast asleep. He was so angry, that he seized him by the ears and shortened his head by hammering it against a stone. He pulled out his long tail and, breaking it in two, stuck the brush part on his rump, making a bob-tail. He stretched his legs and body, making them long and slender, and then cast him upon the ground saying, 'You bob-cats will always look like this, and you will always be so short-winded, that you will never be able to run far.'

"Old Man having been burned by the fire called upon the wind to blow. The cool air made him feel better, so he continued calling upon it to blow harder and harder, until there came such a fierce wind that he was blown away. Every tree that he caught hold of was torn up by the roots, and he could not stop himself, until he lay hold of a birch tree. When the wind went down and he was rested, he denounced the birch saying, 'Why have you

[p. 340]

such strong roots, that you cannot be pulled up like other trees? I was having a good time being blown around by the wind, until you spoiled my fun.' He was so angry that he drew his stone knife and gashed the birch all over.

"This is the reason why the bark of a birch tree always has such a nicked appearance."

Old Man Takes Part in an Elk Dance.

"Old Man come to a herd of elk having a dance. They were following their leader in single file. Old Man persuaded the chief elk to allow him to be the leader. When they became tired, and it was so dark that they could not see where they were going, Old Man led them to a precipice, and throwing his rattle over, to make it sound as if he himself had jumped, he hastened to the bottom. The elk were at first suspicious but when Old Man called to them to follow him, they jumped over one after the other and were all killed, excepting one, which was a cow. Old Man told her to go away, in order that there might be more elk. Old Man then ate his fill of elk meat, keeping the tongues to the last by placing them upon poles to be safe from the animals. When a lame coyote came along and whined for some meat, Old Man refused, but finally promised to give him some, if he would beat him in a long foot race. The coyote, at first, said he was too lame. When Old Man insisted he agreed, but first went to the top of a neighbouring butte, and barked to the north, south, east and west, summoning all of the animals to come together to witness the race. At the start the coyote pretended to be so lame, that he could scarcely walk, but when they were far out on the

[p. 341]

plains, he let down his lame leg and quickly passed Old Man. Old Man seeing that he was beaten, called after the coyote to leave some of the meat for him. When the coyote arrived at the finish, he found the animals waiting. They had a great feast together and finished eating all the elk meat, excepting the tongues, which they could not reach. But the mice crawled up the poles, and ate the insides out of the tongues.

"When Old Man arrived there was nothing left."

Old Man joins in the Mouse Dance and gets into Trouble.

"Old Man found large a elk-skull lying upon the ground. He looked inside and saw some mice having a dance. The Chief Mouse always started the dance by singing Ka-wa-skiau ap-a-nok-se = 'Mice-winking-their-eyes.' Then all stood up and joined in the singing, taking hold of each other's paws and dancing in a circle. Old Man asked if he could join them. The Chief Mouse replied, that his body was too large to get inside the skull, but he might stick his head in and keep shaking it up and down, which would be almost the same thing as dancing. He told him however, that the dance would last all night, and advised him not to fall asleep. In spite of the warning Old Man soon fell asleep, and the mice ate off all his hair. When he awoke in the morning, the mice had gone, and he was unable to pull his head from the skull. He could not see, because the skull covered his eyes. Losing his way, he walked over a steep hank into a river. He swam down stream with the elk-antlers sticking out of the water, until he drew near an Indian camp, where his appearance caused great excitement.

[p. 342]

[paragraph continues] When Old Man heard the people shouting, 'Here comes an elk,' he made a noise like an elk, and kept on swimming. The Indians roped him with lariats, and pulled him ashore, but they did not discover that it was Old Man; until an old woman broke open the skull with a stone-hammer."

Old Man Travels with a Fox and Punishes a Rock.

"While Old Man was travelling with a Fox, they came to a large rock, where they stopped to rest. It was a very hot day and Old Man was very tired of carrying his robe. As they were leaving, he said, 'Poor Rock! You have been living here uncovered so many years, that you are turning black. I am so sorry for you that I will give you my robe for a cover.' He and the Fox then continued their journey. A big black cloud soon came up, and he decided to send the Fox back for the robe. But the Rock refused to give it up saying, 'Whenever anything is given to me, I never part with it.' Old Man asked the Fox to try to borrow the robe, but it was in vain. Old Man then ran back himself and said, 'Rock you have stood here many years without a cover and now you have become too particular.' He angrily pulled the rohe from the Rock, and continued his journey with the Fox. They had not gone far, when they heard a mighty roar, and saw the Rock coming after them. Although they ran their fastest, the Pock gained on them so rapidly that Old Man called upon the night hawks for help To rescue him they kept swooping down upon the Rock and each time a piece fell, until finally it broke into pieces.

"The remains of the Rock can he seen to-day scattered over the plains."

[p. 343]

Old Man's Adventures with the Coyotes.

"After leaving the camp, he saw a coyote on the shore of a lake, eating a piece of fat. When Old Man inquired where he got it, the coyote explained that he made it from the lake foam. He said that Old Man could easily make it, if he would first cover his hands with mud and, after skimming the foam from the lake, put it in his mouth, when it would turn into delicious fat. Old Man did as the coyote said, but, when he put the mixture in his mouth, it made him very sick.

"Farther on, he saw two coyotes on a frozen lake jumping up and down on the ice, and at the same time, singing, 'Pokoto kima ho! hoi!' Whenever the ice crackled, they barked and yelped with excitement. Old Man came near, and asked what they were doing. They explained that, where the ice broke, juicy meat and rich fat came through. Old Man said he would like to try, but, when he jumped on the thin ice, he broke through into the cold water and had a hard time getting out."

Old Mau Flies with the Cranes.

"During Old Man's travels, he came to a lake, where he saw many ducks, geese and cranes gathered into flocks and ready to fly south. He begged them to allow him to go along. The Chief Crane said, that he might join them, if he would wear feathers just as they did. When Old Man agreed, the Chief Crane directed each one of his flock to give him a feather until he was covered with a complete outfit of feathers. Before starting, the Chief Crane warned Old Man saying,

[p. 344]

[paragraph continues] 'When we fly over the Indian camps, you must not look down, no matter how much you may want to see what is going on.' The cranes then mounted high into the air and started towards the south, Old Man flying along with them. When they passed over an Indian camp, Old Man remembered the advice of the Chief Crane and looked straight ahead. When they came to a camp, where there was much noise and shouting, he could not help looking down to see what was happening. He quickly lost his balance and fell headlong into the Blackfeet camp, striking the ground so hard that he was stunned.

"When he came to himself there was a large crowd of people gathered around and they recognised him."

Old Man Tricked by a Small Bird.

"While travelling through the forest, Old Man saw a small yellow bird sitting on a long elk horn. When he stopped to ask what the horn was used for, the bird said that it was his bow. There was a long log lying near by and Old Man asked if it also belonged to him. The bird replied that it was his arrow. Old Man said, 'You cannot shoot me with it.' The bird answered, 'Yes, I can shoot you with it." Old Man then tried to lift the log, but it was too heavy, so he sat down on one end and laughed loudly, because the bird was so very small. The bird asked Old Man to move to the other end of the log saying, 'I will then shoot you with it.' The bird kept urging him to move over and he obeyed until the bird suddenly cried, 'Look out brother, I am going to shoot!'

"The other end, being overbalanced, flew into the air. Old Man was thrown off, but was not badly hurt."

[p. 345]

Old Man dives after Berries reflected in the Water.

"Old Man came to a river, where he saw in the water, the reflection of a bush covered with ripe berries. He jumped into the river but could not get them. He tried again several times, but in vain. He then tied stones around his neck, arms and waist with willow bark, to make him sink deeper. This time he reached the bottom, but was unable to rise again to the surface. While tearing the stones loose, he became so filled with water, that he was almost drowned. He crawled out upon the shore and lay upon his back, feeling very weak. He then looked up and saw the berries hanging from a bush above him, and, for the first time, realised that he had been diving after the reflection. He was so angry, that he seized a stick and beat the bush, knocking off all the berries, and said to it, 'Old bush, from this time forward, the people will gather berries from you in this way.'

"This accounts for the custom, which Indian women have of knocking the berries from bushes with sticks."

Old Man starts the Custom of Taking Scalps.

"The Old Man, who made us, and all things, gambled with another Old Man, who created the people on the other side of the mountains. We have seen the great stones, which they used in their games. The Old Man from over the mountains won all the mountain sheep and elk, leaving the antelope and buffalo. After all the game had been lost, our Old Man wagered his head against the head of the other Old Man, and won, but, in consideration of a return of part of the game, he only took his scalp. In doing this,

[p. 346]

he said: 'When any of your young men kill mine, they shall take their scalps, and when any of mine kill yours, they will do the same and will thus become chiefs. '"

The Blackfeet believe, in common with all Indians, that one, killed and scalped in battle, goes to the happy hunting grounds, with all the glory and honour given to a successful war party returning with the scalps of their enemies, while one, who dies from old age, or sickness, departs in a much less honourable manner.

Old Man induces Men and Women to Mate.

"Men and women formerly did not live together as they do now, they were in separate bands like animals. Old Man was the means of bringing them together. The women were then camped on Crow Lodge River, beside a piskun, [*1] and secured their game by driving them over a high cliff. They were skilled in the art of tanning, and knew how to make good clothes and lodges from skins. The men, on the other hand, killed their game with bows and arrows. They did not know how to tan skins, or sew. Their lodges were made of green hides and their clothes of rough skins, roughly fastened together. When Old Man came to the women's camp, he met the Chief Woman and told her about the condition of the men. She asked him to bring the men to their camp, that they might each choose a mate. Old Man led the men to a hill outside of the women's camp, where they all stood in line. The Chief Woman, who had first choice, came out very shabbily dressed. She walked along the line of men and selected Old Man for her mate. But he did not recognise her in her poor clothes and refused to go with her. The Chief Woman

[p. 347]

was very angry. She returned to camp and instructed the other women to pass by Old Man in their choosing. She dressed in her best clothes and returned again to the men. This time Old Man liked her appearance so much, that he kept getting in her way, seeking to be chosen. But she selected another mate. When the other women selected their mates, Old Man was left out. The Chief Woman then changed him into a pine tree.

"There were formerly three pine trees beside the Women's Piskun. There is now a fourth, which we call Old Man."

Old Man Steals the Magical Fire-leggings.

"Old Man came to the lodge of a man who owned a wonderful pair of leggings. Wherever he went they set fire to the grass. If he wished to kill buffalo, he had only to walk around them when they would be caught in a circle of fire. Old Man wanted these leggings very much. He said that he had come a long journey to get them, but the owner refused to give them up. Old Man then decided to remain all night in the lodge. When the owner and his wife were sound asleep, Old Man stole the leggings. After running a long distance he became tired and lay down to sleep in a thicket with the leggings under his head. But, when he awoke in the morning he found, to his surprise, that he was back again in the lodge. When the owner asked him how it happened that he had his leggings under his head, Old Man told him a lie, saying, 'I had nothing else, so I used them for a pillow.'

"On the following night, Old Man made another attempt to carry off the leggings, but morning found

[p. 348]

him back again in the lodge where the leggings belonged. The owner then told Old Man that, if he wanted the leggings so badly he would give them to him. He warned him, however, not to make use of them more than three times. Old Man was so proud of the fire-leggings, that he put them on to show off in every camp he entered and paid no heed to the warning of the owner. He used them three times successfully, but the fourth time he put them on he set fire to the grass, wherever he stepped. The grass burned so fiercely that Old Man became frightened and started to run. The fire followed him, wherever he went, burning his clothes and his hair, until he was compelled to jump into a river. But the magical leggings were burned up."

An incident happened in Spotted Eagle's Camp that illustrates the remarkable control, which the mind has over the pain and ailments of civilised and savage alike, when the will is directed by an implicit faith in the means prescribed. Kionama had been complaining of severe pains in his side, resulting from an old injury of a horse. I suspected from the frequency of his complaints, that his pains were more or less imaginary. I accordingly doctored him with harmless pills of a pronounced taste, which I took impressively from my medicine case in his presence. During the night I was aroused by groans from Kionama who was sleeping beside me. Suspecting that they were intended to waken me, I asked him if he was ill. He replied that he had those terrible pains again. When I suggested more pills, he said that he regretted giving me so much trouble, but he was confident that, if I could give him more, he would quickly recover. I soon found and administered the magic pills, with the wonderful result that, in a few moments, he was fast asleep.

[p. 349]

Next morning while we were packing for an early start, Spotted Eagle came to bid us farewell. He was on his way from a bath in the river and was clothed only in a blanket and moccasins. In one hand he held a red stone pipe, and in the other his eagle-wing fan. Remembering, that it was required of the Blackfeet, to perform certain incantations before
Click to enlarge
SPOTTED EAGLE'S
 SON RIDING A DOG.
 entering a river, in order to prevent sudden storms, I inquired if he had taken the precautions to make medicine, before going into the water. Spotted Eagle, giving me a keen and inquiring look, replied that he had not. It was a beautiful clear morning, without a cloud in the sky, and with no indication of a storm. So I said, with a laugh, "I suppose then it will rain?" He saw that I was sceptical as to his power over the weather. Gazing intently at the sky and the distant mountains, and then looking solemnly at me, he replied, "Yes, it will surely blow up a storm."

When we rode away, Spotted Eagle was superintending the packing of his outfit. Turning in my saddle for a last look, I saw him seated very grandly,

[p. 350]

watching his wife and daughter taking down the tipi, while his youngest son was trying to ride one of the dogs.

While climbing the long ridge beyond the St. Mary's River, I was mindful of Spotted Eagle's prediction, and my curiosity kept me on the look-out for any sign of a storm. The sky was cloudless, but the sun was very hot and a warm breeze blew from the east. When we gained the summit of the ridge, and had a distant view of the mountains and plains, I saw clouds forming over the high peaks of the Rockies. To my surprise, they spread with astonishing rapidity, and, dividing, a heavy rain passed to the south, while dense black clouds moved rapidly northward along the main range. I suggested that Spotted Eagle would probably be gratified with the apparent results of his prediction. But Kionama was non-committal, while Onesta only shook his head ominously. The clouds continued to spread rapidly, throwing a black pall over plains and mountains. Sheets of brilliant lightning darted from the clouds in the north and heavy rains were falling in many directions. An angry looking cloud, from which extended curving black lines, advanced rapidly towards us--the infallible sign of a dangerous hail storm. When we felt a sudden drop in the temperature, we halted. The horses were quickly loosened and secured with ropes, so that they could not stampede, while we all crawled beneath the wagons to escape the pelting of the hail, which soon covered the ground. When we were again on our way, another storm burst over us with vivid flashes of lightning and a rain so heavy that my slicker afforded but little protection, the water running down my neck and into my shoes. We had just passed through a herd of cattle, all huddled

[p. 351]

together, when there came a vivid flash, and, almost simultaneously, a deafening crash of thunder. The bolt entered the plain in the midst of the herd, killing four steers. I was riding in advance, and did not feel the electrical shock, but the others were stunned. Kionama complained of Spotted Eagle's use of his supernatural power, as if he had directed the storm in pursuit of us, and said: "I do not see why he could not have sent the storm in some other direction." The day's events brought forcibly to mind the reason of the Blackfeet's frequent prayers for protection from "sudden storms." My own experience and observation have convinced me that the remarkable success of medicine men in predicting weather is the natural result of long training and their habit of constant and expert observation of weather signs.

Footnotes

^338:1 The ancient Indian traditions of Old Man have left their impress in many geographical names of this region, as Old Man's River, Old Man Mountains, Old Man's Slide, and Old-Man-on-His-Back Plateau.

^346:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 352]

  

CHAPTER XXVI

  

ONESTA AND THE BEAR SPEAR

Gift of supernatural power from the Sun, conveyed to men through certain animals.--Onesta's watchful care of the Bear Spear.--He gives the ceremonial for an auspicious entrance into a new country.--Relates legend of the origin of the Bear Spear.--The Mink Ceremonial.--Curiosity of white emigrants visiting our camp.--Extreme heat.--Changed outlook after crossing the International Line.--Indian theories for "Fairy Rings" on the plains.--My botanical collection of herbs and plants used by the Blackfeet.--Perfumes used by women.--Arrival in the Blood Country.

MANY of the Blackfeet legends relate to the origin of their medicines, and the manner in which supernatural power was transmitted to men by the Sun. When an Indian desired to know the future course of his life, or to receive knowledge, that would be of value to his tribe, he went off alone upon the plains, or to a remote region among the Rocky Mountains, to fast and pray, sometimes for many days, that he might receive a dream or vision. If he was worthy, a message would be transmitted to him from the Sun, through some animal, or supernatural being, whose compassion had been excited by his fasting and exhausted condition. The revelation, and with it the gift of power, generally came in a dream through the medium of one of the more powerful animals, such as the buffalo, beaver, wolf or grizzly bear, which were believed to have supernatural attributes, or through one of the personified natural forces, such as the Thunder Chief, the Wind Maker, or Es-to-ne-a-pesta,--Maker of Storms and

[p. 353]

[paragraph continues] Blizzards. The Blackfeet believed that this power was conferred upon the animals by the Sun, and they in turn were able to transmit it to men. If, for instance, the grizzly bear bestowed his power upon a man, that man would attain the nature of a grizzly. It would be difficult to kill him in battle, because of his wonderful vitality, or

Click to enlarge
ONESTA WITH THE BEAR SPEAR.

life force, and like the bear, he would inspire fear among his enemies. At the death of the owner of this power, or medicine, it was handed down to his son, or someone worthy to possess it, along with the ceremonial and the story of its origin, which became one of the most valuable of his possessions and was made known only upon special occasions.

[p. 354]

Onesta was the owner of the sacred Bear Spear. During our travels I found it very interesting to observe his watchful care of it. When we made camp, the Bear Spear was always attended to first. It was never allowed to lie upon the ground, but hung from the tripod behind the lodge. After sunset, it was carried inside and tied to the lodge poles. In the morning, it was again taken outside to hang in the sunlight, but was never exposed to a storm. The evening we camped on the border of the reservation of the Kainau (Blood tribe), Onesta made preparations for the ceremonial necessary before entering a strange country. He and Nitana put on their ceremonial clothes of yellow,--the colour sacred to the Bear Spear. Nitana led Yellow Mink, their small daughter, to a stream, where she was washed, her hair was neatly braided, and she was clothed in her little yellow dress, with beaded leggings and moccasins to match. Onesta and Nitana burned sweet grass as incense and painted their faces. They sang a chant over the Bear Spear, which was laid before them, and made prayers for a prosperous journey. Having become familiar with the chants, I joined with them in the singing, doing my part in giving more power to their prayers. When the ceremonial was finished, and we were gathered around the evening fire, Onesta related the following legend of

  

THE ORIGIN OF THE BEAR SPEAR

"Many generations have passed since the events I am about to relate took place. They happened at the time, when the Blackfeet used dogs, instead of horses, as beasts of burden. Our people were travelling in the moon, when the leaves fall (late autumn). One

[p. 355]

evening, when they went into camp for the night, a herald announced that a dog travois owned by the head chief was missing. The herald said further, that the chief's ermine skin-suit, and his wife's buck-skin dress., and her sacred elk-skin robe were all on this travois. No one could recall having seen the dog during the

Click to enlarge
ONESTA HOLDING UP PIPE WHILE PRAYING TO THE BEAR SPEAR, WHICH HANGS FROM THE TRIPOD.

day. A band of warriors rode back to their former camp, but they could find no sign of the missing travois. Sokumapi, a young boy about twelve years old, was the only son of the head chief. When the warriors returned, after their fruitless search, he went to his father, and said: 'My father, let me return to our old camp. I am now old enough to make this trip alone, and I feel that there is in me the power to find out what has become of our travois dog.' The head chief was, at first, unwilling

[p. 356]

that his son should go so far alone, but the boy was so eager, that he finally consented. Sokumapi travelled alone to their former camping grounds, which were close to the Rocky Mountains. He went first to the place where their tipi had stood, believing that, if the dog had strayed away, he would return there. Then he walked slowly around the circle of their old encampment, carefully examining the ground. When he discovered a single travois track leading away from the camp, he followed it, until it ran into a well-worn trail, leading in turn into a deep and rocky ravine. Near the head of this ravine, he discovered the entrance to a large cave. Its mouth was almost covered with large sarvis berry and choke-cherry bushes. On a fresh mound of earth, in front of the cave, he found the missing travois. While he stood gazing at it, and was wondering what had become of the dog, a huge grizzly bear suddenly appeared in the entrance. He walked out from the cave and, rising upon his hind legs, gave a terrible roar, which so frightened Sokumapi, that he could neither speak, nor move. The grizzly grasped the boy in his paws and carried him back into the cave, where it was very dark. Gradually Sokumapi's eyes became accustomed to the darkness and when he discovered the enormous size of the bear that held him, his spirit left his body. When he came to himself, he was lying on the floor of the cave. He was so close to the head of the grizzly, he could feel his hot breath. When he moved, the bear placed his heavy paw across his body and stretched out his great claws. After that, the boy lay still; for a long time he did not even move, but gazed straight ahead. Finally, the grizzly spoke to him saying: 'Do not be alarmed, my son, for I will do you no harm. I am the head chief of all the bears and my

[p. 357]

power is very great. I know that you have wandered to my den because you are trying to help your father. It was my supernatural power that drew you here, because I want to help you. Live with me here while the snows are deep. I have provided plenty of food and no harm will come to you. Before you leave my cave in the spring I will bestow upon you some of my supernatural power, so that you will be of great help to your people.' The grizzly then stood upon his hind legs, his head almost touching the roof. He first walked around and around and then led the boy to a large pile of branches bearing different kinds of berries and said: 'You will have plenty of berries for food. The bear eats them, stems and all, but you can pick the berries from the stems if you prefer.' Taking Sokumapi to the other side of the cave, the bear uncovered a hole filled with buffalo chips. He showed him how to transform them into food. Lifting one, he held it between his paws and danced slowly four times around a circle, making many mysterious motions. As the boy watched the buffalo chip, he saw it change into rich pemmican and wild berries. Sokumapi lived all winter in the cave with the bear, doing just as he did. His eyes became so accustomed to the darkness, that he could see just as well as the bear himself. He observed that, when the snows lay deep the bear lay on one side. He did not even move. But when the warm winds of spring began to blow, he became restless. One day he rolled upon his back, and, after lying for some time with his legs in the air, he sat up. Finally, he yawned and rising walked around the cave, turning now and then to look out of the entrance. The bear then told the boy that spring had come and it was time for them to leave the

[p. 358]

cave. When Sokumapi looked out, he saw that a Chinook (warm wind) was blowing and that the snow had melted from the hills. But, before they left the cave, the Medicine Grizzly bestowed upon Sokumapi his supernatural power. He brought forth a long stick and, raising himself upon his hind legs, stretched out his arms and extended his claws. Throwing up his head, he snorted and rolled back his lips, showing his long sharp teeth. He said, 'Behold my nose, with its keen scent, and my claws and teeth which are my weapons! Everything fears the grizzly bear. There is nothing living upon the earth that dares to defy my power. When you return again to your people make a Bear Spear. Secure a long stick like this I am holding. To one end of it attach a sharp point, to represent my tusks. Tie bear's teeth to the staff and a bear's nose, which must always go with the teeth. Fasten eagle feathers to the handle and cover the staff with bear skin painted with sacred red paint. Grizzly claws should also be tied to the handle, so that they rattle like the noise a grizzly makes when he runs. When you go into battle, always wear a grizzly claw in your hair, and my power will go with you. Whenever you attack, imitate the noise a grizzly makes when he charges, so that your enemy will be afraid and will run away, just as everything that lives on earth runs from a grizzly.' The bear taught him the chants to be used in healing the sick. He also showed him how to paint his face and body, so that he would not be struck in battle, red over his body, black across the forehead, and two curved black lines at either side of his mouth, to represent bear's tusks. The bear warned him that the Spear must be kept sacred. Its supernatural power must be

[p. 359]

used, only in battle and for healing the sick. When anyone is near death, a relative can make a vow to purchase the Bear Spear, and the sick will then be restored to health by the supernatural power that goes with it. The Medicine Grizzly accompanied Sokumapi, until they saw an Indian seated on a distant butte. The bear then left him, saying, 'Go now, my son. That person is a sentinel of your people and the camp is not far distant.' The sentinel recognised Sokumapi and inquired where he had spent the winter, and told him that his father and mother had mourned him as dead. But the boy was silent. He would not answer. When the sentinel called out that the lost son of their head chief had returned, the entire camp was thrown into great excitement. Everyone came out to meet him. The head chief was proud of his son. He gave a feast and invited many prominent men to his lodge. When they had finished eating, and all were seated to listen, Sokumapi related the story of his journey, the visit to the den of the Medicine Grizzly, and the gift of the sacred Bear Spear. Sokumapi began at once to make the Spear, as the grizzly had directed, and the tribe did not move camp, until it was finished."

Not long after Sokumapi's return, it happened that the Blackfeet were preparing to meet the Crow Indians in battle. The two battle lines were drawn up, but, before they met, Sokumapi appeared in front of the Blackfeet warriors, bearing the sacred Spear on his back, with the sharp point up, and the feathers hanging down. He was stripped and his body was painted red. There were black curving lines at either side of his mouth for tusks, and in his hair he wore a huge grizzly claw. He walked along the line, singing one of the Bear songs, and back again, singing another, then

[p. 360]

holding the Spear up towards the sun, so that all could see, he prayed, and started a charge against the enemy, calling upon all the warriors to follow. The Blackfeet followed the sacred Spear and, knowing that the power of the Bear was with them, rushed upon the Crows with such fury, that they turned in flight. It was a great victory. The Blackfeet killed many of their enemy and, when the battle was over, they put Sokumapi on a large horse and he led the warriors back to the tribal camp, chanting the Bear songs. After this victory, Sokumapi was made a war chief, and the people knew that the Bear Spear was endowed with supernatural power. It was often taken to war, and was also used for healing the sick. Its ceremonial lasted an entire day. The man, who made the vow to receive the Spear, pitched his lodge at a distance from the main camp, on the side where the sun rises. He remained there alone for four days and four nights. If during that time, the tribe moved camp, one of his relatives was required to change his camping place four times, before his lodge could be pitched again in the main camp. After the Spear changed hands the owner hunted for a bear-den, and securing some of the dung, he placed it on the ground, where the Spear was uncovered, and also upon the spot where the incense was burned. Sweet grass is used as incense in the spring and in summer, when it is at its best. In the autumn and winter, the root of the big turnip is used instead, because it gives forth such a strong odour at that time of the year. The owner of the Bear Spear must always keep it near him. It cannot be placed on the ground, but must hang from a tripod. No dogs are allowed within the lodge, because they fight bears. All openings must be kept closed and parfleches placed

[p. 361]

against the door, so that dogs cannot find an entrance. The sacred Spear is unrolled and taken out in the spring, when the first thunder is heard, just as with the Medicine Pipe, because the bear appears in the spring, and remains out all summer, like the thunder. In the late autumn, when the bear disappears for the winter, the sharp point is removed from the staff and the Spear is put away. Wipes-his-eyes owns a Bear Knife given him by the Black Bear. The songs belonging to its ceremonial are different from the Bear Spear songs. Women are not allowed to handle, either the Bear Knife, or the Bear Spear. When Onesta was leaving camp, not expecting to return before dark, he asked me to remove the Bear Spear from its tripod at sunset and hang it from the poles inside the lodge. He explained that his wife could not do this for him, because women were not allowed to touch the sacred Spear.

Next morning, Onesta brought forth a Mink Shin, over which he held a short ceremonial, explaining to me that it had been in his possession for thirty years, and had formerly belonged to the Bear Spear Medicine. The incense he burned for the Mink Skin consisted of small dried seeds which gave forth a pleasing odour. He called it Pono-kan-sinni (Elk Food) (Narrow Leaved Puccoon), and said it was prepared by drying the tops of the plant. While painting his face he said, "A-pe-ech-eken, it would be well for you to paint your face also, in order that the Bloods may know that you are an Indian, and besides, the red paint protects the face from the hot sun." Nitana then decorated my moccasins with paint, thinking that it improved their appearance.

At some distance down the stream, was a camp of

[p. 362]

white people. They were evidently emigrants moving into Canada, for they had several prairie schooners and a large herd of horses. They all came in a crowd, men, women and children, to stare, and to gape at the Indians, and to examine everything belonging to us. Many were the surprised and curious glances directed at me, but I escaped by going upon the prairie after my

Click to enlarge
ONESTA AND NITANA HOLDING CEREMONIAL WITH SACRED MOUNTAIN LION CLAW NECKLACE.
 (Onesta is chanting while painting necklace. Nitana is praying with the Pipe.)

saddle horse. By the time we were ready to start the sun was intensely hot, with a warm breeze from the south. My thermometer registered 98 degrees in the shade and 125 degrees in the sun. Suddenly the wind changed, and blew furiously from the north, carrying with it clouds of dust and sand, which filled our eyes and mouths. In a few minutes there was a

[p. 363]

fall of more than 60 degrees in the temperature, compelling me to dismount and walk, to keep warm.

A great change now appeared in the face of the country. Instead of the high and rocky ridges of Northern Montana, the Alberta country was undulating. The soil was rich and black and the prairie covered with luxuriant grass. I saw everywhere many "Fairy Rings," both large and small, made by the peculiar growth of a species of fungus, or puff balls. They are identical with the mushroom growths common in our eastern fields, and popularly known as "Fairy Rings," or "Fairy Dances," supposed to be caused by fairies in their dances. Kionama's idea of them was, that they were buffalo wallows, which had gradually filled up. But Onesta advanced the Indian belief, that they had been caused in olden times by the dances of buffalo, the large circles by old buffaloes, and the small circles by buffalo calves. Puff Balls, called Dusty Stars by the Blackfeet, because supposed to be meteors fallen during the night, grow around the circles and emit A, puff of dust when pressed. We may have in this belief the origin of their use of the broad band of dark colour, with its circle of discs or Dusty Stars, as the bottom decoration of the Blackfoot tipi. This band, usually painted in red, with the discs in yellow or other colour, suitably symbolises the Earth as the foundation for all things.

Menake and Nitana were industrious collectors of medicinal herbs and edible plants. Whether in camp, or on the trail, whether in the forest, or along the streams, or even on the dry and dusty plains, they never lost an opportunity for collecting them. They dried them before the camp fire, or in the hot sun. They used some of them in seasoning the meats and stews, others

[p. 364]

as medicines for the children's sore throats and other complaints, and as a tonic for Kionama's weak stomach. Menake showed me a special collection she was taking as a present to Brings-down-the-Sun, containing plants he used in doctoring, but did not grow in the north country. When I started a botanical collection [*1] of my own, the women were constantly on the look-out to aid me, pointing out the different varieties, telling their. Indian names, and explaining their different uses and methods of preparation. Our outfit was frequently halted to secure additional specimens.

It surprised me to learn the number of perfumes used by the Blackfeet. Menake said that sweet grass was the most popular among the women. It is dried and made into braids and placed among their clothes, or carried in small bags. They also use beaver musk, red cedar, punk from the cottonwood tree, buds from the balsam poplar and dried blossoms of dog fennel and meadow rue. The leaves of sweet pine are also valued for their delightful odour, when confined in small buckskin bags, and are also used to give a pleasant fragrance to hair grease. In gathering sweet pine, the women distinguished the right species from others by its branches turning upwards.

In the late afternoon I saw, in the far distance, a green line, which Kionama said consisted of trees, marking the course of the river Okoan ( Belly), so named, because the outlines of the hills along its course resemble those of a buffalo's paunch.

Riding ahead of our party, I was the first to enter the valley, and soon found myself in the midst of the Kainau camp (Blood Indians). I looked with keen interest at everything about me,--the decorations on

[p. 365]

Click to enlarge
CAMP OF THE BLOODS.

[p. 366]

their lodges, the picturesque travois and the costumes of men, women and children. It was a warm evening, and the fronts and sides of the lodges were lifted for better ventilation. The centre of interest was a large gathering of Indians near a big lodge. It was evidently a ceremonial, for they were seated in a circle, beneath a shelter made of an old lodge lining, and held in place by a cluster of poles tied together near the top. Because of the warm day, the men had discarded their clothing. At the back reclined a distinguished looking Indian, one of their leading chiefs, and, in front of him, was seated an elderly chief, who was evidently a visitor. He held a long red-stone pipe, from which he drew copious whiffs of smoke. A fire burned at one side, over which a large kettle hung from a tripod. A squaw had arrived from the river, with a travois, to which were fastened pails filled with water. On the edge of a high cut-bank nearby, an old Indian was seated, placidly smoking, facing the setting sun.

Meanwhile, a horseman came to meet me. When he saw I was a stranger, he raised his hand, and signed to know who I was. I replied, that I was travelling with a party of Pi-kun-ni (South Piegans), and that my people were behind. He closely inspected everything I had, from my horse's brand to each article of clothing I wore. Kionama, with the rest of the party, soon came in sight, and my new companion rode back to meet them. He proved to be Wolf Robe, an old friend of Onesta's. After conversing a few minutes, Wolf Robe led the way down the river to One Spot's camp, a near relative of Menake's. One Spot, with Snake Woman, his wife, also Cotton Tail, Good-young-man, and others hurried

[p. 367]

forth to greet us. One Spot insisted upon our sharing his lodge, but Kionama and Onesta replied, that in such warm weather we preferred camping in the open. He directed us to a place, sheltered from the west wind by a large grove of poplars and cottonwoods, and where the Pome-piskun (Greasy Cliff) stream flows into the Okoan River. Before our wagons were unpacked, the Blood women came with presents of food. This is an old Indian custom, originating in the desire to obviate the inconvenience to visitors of preparing their first meal, when the tipis had to be pitched. Snake Woman, wife of One Spot, was the first to come with her baby on her back, bearing sarvis berries, a pail of tea and dried meat. To the South Piegans these sarvis berries were the first of the season and therefore it was necessary, before eating, to make an offering to the Sun. All waited, while Onesta held a berry up, with the prayer that we all might have abundance of food during the coming year, and then we followed his example, by planting a berry in the ground, with a similar prayer to the Underground Spirits.

When the Blood women returned to their lodges, their presents were promptly repaid by Menake and Nitana with tobacco, rice, flour and meat.

Footnotes

^364:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 368]

  

CHAPTER XXVII

  

CAMP OF THE BLOODS

Reserve and haughtiness of the Bloods.--Pathetic mourning of a mother for her son.--Tragedy of Opiowan, "The Mad Indian."--Journey along the Okoan River.--Onesta and Nitana pray for a prosperous journey and my success.--Onesta teaches me two queer Blackfeet songs.--Beautiful valley of the North Piegans.--The trail along the Crow Lodge River.--Interesting Indian names for local topography.--Lookout Butte and the Indian watchers.--Camp of Brings-down-the-Sun.--His dignified and hospitable welcome.--Our attractive camp under the cottonwoods.--Indian custom of exchanging gifts.--Ideal camp of a happy and contented Indian clan.

WE remained several days in the Blood camp to rest our horses and visit Indian relatives and friends. The Bloods are a fine looking tribe, but reserved and haughty. They seem to be on the best of terms with the North Blackfeet, but are not popular with other tribes, because of their conceit and arrogance. The Piegans have a saying, "He is just like a Blood, he likes to show off." They also speak of the Bloods as "generous givers, but always seeking to get back as large a return as possible."

An incident occurred, while I was present at a Sun-dance of the Piegans, which illustrates the peculiar manners of the Bloods. It was in a large assembly of Indians, including representatives from sixteen different tribes, guests of the Piegans, who were gathered around the Sun-lodge, listening to the war stories of prominent chiefs. Unlike their white brothers, it is the custom of

[p. 369]

[paragraph continues] Indians to always listen with respectful attention to the speeches of their leaders, without regard to their importance. But not so with a visiting band of young men from the Bloods. While the old Piegan chiefs were recounting their brave deeds in battle, the Bloods

Click to enlarge
HEAD CHIEF OF BLOODS.

gave great affront and transgressed all custom and etiquette by publicly ridiculing their stories.

For my own part, I have found that the Bloods are not so approachable, and lack the cordiality and open hearted friendliness so characteristic of the Piegans.

After sunset, on our way to One Spot's lodge, we were startled by the mournful wailing of a woman, standing upon a lonely butte, overlooking the river valley.

[p. 370]

[paragraph continues] Snake Woman told us that she was the mother of Has-many-guns-in-the-camp, mourning over his death. The sad news had just come, that he had died in the camp of the North Blackfeet. While absent on a long journey, he had heard that his wife had left him for another. Has-many-guns mourned so deeply over the loss of

Click to enlarge
BLOODS DANCING.

his wife, that he refused to eat and finally died from starvation.

The similarity of the cause of this pathetic incident,--the infidelity of a wife,--reminds me of a much more tragical event, which happened in the winter of 1896, during my visit among the Piegans.

Opiowan, a Blood Indian, living just across the border in Alberta, killed his rival, who had stolen his wife's

[p. 371]

affections. For many weeks he kept the Indian families on both sides of "the line" at the highest pitch of excitement and alarm because of his sudden attacks and cold blooded murders. He proved himself more than a match for the Canadian Mounted Police in his Indian cunning and resourcefulness in evading arrest.

This Opiowan tragedy illustrates the capabilities of a single Indian for cunning, ferocity and physical endurance,

Click to enlarge
BLOOD CUSTOM OF PILING WINTER WOOD.

when fired by revenge for wrongs suffered. When one such was multiplied into a band, or tribe united for revenge, as in the cases of the Sioux, Apaches and Nez-Perces, it meant a bloody war against the whites. War meant extermination for the Indian, for it developed among the whites that bitter animosity which was universal along the frontier and still finds expression in that laconic but barbarous saying, "The only good Indian is a dead Indian."

Opiowan was reported as frequenting so many localities

[p. 372]

and as moving about with such incredible swiftness, while murdering indiscriminately, that all, whether in the mountains, or on the plains, were in dread of a surprise by him. The Piegan women spoke of him in great fear as the "Mad Indian," while the mere mention of his name filled the children with terror. When I asked Snake Woman for the Blood account, she related the following thrilling story of vengeance under the "unwritten law."

  

TRAGEDY OF OPIOWAN, "THE MAD INDIAN."

"Opiowan once lived at peace with all our tribe. He was known as an industrious man, living contentedly in a lodge with his two wives, his mother and his only child, a boy of eight. A young man named Natomina, a former lover of Pretty Wolverine, his favourite wife, began coming to the lodge. When he became so deeply enamoured that his attentions were the talk of the tribe, Opiowan warned him to desist. One day Opiowan prepared for a journey, as if he would be absent for several days. He rode off over a ridge, but, instead of going farther, lay in ambush to watch his lodge. When he saw Natomina and Pretty Wolverine cross the meadow together, he quietly returned and with drawn knife came unexpectedly upon the guilty lovers. He mutilated and killed Natomina, but spared his wife. Having ordered her to return quietly to the lodge, he continued his journey. When the Mounted Police discovered Natomina's dead body, some days later, they carried it through the camp, vainly endeavouring to find some trace of the murderer. When Opiowan returned from his journey, he heard the people talking about the mysterious murder. At night the face of Natomina

[p. 373]

was always before him, so that he was unable to sleep. He dreaded hearing a rider enter the camp, lest it might be one of the Mounted Police coming to arrest him. He became morose and gloomy and shunned his friends, imagining that all had turned against him. He thought he must be going mad and desired to live no longer. Resolved to die the death of a brave, he vowed he would kill as many people as he could, both Indian and white. Passing the store at night, and seeing the trader standing near a window, he raised his rifle and fired. He saw the trader fall forward upon his face and then fled in the darkness. Returning to his lodge, he told his wives that he had shot a white man, and he must hide in the mountains. The lodge was quickly taken down, and their belongings packed upon a travois. Opiowan put on his war charm and, painting his face, chanted a war song. They entered the Rocky Mountains, camping in a small glade, where their lodge was hidden by the trees. When the Mounted Police heard of Opiowan's escape, they knew he must be the murderer and followed his trail. But Opiowan, watching from a neighbouring cliff, saw them coming. Knowing they would enter the glade from below, he left his mother and son in the lodge and with his wives circled through the forest. The police tied their horses at the lower end of the glade and advanced on foot. They shot into the lodge, but the boy and woman lay flat and were not hit. Opiowan then came quickly from the forest and made off with their horses. The police captured the old mother and the boy and withdrew, after destroying the lodge, but Opiowan, with his two wives, escaped by going northward along the Rockies. When they came to the country of the North Piegans, they entered the Porcupine Mountains and hid

[p. 374]

themselves in the forest. Whenever they ran short of food, or ammunition, Opiowan stole down at night into an Indian camp, shooting anyone who would oppose his demands. One day he rode boldly through the main street of a small town (Cardston), and shot one of the police. They followed him many miles, but were unable to capture him. On a big flat beyond the Kootenai River, Opiowan killed another of his pursuers, whose horse had outrun the others, and seizing the policeman's rifle and ammunition, escaped into the forest. The autumn passed and winter came on with intense cold and deep snow, but no one could 'find his hiding place. One night, in a heavy snow storm, Opiowan left the camp of Brings-down-the-Sun, where he had suddenly appeared to demand food and . He lost his way and was followed by the police, but again managed to elude his pursuers. At last, fearing that his wives might desert him while absent on foraging expeditions, he hobbled them, tying their hands and feet, but leaving them separated from each other. Managing to free themselves, they made their way down the mountains by night and came into the Blood camp on the plains, where they were arrested. Opiowan, deserted by his wives, without food and suffering from the intense cold, was finally driven from the mountains by starvation. He came one night to the lodge of his brother Sixepe, who kept him in hiding. The information was carried to the police, who surrounded the camp, and ordered them to give up the outlaw. Our chiefs in their alarm finally prevailed upon Sixepe to betray his brother into the hands of the police. As he lay tied hand and foot, Opiowan warned his brother that he would die first. Within four days Sixepe suddenly sickened and died. Opiowan also died soon after, killing

[p. 375]

himself by piercing the arteries of both wrists with a sharp awl."

 

We left the Blood camp soon after sunrise, riding along the Okoan River, and through groves of large

Click to enlarge
SUN-SHELTER AT MIDDAY.

cottonwoods. After fording the river, we turned towards the mountains and the country of the North Piegans. Heavy clouds covered the plain, completely hiding the rising sun. But the snow-clad summits of the Rockies in the west, glowed in the rays that shone above the clouds. We followed an old Indian trail known to Kionama and Onesta, a short cut, that took us across a broad plain. When we entered the hill

[p. 376]

country beyond, the clouds disappeared and the hot sun again shone in a clear sky. My thermometer registered 98 degrees in the shade and 130 degrees in the sun. We rested our horses at midday near a small lake. The women erected a shelter from the sun by throwing canvas over a wagon pole, supported on a tripod. The sides were then raised, allowing the breeze to blow through.

In the early afternoon clouds gathered over the Rocky Mountains. Electrical storms appeared in all directions and the air gradually became cooler. While slowly winding our way among the high hills, I heard Onesta and Nitana chanting a religious song. I quietly rode behind them and, after becoming thoroughly familiar with the air, joined in the chant. They explained that it was an ancient custom, while travelling towards a strange country, to chant and offer prayers to the Sun for a prosperous journey and safe return. Onesta said, "On this occasion, we have been praying also, that you may be successful in securing the information you desire from the North Piegans. I intend giving the Sup-weyo-kinni (Crow Beaver) ceremonial in their camp and I will teach you some of the chants, so that you can help us in the singing." Nitana expressed her uneasiness, lest some misfortune might overtake us, because one of the medicine sticks of the Crow Beaver Bundle had been broken while in the Blood camp.

Onesta taught me the Worm song, which the Blackfeet use to make worms dance. When we came to a wild rose bush covered with cobwebs enclosing small worms (Tent Caterpillars), he directed me to stand near and sing, "Kom-i-os-che! Kom-i-os-che!" (Worms! Worms!), beating time by clapping my hands. To my surprise, the worms, which had been perfectly still, began to move

[p. 377]

as if slowly waking up. They soon became more active, until all stood erect and swayed their heads to and fro. Onesta sang another song, with which, he said, he could make a sand-piper dance, by clapping his hands and singing, "Ek-si-sa-que! Ek-si-sa-que!" (Meat! Meat!)

He called my attention to the swallows hovering over the horses to secure hairs for their nests, and also to the grasshoppers flying high in the air "to colour their wings." Grasshoppers' wings are said to be without colour, until they fly into the sunlight, which turns them red, yellow and black.

When we finally gained the summit of the ridge, we looked down upon the broad valley of the North Piegans, through which flowed a river, bordered with huge cottonwood trees. Towards the north were the Porcupine Mountains covered with dark forests of pine, and westward were the snow-capped summits of the Rockies. While descending towards the valley, we met several young men of the North Piegans, guarding their tribal herds of cattle and horses. They guided us towards the camp of Brings-down-the-Sun. One of them, whom I afterwards discovered was the son of Crow Eagle, the head chief, rode with me. He pointed out an enormous solitary rock upon the prairie, and said: "Many years ago a huge grizzly lived in a cave beneath that rock. Around it grow different varieties of berry bushes from seeds carried there by the bear." The Porcupine Mountains are so named, because the ridges bristle so thickly with tall trees that they resemble a porcupine's back. The river in the valley before us was called Old Man's River by the white men, but Crow Lodge by the Indians, the vision for the Crow Lodge having been received in former days near its source. The high mountain, with a broad slide shining like a huge glacier, is called Turtle

[p. 378]

[paragraph continues] Mountain by the whites, but is named Lodge Lining by the Indians, because its slopes are uniform and regular, resembling the inside lining of a lodge.

Having reached the river, Crow Eagle's son invited us to his tipi. But, when Onesta explained that we must go direct to the camp of Brings-down-the-Sun, he

Click to enlarge
HERDER LASSOING WILD HORSE.

pointed out to us a distant bend in the Crow Lodge River, saying that we would find Natosin Nepe-e (Brings-down-the-Sun) there among the big trees on the north bank.

After the young men had left us, I observed a single horseman appear upon the summit of a distant ridge and remain to watch our course, that we might not go astray. The trail led down a steep hill and into the

[p. 379]

valley. A wolf standing motionless, watched us from the head of a small ravine. The colour of his coat was so like the grass and willows surrounding him that he had an excellent colour protection. The deep shade of the big trees and luxuriant vegetation of the river valley were most refreshing, after the fierce sunlight and heat of the plains. The meadows were bright with a

Click to enlarge
"A SINGLE HORSEMAN APPEARED UPON A RIDGE TO WATCH OUR COURSE."

beautiful pink flower called Manekape (young man) by the Blackfeet, but known by botanists as Horse Mint, or Monarda scabra. The trail ran sometimes close to the broad, swift river, now through meadows of grass and flowers and now among the cottonwoods. Passing through an opening among the trees, I saw, in the distance, a group of Indians, wrapped in blankets, standing on the edge of a high cut-bank overlooking the valley. They were watching our approach with evident

[p. 380]

interest. Onesta explained to me that it was a "Lookout Butte" for the camp of Brings-down-the-Sun. From its summit, not only the river valley, but also the surrounding plains could be viewed for a long distance. As we drew nearer, I discovered that the watchers were women. One with a baby on her back, her long black hair flying in the wind, and her figure distinctly outlined against the evening sky, was standing surrounded by children. Nitana recognised her as Long Hair, favourite daughter of Brings-down-the-Sun. As we approached the edge of the clearing, a group of white lodges among the trees came into view. It was the camp of the noted medicine man, with his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. In front of a lodge, beneath a huge cottonwood, and close to where the trail again entered the trees, a tall figure, with a blanket wrapped closely around him, stood gazing intently at us. When he recognised Onesta, he hailed us and said: "My children, I will be glad to have you pitch your lodges close to mine, under the big trees on the other side of the trail." I rode nearer to observe him more closely. He was an elderly man with clean-cut Indian features. His hair was grey and the deep lines in his face indicated a strong character, burdened with care and responsibility. With hand upraised and head thrown back, he had the air of one accustomed to command. Pointing to the meadow, he continued, "However, if you wish, you can camp in the open at the edge of the cottonwoods. Sometimes heavy wind-storms tear branches from the trees, and if your lodges were beneath they might injure you. On the north side of the clearing you will find a spring, where the water is cold and good to drink. It will be better for you to take your horses upon the hills, where they

[p. 381]

can feed upon the abundant bunch grass." With these words the chief withdrew into his lodge.

The cool shade of the woods proved such an attraction that we promptly selected the spot beneath the big trees pointed out by Brings-down-the-Sun. While our lodges were being pitched, Sis-tse (Bird), wife of the chief, with her daughters and daughters-in-law, arrived, bearing many presents. This exchange of gifts among the women was always an interesting performance. They often gave many objects, that were highly prized by themselves, although they might seem of little value to white people. For instance, Nitana received on this occasion an old tea-pot, a wash tub and board, a small bag of beans, two plates, two cups, a copper kettle and a butcher knife. In return, she gave two blankets, two pairs of moccasins, paints dug by herself on Birch Creek, and a few trinkets. Bird brought an invitation from Brings-down-the-Sun, for Onesta, Kionama and their friend, the white man, to eat with him at sunset. When we walked down the wooded trail towards the tipis of the chief and his son Running Wolf, standing close together at the end of a grove of huge cottonwoods, we came upon an ideal camp and the most peaceful and charming picture of a happy and contented Indian family it has ever been my good fortune to see. A large outside fire sent a shower of golden sparks into the air. It lighted up the white tipis with their clusters of tapering poles, and tops deeply browned by smoke, and brought them into sharp contrast with the dark trunks and green branches of the big cottonwood trees. Grouped around the fire, and dressed in brightly coloured Indian clothes, were women and young girls engaged in animated conversation, while cooking, making clothes and moccasins and playing Indian games.

[p. 382]

[paragraph continues] To one side a little baby hammock, swung between two saplings, was rocked by a mother singing a Blackfeet slumber song. When we stepped into the circle of bright firelight, this peaceful scene was rudely disturbed by a dog dashing at us, with flattened ears and snarling fiercely. A squaw shouted, "Puksiput! kokun! Kopsksis-e!" (Come back here! you pup! Swell Nose!), but the damage was done. The group of young girls, warned of the approach of the strange white man, fled precipitately into the woods, and the charming circle was quickly broken.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 383]

  

CHAPTER XXVIII

  

CAMP OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN

We dine with Brings-down-the-Sun. -Onesta introduces me to the old chief.--He declines to impart his knowledge.--Recites the wrongs which caused his mistrust of the white race.--Allows me to remain in his camp.--I meet his wife and youngest daughter.--He offers us free use of their wild berry supply.--His statesmanlike reasons for preserving their natural resources of trees and berry bushes.--First thunder of the summer is heard marking time for opening Medicine Pipes.--I meet my friend Bull Plume conducting a Pipe ceremonial.--Hospitality of Brings-down-the-Sun.--Indian children's fear of white men.--Interesting scenes along a stream.--A contented family of beavers.--A miniature camp with complete doll outfit.--Games of boys and girls.--"Wheel and arrow," a gambling game of men.--An extended sunset view from Lookout Butte.

WE found Brings-down-the-Sun reclining against his lodge-back, waiting our arrival. He directed Onesta, his nephew, to a place on his right, while Kionama and I took seats on a comfortable blanket-bed on his left. A small fire burned in the centre, and, from a hot coal, arose the fragrant smoke of dried sweet grass. Everything inside the lodge was scrupulously neat and clean. The shining cooking utensils were stored in boxes by the door. The provisions and clothing were hidden away behind the beds in bags and painted parfleches, while articles decorated with beads and coloured porcupine quills hung from the lodge poles. After a preliminary smoke and a simple meal of bread, dried meat and tea, Onesta addressed Brings-down-the-Sun:

"We have brought this white man, A-pe-ech-eken, the adopted son of Mad Wolf, a long journey under a hot sun to see you. On

[p. 384]

our way we met Spotted Eagle and Big Smoke. We also visited the lodge of One Spot in the Kainau Camp. I have told them all that we were taking A-pe-ech-eken to the North Piegans, to learn from you about our legends and customs and that you might instruct him concerning the worship of the Sun. You are my uncle, A-pe-ech-eken is my friend, and I ask that you do this."

Brings-down-the-Sun gazed keenly into my face and then replied very earnestly: "The white race have always cheated and deceived us. They have deprived
Click to enlarge
BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN.
 us of our country. Now they are trying to take away our religion, by putting a stop to the ceremonial sacred to the Sun. Our religion was given to us by the Sun and Moon, and we will never give it up, while the Sun and Moon last. The white people have given us no good reason why they wish to take away our religion. We do not fight, nor drink whisky at our ceremonials, and there is nothing harmful that can come from them. We have been struggling to keep up our religion, in order that our people may be happy, and that they may lead better lives. When I began preparations for a Sun ceremonial this spring, in accordance with the vow, made by one of our women for the healing of her sick son, the agent shut off our rations. He would not allow my family to receive the food, upon which we are dependent. Because of these things my heart has

[p. 385]

become bitter, and I have made a vow, that I will have nothing more to do with the white race. It does not now seem to me advisable to talk further about these things, and to explain our religion to a white man. However, Onesta is my kinsman and has brought this white man a long distance. He can remain in my camp for a few days to rest, and, during that time, it is possible that we may grow to know each other better." At this moment Bird, the 
Click to enlarge
"WHISTLING-ALL-NIGHT" AND
 "CRIES-EARLY-IN-THE-MORNING,"
 DAUGHTER AND GRANDDAUGHTER
 OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN.
 chief's wife, entered the lodge with her daughter, a very pretty young woman. The mother was small and slender. In her youth she must have been remarkably good looking. She gave me a smile of welcome, and the old chief explained, that the girl was his youngest daughter, and that she was called as "Whistling-all-night," because she was born in January, the moon when the jack rabbit whistles at night, in calling his mate, just as the bull elk is accustomed to do. Brings-down-the-Sun said to Kionama, "I am glad in my heart that you have come to stay in my camp. We pitch our tipis in this grove of cottonwoods every summer, to gather sarvis berries for our use, when the snows are deep. You will find many kinds of berries on all sides. You can eat them now, or gather and dry them for your winter supply, just as we do. I ask, however, that you will be careful not to injure the trees, or break

[p. 386]

the branches of the berry bushes. I make this request, because I am looking ahead for my tribe. I am anxious to preserve these big trees and the berry bushes for our children. I am accustomed to admonish my people, in this manlier, warning them not to be short-sighted like the Bloods. They once had many large trees along their river, but they cut them down for firewood. Now their country is bare and they have few berries. I am continually advising my people not to cut down the trees along the river, but to haul their wood from the forests on the mountains. They have followed my advice and we still have our big leaf trees (cottonwoods). The long leaved trees are the spear-leaf trees (Balsam-Poplar). We also have round-leaf trees (Quaking-Asps) and brush-sticks (Willows). We always speak of large trees as 'The Old Time Trees' and the small ones as 'Young People's Trees.'" When leaving, I presented the chief with a large silk handkerchief, his wife with a blanket, while the daughter, Whistling-all-night, showed great delight, when I gave her a set of pearl buttons.

The first night of our arrival in Brings-down-the-Sun's camp, I spread my blankets beneath a large cottonwood tree. Although I was very tired after our long ride in the hot sun, and from assisting in the laborious work of making a permanent camp, caring for the horses, unloading the wagons, cutting the lodge poles and firewood, pitching the tipis and starting the fires, I was too restless to sleep. The night was unusually warm and sultry. Heavy clouds had gathered over the Rockies and extended over the plains, bursting upon us, during the night, with wind, lightning and crashing peals of thunder.

Next morning, Onesta said that it was the first

[p. 387]

thunder heard by the Piegans. In Montana it had thundered earlier and the South Piegans had already brought out their Medicine Pipes, but the North Piegans had been waiting, and now they must give the ceremonial of unrolling their Pipes and renewing the tobacco in their sacred bundles. A messenger came into camp, announcing that Running Antelope would

Click to enlarge
BULL PLUME LEADING THE CEREMONIAL.

open his Medicine Pipe and invited us all to the ceremonial. Onesta, Nitana, Bird and Long Hair were going, so I accompanied them several miles up the river to Running Antelope's camp. When we entered the lodge, the ceremonial had already begun. To my surprise, I saw that the leader was Bull Plume, the chief, whom I had met when visiting Mad Wolf. He was so astonished at my unexpected appearance, that the rattles fell from his hands, and he stopped in the

[p. 388]

middle of a chant. When he had recovered himself, he shook my hand, telling the assembled people my Indian name, and explaining that I was the adopted son of Mad Wolf. Bull Plume then turned to me and said: "I can tell you how many moons have passed, since I last met you in Mad Wolf s lodge, for I have kept count and have marked the moons in my records." He handed me a pair of rattles, requesting me to join in the chant and take part in the ceremonial. After a number of dances, followed by a feast, the Medicine Pipe was opened and held up. Fresh tobacco was also inserted in the Bundle, in place of the old, which was distributed among the people. When the Medicine Pipe ceremonial was finished, Running Antelope's wife availed herself of the opportunity to open a Medicine Bonnet, in fulfilment of a vow made by her son. During the winter, when he was very sick, he made a vow to the Sun, that, if he recovered, his mother who had given the Sun-dance and owned a Medicine Bonnet, would give a ceremonial. The boy recovered, and the mother was now fulfilling his promise.

On this same day, Brings-down-the-Sun drove thirty miles across the plains, under a burning sun, that he might secure, from the nearest trading store, provisions for his visitors. He took with him Mysterious Woman, his young daughter-in-law, and Sinopa, the daughter of Menake. When they returned, Brings-down-the-Sun carried all of his purchases (five loaves of bread and some fresh meat) to our camp, at the same time offering apologies that he had so little to offer. He said: "Some people may think me foolish for taking two young women with me, but I thought they would be pleased at seeing the strange sights of the town." Sinopa afterwards told her mother that, when they reached town

[p. 389]

[paragraph continues] (Macleod, Canada) the old chief took them to a restaurant and ordered a fine turkey dinner for them. While they were eating, he visited the bakers to buy bread, and hunted for a good store to secure the best meat. Before they started home he gave Mysterious Woman five cents with which to buy candy, remarking that "it was not well to spend more for sweet stuff."

When I walked through the wood to explore the trails, I noticed groups of children slyly peeping through the trees to get a look at the "strange white man." They had been taught from infancy that white men are dangerous monsters, for whenever I came near, they quickly disappeared like frightened deer, but I gradually overcame their instinctive dread; at first by seeming to ignore their presence, and finally gaining their confidence, by small presents and bribes of candy. I investigated the spring pointed out by Brings-down-the-Sun for our water supply. It proved to be the still-water of a very beautiful stream. Along its shady banks, I found delicious wild strawberries, choke cherries and sarvis berry bushes, growing high above my head and laden down with ripe fruit. In the wood, were great numbers of beautiful song birds. I recognised the yellowthroat, cat bird, whitethroat, goldfinch, white crowned sparrow and many varieties of warblers. In a grove of cottonwoods, beside the river, I discovered the fresh tracks of a family of beavers. There were tiny footprints of the children in the soft mud and the large tracks of old beavers. I saw their recent cuttings and also weather-beaten stumps of trees felled by them, many years ago. When I spoke to Onesta of my find, he said; "Some beavers, like many people, never seem to be satisfied and are continually travelling, but this family, you speak of, have lived here undisturbed for

[p. 390]

many years. They have a sandy beach and a mud bottom, with plenty of food, and are contented with their home."

Following a trail, leading past Brings-down-the-Sun's tipi, and crossing the stream near the deep pool, where every day the old chief and his entire family took their early morning plunge, I met Long Hair coming from the stream with a bucket of water. Nitana sat nearby upon a grassy bank washing Yellow Mink. It was a beautiful spot. In the mirror-like stillwater were perfect reflections of the arching trees, the tipis close to the shore, and the blue smoke floating from their tops. The children and young people had congregated along the banks, to wade and swim and play their primitive games. I saw a young girl poling a raft. She looked very picturesque in her squaw dress, with hair hanging in long braids over her shoulders. She wore white shell earrings, a braided health-charm fastened in her front hair, and a long necklace of dried sarvis berries. When the craft finally grounded upon a large rock in midstream, I felt like going to her assistance but, realising that it would only subject her to the gossip of the camp, I remained at a distance, and contented myself with taking her picture.

In an open glade was a miniature encampment, where a group of little girls were playing. They had men and women-dolls dressed in buck-skin, and cloth costumes, with real human hair and leggings and beaded belts and moccasins. There were gopher skins for robes, little knife-sheaths, tanning-tools and baby-cases. In the centre of the camp circle of miniature tipis, they had the largest tipi with long poles, for the head chief, also small lodge backs, painted parfleches and a diminutive medicine case, hanging from a tripod.

[p. 391]

A boisterous game was being played by lively boys and girls. The game was similar to our 'catcher,' in which all endeavoured to avoid the touch of one of their number, at whom they sang derisively, "Ape-koi-ya-soma-tia-kake-kina" (You are a mangey old skunk with no hair along your backbone). [*1]

The young girls played a game called, "Throwing

Click to enlarge
CHILD'S PLAY TIPI.

willow arrows." They used a large arrow with a string of plaited horse-hair attached to one end. The first in turn threw it into a bush. If the second thrower could hit the larger arrow with a smaller one, or even touch the horse hair, she won an arrow from the first player. But, if she missed, and the first player in turn threw a

[p. 392]

small arrow touching the second arrow, the latter became the winner. The girls also had a game of "hiding bones," made of antelope bones, beautifully carved and decorated. The boys had another curious and amusing game. They sat in two long rows. One of the players, with his eyes closed, walked back and forth between them, each side trying to confuse him, by calling to him to go this way, or that. If he came too close and touched one of the players with his foot, that boy jumped up, and taking him upon his back, held him by the legs with his head hanging down. All then rose and, taking hold, swung him round and round. If he called out the name of a girl, saying: "She is my sweetheart," they stopped, but, if he was ashamed to do so, they kept swinging him until they were tired out. If the boy lacked nerve to endure the swinging, he acknowledged it by spitting and they dropped him at once.

The boys had a bow-and-arrow game. A stake arrow was driven into the ground and they shot in turn, each trying to hit the stake, or come as near as possible. If the first player shot so close, that the second in turn thought he would have difficulty in beating it, he walked up to the stake arrow and danced beside it, to secure "power" for shooting, beating time with an arrow upon his bow while singing, "I am going to hit it first." If the second player shot well also, the third danced, seeking for even greater skill, singing, "No, I am the one, who will hit the stake arrow first."

There was also the "wheel and arrow," a gambling game played by men with arrows and a small wheel with beaded spokes. The wheel was rolled over a smooth and level course, each player throwing an arrow at it. The points were counted according to the position of the arrows when the wheel stopped. Its origin is very

[p. 393]

ancient and it is often mentioned in old stories and legends. Its use as a gambling game was very general among the plains-tribes.

Passing from these interesting scenes of camp life, I climbed the steep ascent of "Lookout Butte," which Onesta told me had been used for many generations by Brings-down-the-Sun and his ancestors, as a place of meditation and prayer. A wonderful prospect was spread out in every
Click to enlarge
WHEEL AND ARROW GAME.
 direction. By the winding course of green cottonwood trees, I could trace the beautiful valley of the Crow Lodge River westward to its very source among the snow-crowned summits of the Rocky Mountains, and then follow it eastward like a shining silver band, far out upon the prairies. A rainbow from a straggling storm appeared in mid air, hanging over the river. As the sun was sinking behind the mountains, the clouds became suffused with red up to the zenith. At the foot of the butte, and among the trees below, lay the picturesque Indian camp, with its white lodges and brightly blazing outside fires. The continuous beating of drums came from our South Piegan camp, where Onesta was making preparations for his Crow Beaver ceremonial, to be held on the following day.

Seated in this ancestral place of meditation, and under the spell of my peaceful and beautiful surroundings,

[p. 394]

a strong doubt entered my mind as to whether the white races, in the pride of their civilisation, fit their natural environments much better than this patriarchal settlement of Blackfeet.

While we have mastered and harnessed the forces of nature to do our bidding, and have achieved wonderful things in science and industrial combination, have we, with all of our striving and complex life, attained a much higher average of character, contentment and loyalty to the community interests, than was attained under the simple life and few wants of the average Blackfoot family, before the invasion of the white race? We could look in vain in such camps as that of the North Piegans, nestled among the cottonwoods, to find the depravity, misery and consuming vice, which involve multitudes in the industrial centres of all the large cities of Christendom.

Footnotes

^391:1 Song 9. See <page 515>.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 395]

  

CHAPTER XXIX

  

PROPER NAMES

Various methods used in obtaining proper names.--Interesting illustrations of naming children.--Manner of changing men's names.--Women's names.--Names for strangers.--Names for animals.--Extended use of sign language among plains-tribes.

IT is a wonderful provision of nature, which preserves the identity of the individual by infinite variations and combinations of facial features and other characteristics. All races of men emphasise this individuality still further by giving to such human entity a proper name. The various methods, by which this is done, furnish an interesting field of investigation. I found it so with the Blackfeet, but was not able to make an exhaustive study of the subject. I, however, discovered that the queer and fantastic proper names of the Blackfeet, which seem to most people either curious, or amusing, have often been improperly rendered into English equivalents which fail to express the Indian ideas.

I met with a reluctance among the Blackfeet to tell their names, which was prompted by a superstitious fear of the bad luck, or misfortune that might follow.

In common with other Indian tribes, the Blackfeet have no patronymics to denote ancestry, or surnames to designate family. It was, however, sometimes the case, that a distinguished name would be handed down from father to son. Thus Brings-down-the-Sun, having

[p. 396]

received in infancy the name of his distinguished father, Running Wolf, and being proud of the name, and the brave deeds it stood for, gave the same name to his son.

The Blackfeet used great care in the selection of appropriate proper names, being guided by certain customs and employing a variety of methods in obtaining them. Parents ordinarily entrusted the task of naming their children to
Click to enlarge
NITANA.
 others, usually to an old person, because they believed this would favour their reaching old age. When names were formally given, it was with the prayer that they might live to be old. They had a superstition against the choosing of children's names by young persons.

Names were often given because of some physical mark, or characteristic. The use of horses and the capture of horses from other tribes having been a prominent feature of their life, it was but natural that the word horse was used in a great variety of name combinations.

Dreams were depended upon for suggestions; which were said to come from the "Dream People," and they were also received from the animals. When Onesta's wife, Nitana, was once sleeping on the bank of the Missouri River, she heard, in a dream, a strange voice calling "Go away from there, Green Snake Woman, do not disturb that sleeping person!" and then again, "Go

[p. 397]

away from there, Green Snake Woman, do not waken that person!" When she awoke, she saw, by a strange coincidence, a rattlesnake near by with head erect, as if calling to her children. The young snakes were crawling beside their mother, and all went off together. When Nitana was afterwards asked to name her sister's

Click to enlarge
TWO SISTERS--GREEN SNARE WOMAN AND BLUE SNAKE WOMAN.

little girls, she gave them the names of the rattlesnake's children.

Spotted Eagle, the medicine man, once dreamed that he was walking under the ground, following a man, whose comrade called him "Walking Underneath." The first male child Spotted Eagle was asked to name he called "Walking Underneath."

When Brings-down-the-Sun lay watching a family of beavers at their work, he heard the mother beaver calling her children by the names, Sa-ko-wai-stai (Last

[p. 398]

[paragraph continues] Diver) and Sa-kowa-et-sosin (Last-one-to-swim-in-with-the-willows, referring to the beavers' food). When the chief was asked by a relative to name two of his boys, he gave them the names of the beaver children.

Another custom was to name a child in honour of a

Click to enlarge
LAST-ONE-TO-SWIM-IN-WITH-THE-WILLOWS AND HIS SISTERS.

medicine animal, or bird, thereby invoking their protection, or the gift of their supernatural qualities for the child. This had its counterpart in the custom of the Pilgrim Fathers of New England of choosing Christian names from Biblical characters and qualities and even sacred phrases. It resembles, too, the more modern custom, which many observe, of giving the names of the saints to their children.

[p. 399]

The name of the wife of Curly Bear, who is still alive, although now an old woman, had a singular origin in a religious act of her father. Many years ago, during a scourge of smallpox, her father prayed to the Sun, offering his girl baby as a propitiatory sacrifice to ward off the "great sickness" with the prayer, "Take her, O Sun! and leave the rest of my family!" But they all died save this baby. She alone was spared. From that day her name has been "Given Away."

Running Fisher and his wife (Lone-Charge-Woman) became discouraged because of the death of all their children, although they had carefully complied with the customary precautions and observances, to insure their living to old age. When another child, a girl, was born, they decided upon a different method. They named her Sis-toi-tsi-ma (Something-that-is-given-away). They allowed her to run wild, hoping by that method to escape the bad luck that had befallen their other children. She is alive to-day and the mother of a family.

Other names of girl babies that I met with were:--

A-sa-na-ki = Cries-all-the-time.

Ska-na-sa-ne = Cries-early-in-the-morning.

A-na-to-ki = Pretty Head.

So-ya-ksi-wa-wa-kas = Water-spider-woman.

Sit-so-a-ki = Good-looking-water-bird.

Sit-a-ka-poki = Stays-in-different-lodges.

A-ka-no-kim = Everybody-down-on.

also Blue Wings and Born-with-teeth.

[paragraph continues] The names of females were not changed after childhood as was the case with males. A boy's name was frequently changed when he became 16 or 18 years old and his character was sufficiently developed to make

[p. 400]

some trait prominent, or give promise of his after life. But, when he reached manhood, his name might be changed again to commemorate some deed of valour, or notable event.

"Behind-the-ear" was so named, because he shot an enemy behind the ear, and Many-white-horses, because his herd was composed entirely of white horses. Brings-down-the-Sun told me that his present name originated in a dream, in which the Sun God came down and stood beside him and said, "I take you for my friend, and I bestow upon you my supernatural power." When he related his dream to his people, they changed his name from Running Wolf to Natosin Nepe-e or Brings-down-the-Sun.

When a man distinguished himself as a warrior, in the face of the enemy, it was customary for him to name his girls in honour of his exploits. But they had a superstitious belief that if his claims were false, the child would die.

The following names of women will illustrate:

A-kops-iso = Took-many-things-with-a-scalp; Kills-many; Strikes-on-a-horse; Catches-the-enemy; and Catches-two-horses.

Mad Wolf named his daughter Strikes-on-both-sides, because as he said, "when captured by the enemy, I saved her life by striking them down on both sides of her."

The wife of Big Eyes was named by her father, Its-ue-nikki = Kills-close-to-the-lake, because he killed an enemy in a fight close to a lake. I found many names of women, the first syllable of which was either "Strikes" or "Kills."

Strangers were given names from some peculiarity of their personal appearance. When Arthur Nevin, the musical composer, went with me among the Blackfeet,

[p. 401]

they called him "Don't-lace-his-moccasins," not because of any carelessness in tying his shoes, but because he was said to resemble a Blood Indian of that name. They called the author, A-pe-ech-eken = White Weasel, because I was a blonde. They called Father De Smet "Long Teeth" because of a peculiarity of his mouth. "Long Knives" is their name for United States cavalrymen equipped with sabres; "Red Coats" for the Canadian mounted police; "Black Robes" for Catholic priests, and "White Ties" for Protestant missionaries.

Names for animals are in like manner similarly expressive, although sometimes difficult of rendering into equivalent English words.

Beaver; Ksis-stukki = Cuts-trees-with-his-teeth.

Buffalo; Ee-neu-ah = Black Horns.

Badger; Me-sin-ski = Striped Face.

Deer (White-tail); Au-a-tu-yi = Wags-his-tail.

Coyote; Kis-see-noh-o = Bastard; or E-muck-o-tis-ah-pi-ce-yi = Small Wolf.

Mule; O-muck-stow-ki = Big-Ears.

Horse; Pono-kom-i-ta = Elk Dog.

Pono-kom-i-ta (horse) is a compound word composed of Ponoka = Elk, and Emita = dog. Its etymology seems to have been as follows. The elk was known and named by the Blackfeet long before the appearance of horses. When horses were introduced, and because they resembled the elk in form, they applied to the new animal their name for elk, but differentiated it, by affixing their name for dog, expressing its use, the dog having been their beast of burden before horses were known.

Further illustrations of the appropriateness of Blackfeet names for things will be found in Brings-down-the-Sun's

[p. 402]

topography of the Old North Trail (pp.<page 434>-<page 440>); in his discourses on the names and habits of birds (pp. <page 481>-<page 484>); and on the names of the different moons, the constellations and signs in the heavens (pp. <page 486>-<page 488>).

They also had phrases and proverbs tersely expressing both wisdom and humour.

The phrase, "Ik-is-kaks-ksisi," = "His nose is short for good nature," describes a man who loses his temper quickly.

The phrase, "Ah-kit-kats-a-pin-soye," = His eyes are dry from looking around so much," or, more literally, "He has been looking around so much, that he winks his eyes as if they were dry," describes a sight-seer, or one absorbed and staring at the sights around him.

The art of talking by sign language, i.e. by a combination of facial expressions and bodily movements, which is natural to man, attained a high degree of perfection among the plains-tribes. Having different vocal languages, their contact, when coming together in war or in hunting buffalo, of necessity developed the use of gesture-speech in the remote past. A tradition of the Arapahoe tells us that the original Arapahoe, the creator of all things, "taught them to talk with their hands." Iron Hawk, a Sioux chief, said to Captain W. P. Clark, "the sign language was the gift of the Great Spirit. He gave the whites the power to read and write and convey information in this way. He gave us the power to talk with our hands and arms and to send information to a distance with the mirror, blanket and pony, and when we meet with Indians who have a different spoken language from ours, we can talk to them with signs." Alex. Henry, a partner of the North Western Company (Montreal),

[p. 403]

records in his journal (1806), "It is surprising how dexterous these natives of the plains are, in the art of communicating their ideas by signs. They will hold conference for several hours together upon different subjects and, during the whole time, not a single word will be pronounced on either side, and still they appear to understand each other perfectly."

The Blackfeet, because of their central location on the

Click to enlarge
VISITING INDIANS CONVERSING IN SIGN LANGUAGE.
 (Second from left end is making sign for buffalo by crooking forefingers.)

[paragraph continues] Buffalo range, and frequent contact with other tribes, had constant use for sign language and were very proficient. I attended one of their large camps where representatives from 16 different tribes were present. Although unable to understand each other's spoken language, they talked freely and rapidly together in gesture speech. Each evening the visiting Indians withdrew to a ridge, overlooking the big camp, where I

[p. 404]

watched, with great interest, their graceful and expressive gestures, while conversing with the Blackfeet chiefs in the sign language. I learned the equivalent ideas representing the names of the following tribes present and saw them expressed by signs readily understood by all.

Arapahoe = Spotted People, because they had many spotted, or pinto horses.

Blackfeet = Black moccasins, because the bottoms of their moccasins were black.

Blood = Streak-across-the-mouth, a peculiar way the Bloods had of painting.

Cheyenne = People-who-part-their-hair-in-the-middle.

Crow = Bird flying.

Flathead = Peculiar shape of the head.

Gros Ventres (of the prairies), = Big Bellies, because they eat so much.

Kutenai = Mountain People, People-who-live-in-the-mountains.

Mandans = People-who-live-in-dirt-lodges.

Nez Perce = Users-of-black-paint.

Pend d'Oreille = Paddling People, or River-people-using-canoes.

Piegan = Users-of-paint-on-the-cheeks.

Sioux = Cut Throats, from the olden-time tradition that they cut off the heads of their victims in battle.

Snake = A crawling serpent.

As an illustration of the Indian's method of conveying ideas by signs, I quote the manual equivalents for some of the above mentioned tribal names, for which I am indebted to "Indian Sign Language," by Captain W. P. Clark, Second Cavalry, United States Army.

[p. 405]

Sioux = Concept.--Cutting off heads.

Sign: Hold right hand, back up, in front of left shoulder, height of throat, index finger extended and pointing to left, other fingers and thumb closed, move the hand horizontally to the right, index passing near throat.

Blackfeet. Concept = Black Moccasins.

Sign: For moccasins, pass spread thumbs and index fingers over feet and toes to ankles, right hand over right foot, left hand over left foot, palms of hands towards and close to feet. For black, point to something black in colour.

Crow. Concept = Bird flying.

Sign: Bring extended hands, backs nearly up, in front, a little higher than and slightly to right and left of shoulders; move the hands simultaneously a little downwards, slightly outwards, and a trifle to right and left, indicating motion of wings.

Flathead. Concept = Peculiar shape of head.

Sign: Press the upper part of forehead and head with palms of hands, fingers extended and touching, tips of fingers touching above head.

Nez Perce. Concept = Powder, because of their excessive use of a bluish black paint.

Sign: Hold extended left hand in front of body, back down, and rub tips of fingers and thumb of right hand just over left palm.

Snake. Concept = Motion of a snake.

Sign: Hold right hand, back to right, in front of right shoulder about height of waist, first and second fingers extended, touching and pointing to front, and, by wrist action, give a wavy sinuous motion to extended fingers.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 406]

  

CHAPTER XXX

  

ONESTA GIVES THE CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL

North Piegans gather around our camp fire.--Dances by the children Emonissi and Yellow Mink.--Embarrassing relations between a mother-in-law and son-in-law.--Running Wolf and myself entertain a gathering with Blackfeet songs.--At Onesta's request I sleep in the sacred Thunder Tipi.--Story of my vision has an advantageous result.

ONESTA was drumming and chanting religious songs, inside his tipi, when he requested me to join with him and help in the singing. The women, having finished their evening cooking, opened the front of the lodge and seated themselves to listen. The North Piegans, attracted by the chanting and sound of the drum, also came to our camp and joined the audience. Onesta and I continued our singing, while his little daughter, Yellow Mink, danced for the amusement of the company. When she had finished, Kionama directed his son, Emonissi, a young boy about eight years of age, to go through some of the Medicine Pipe dances he was teaching him. When his father picked up the drum, and began beating time, the little fellow started off with the Grizzly Bear dance, stepping slowly backwards and forwards, imitating the clumsy movements of a bear, holding out his arms, with his hands hanging, and then moving them about, just as a bear does, all the while breathing hard like a grizzly, when running. In the Antelope dance, Emonissi imitated, with his hands,

[p. 407]

the graceful movements of an antelope, and turned his head alertly, like an antelope. For the Swan dance, he held his arms in front with the palms spread out, in imitation of the swan sailing through the air. Kionama explained that the boy was representing the chief swan, who leads the flock. In the Thunder, or Pipe dance,

Click to enlarge
THUNDER TIPI.
 ("Lookout Butte" in distance.)

[paragraph continues] Emonissi held a pipe in his right hand, while his left was extended, to represent the Thunder Bird flying. After the performance, Onesta announced that he and Nitana would give the Sup-we-yok-kinni (Crow Beaver ceremonial), and invited all the North Piegans to attend. He had been so pleased with my singing during our evening dance, that he asked my help for his ceremonial, and suggested that I should be the

[p. 408]

owner of a medicine drum. Nitana had spent the entire day gathering sarvis berries for the feast, also sage and the different herbs required for the ceremonial.

Early in the morning of the day of the dance, the women pitched the sacred Thunder Tipi. The top was painted black to represent a cloudy sky, with a cross at the back, symbolising the Butterfly, the Bringer of Dreams. A band of Dusty Stars circled the bottom, symbolising the earth and, resting upon it, were representations of mountains. Between the top and bottom decorations were four serpentine bands of red representing the trails of the Thunder Bird (Lightning).

A huge kettle hung from the tripod over our outside fire, in which the sarvis berry stew was cooked. Onesta and Nitana chanted and offered prayers, while placing the berries in the kettle, and when all preparations had been completed, they reverently carried the food and their medicine bundles to the sacred tipi. Onesta beat loudly upon his drum, the signal to the people to assemble. The North Piegans, having never before witnessed the Crow Beaver ceremonial, attended in great numbers. One exception was a fine-looking man, who was holding himself aloof from the rest of the company. Noticing that he remained apart in the South Piegan camp, and wondering what could be the cause of his absence, I made inquiries. Menake explained that Bird was his mother-in-law and, according to the tribal custom, two persons of such relationship could not be present at the same time. If she chanced to meet him face to face, she would be greatly annoyed. If a man came unexpectedly into the presence of his mother-in-law, he would be expected to make her a handsome present for such a breach of etiquette.

Brings-down-the-Sun did not enter the sacred tipi,

[p. 409]

neither did his wife, nor any of the family, but sat outside, for only those who took part in the ceremonial were expected to enter. Menake said, that, "It was their custom to refrain from participation in any ceremonial, excepting that of the Sun-dance. He was the high priest of the Sun-dance and his wife one of its sacred women. It was necessary for them to be careful,

Click to enlarge
ONESTA GIVES THE CROW BEAVER CEREMONIAL.
 (Onesta is second from right end.)

not only in respect to their own, but also their children's actions. They were expected by the tribe to lead straight lives and to be above reproach." In this instance, they all attended as onlookers, because Onesta was a relative, but maintained their dignity by not participating.

The Crow Beaver Society ceremonial was introduced in recent years by a Blackfoot Chief, after a visit to the Crow Indians. It is participated in by both men and

[p. 410]

women. Their ceremonial is generally given for healing the sick. The society is invited to the home of the sick person, where the ceremonial is held. They bring their medicine bundles, and opening them, dance, with feathers and skins of the different birds and animals, and offer prayers for the recovery of the sick.

The priests, assisting Onesta in the ceremonial, were seated by his side. The North Piegans, who were to be instructed sat opposite, or were "against him," as the Indians expressed it.

When the Crow Beaver dance was over, and the people had dispersed, Onesta inquired if I would be willing to sleep in the sacred Thunder Tipi, explaining that it was contrary to the rules of the medicine to leave it unoccupied during the night. He said that, if I slept inside, I might possibly secure a dream, or a vision. He was much gratified, when I agreed to the proposal. Onesta, Nitana, Kionama and Menake came to sit with me during the evening. We were also joined by Running Wolf, Star-that-sets-over-the-hill, and their wives.

When we were all gathered around the lodge fire, Running Wolf asked me to sing some Indian songs. I agreed, if he would sing in turn. In reply to my wolf song, he sang a dance song, used by young warriors during a test for bravery. He gave me the following explanation of the occasion, when it is used.

"The bark of a pitch pine tree was set on fire. A group of men stripped naked, and holding hands, gathered in a circle about the tree. Two of them with long poles stood close to the tree, scraping the burning bark. This caused showers of sparks, which fell upon the hare bodies of the candidates, dancing around the tree, and singing 'Sats-to-o-komo' (Rub under the jaw). When the live sparks struck the faint hearted and cowardly, they could not withstand the pain and ran from the circle, but the men with brave, strong hearts continued dancing and singing, unmindful of their burns."

[p. 411]

After my dance song, Running Wolf sang a song used in a man's game. The oldest man present takes two burning brands from the fire. All the others fall in line, each holding tightly to the one in front, and all singing in unison. The leader strikes the burning brands together, throwing off showers of sparks, while he leads them, winding in and out. The sparks falling on their bare bodies make the faint hearted shrink from the ordeal.

Nitana sang the song of a maiden disappointed in love. The words were,

"My lover looked like an eagle from a distance, but alas! when he came nearer I saw that he was nothing but a buzzard."

My guests, especially the women, were much interested, when I sang the love song I had heard in Mad Wolf's Sun-dance camp, and they insisted upon hearing it over and over again. When Mysterious Woman entered the lodge, a request was made that I would again sing the love song for her.

It was after midnight, when my visitors departed. Before they left, Onesta was careful to inform me of certain things I must avoid, while occupying the sacred Thunder Tipi, to guard against bad luck. Running Wolf also warned me, that a skunk visited the locality every morning, just before daybreak, but assured me that if he were to enter the lodge, he would go out without causing any trouble, if I would lie perfectly still.

The night was very cold, after the Indians had departed. I built a warm fire and, comfortably wrapped in my blankets, lay for a long time, thinking of the varied events of the past day. It was a strange experience to be occupying a sacred tipi, to fulfil the laws of the medicine and to await a vision, like a

[p. 412]

medicine man. The rustling of the cottonwoods overhead, the faint murmur of the river rapids near by, and the weird shapes of the lodge decorations, in the fitful glow of the dying fire, made favourable conditions for a vision. As I went to sleep I remembered having seen a large eagle, sailing high above the plains, on the day we entered the North Piegan country. He stood beside me in the night, advising what message I should bring to the North Piegans.

I was wakened by the bright rays of the morning sun, shining into the lodge. Smoke was slowly rising in the still air from our South Piegan camp fire. Menake and Nitana were already cooking breakfast. Kionama called me, while I was at the river endeavouring to wash the red paint from my face and hair. Before long, as I had expected, Onesta inquired if anything had disturbed me during the night. I replied, "No," and relapsed into silence. Menake then asked if I had seen a vision. When I replied that I had had a very strong vision, Onesta urged me to tell it. I said, with the greatest seriousness,

"Before sunrise, just as day was breaking, an eagle stood beside me, saying, 'My son, it is the chief of all the eagles that is speaking to you. I am going to help you because you are alone among a strange people. It is a good thing for you to visit the North Piegans, to learn about them, and to take their pictures. It will bring good luck to you and to those, who take part in the ceremonials. Good fortune and long life will come to all who may help you.

My companions looked to see if I were joking, but, when I maintained a solemn countenance, nothing further was said, and I knew that my vision was taken seriously, and would soon be heralded and discussed, in its smallest detail, throughout the North Piegan camp.

[p. 413]

During the day a violent storm passed over the camp. Onesta questioned me closely as to my having disobeyed any rules of the Thunder Tipi. When I told him I had washed off the red paint in the early morning, he said that that was undoubtedly the cause of the storm.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 414]

  

CHAPTER XXXI

  

THE RIVAL LEADERS

Jealous anger of Bull Plume.--He urges me to visit his camp.--Brings-down-the-Sun is angered by the intrusion.--Onesta explains the cause of the rivalry.--Brings-down-the-Sun makes a friendly visit.--He agrees to impart his knowledge.--Stories of his father Running Wolf.--Origin of the name.--Winter counts kept by him as head chief of the tribe.--His initiation into the Medicine Pipe Society.--Discovers cavern of the Thunder-bird on Chief Mountain, who gives him a sacred Pipe.

ON the day of the Crow Beaver ceremonial, while seated by the door of the sacred lodge, I was honoured by Brings-down-the-Sun seating himself beside me. To the Indians his act was a conspicuous recognition of me, and was noticed by everyone. Bull Plume was inside the lodge seated opposite to Onesta. When he observed Brings-down-the-Sun's action, he was much disturbed. Unable to control his jealous anger, he harangued the people seated near him. Even the family of Brings-down-the-Sun heard his words. He said: "My heart is now black because A-pe-ech-eken, who is my friend, has not come to my camp. I know that someone must have turned his heart against me." During the rest of the ceremonial Bull Plume was morose and silent. Next morning he came early to our camp to see me. We seated ourselves on the ground, and while engaged in a friendly smoke he made inquiries as to my journey, and how long I intended remaining in his country. He said he felt

[p. 415]

offended because I, an old friend, was visiting another man. He suggested that his camp was not far distant, on the other side of the river, and asked me to return with him. Knowing well the jealousy that pervades an Indian tribe, and the rivalry between all medicine men, my replies were careful and guarded. I explained that I had come a stranger to visit in his country, along with relatives of the chief, in whose camp I was now staying. It was necessary that I should remain with the people, with whom I was travelling. Bull Plume then became more urgent. He said, "I have some interesting tribal records to show you. They were handed down by Wolf Child, my grandfather, and are very old. If you come, you may copy them and you can make as many pictures in my camp as you wish." I replied that I was eager to see his records, and to take the pictures, but that our horses were running loose upon the hills, and I had no means of crossing the river. Bull Plume then departed, leaving me much disturbed in mind. It was the last I saw of him.

I learned afterwards, that he was so disappointed at my refusal to visit his camp, and angered, because Brings-down-the-Sun had practically won a victory over him, that he and all his followers struck their lodges and started for the north. Onesta explained this very strange occurrence by the fact, that Bull Plume and Brings-down-the-Sun were rival leaders. Bull Plume was a comparatively young man, ambitious for reputation and influence, while the aged Brings-down-the-Sun was universally revered, because of his honesty and kindness of heart, and his life-long reputation for high character and knowledge of their sacred ceremonials. Onesta said that Bull Plume was also a constant source of irritation to Brings-down-the-Sun, because of his

[p. 416]

aggressive methods, and that, if I had associated with him, it would have injured me greatly in the estimation of the older chief.

Political human nature is the same the world over. How like the rival ambitions and struggles for preeminence between the chiefs of our political parties, and political antagonists anywhere, was this manoeuvring for recognition and leadership between these rival chiefs of the Blackfeet!

When Brings-down-the-Sun heard that Bull Plume had been in the South Piegan camp, trying to persuade the white man to go with him, he was very indignant. In the afternoon he entered our camp for the first time. Seating himself upon a big log, near the outside fire, and, filling his every-day pipe, he spoke as follows:

"For several years I have endured many things from this Bull Plume. I will no longer be silent, but will now speak plainly. If you desire to go to the camp of this man, I will not hinder you." When I replied that I intended remaining with him, he seemed relieved and continued: "I would prefer to have you stay with me, inasmuch as you came first to my camp and I have been preparing myself to relate to you many things that have happened to my people in former days. If you should be instructed by another man, there might be confusion. However, I do not wish to interfere, if you want to learn from Bull Plume." I again assured him that I desired to learn from him alone, and said, "When I started north with the South Piegans, they promised they would take me to your camp, because you know more than any of the chiefs. When I met the Blood Indians, I told them also that I was on my way to visit you. I do not care to go to the camp of Bull Plume and I want to learn from you alone." Gazing steadily

Click to enlarge
THE WAR CHIEF

[p. 417]

into my face for a moment, he said, "I can read a man's character in his eyes and by the look I see in his face. I know this Bull Plume is tricky, because he cannot look a man straight in the eyes. He is like a crooked stick and his words and his schemes are as many as the branches in yonder thicket. He told you that he has in his possession tribal records handed down to him from his grandfather. This is not true. Bull Plume is a young man. We do
Click to enlarge
BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN.
 (Eagle feathers fastened
 on both sides of head.)
 not even know who his father was. I remember him as a small boy. He was so poor he used to walk barefoot behind the travois. When, as a young man, he was gathering together the records he now boasts about to you, he secured the knowledge from me. This same information was given to me by  my father, who was the head chief of the Blackfeet. Bull Plume has lied to you and, if you had gone with him to his camp, he has no records of value to show. Since you were not deceived, and have remained true to me, I now take you as my son, I will be your father in the north, and the people in my camp henceforth will be your brothers and sisters. As long as you remain in my camp, I will give myself up to you and will tell you all the information you may desire

[p. 418]

to know. I also take as my friends your white father and mother who live towards the rising sun. I ask you to send them word that my heart feels good towards them."

After expressing, in a few words, my deep appreciation of his kindness and goodwill, I asked him to tell me about his father, and also about his own life.

His manner was very impressive as he turned and,

Click to enlarge
"I WILL TELL YOU NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH."

pointing towards the setting sun, addressed me. "The Sun looks down upon us both, sitting here together, and hears everything that we say. I declare, before the Great Mystery in the Sun, that I will tell you nothing but the truth.

"When my father became a man he was named A-pe-so-muckka (Running Wolf). My grandfather, Little Mountain, was once alone in the mountains, when a wolf came to him in a dream saying, 'My son, you have often heard my voice, for I am Running Wolf, the head chief of all the wolves. I run all over the

[p. 419]

country. My tracks are to be found everywhere, and I will always continue to wander. If you should ever have sons, name one of them Running Wolf after me. If he should have a son, let the name be handed down. All of your descendants, who bear my name, will be blessed with long life.' I was the only one of my father's sons to be named Running Wolf, and I in turn have given this name to my son whose tipi stands there next to mine. My father was the third son, and I will relate the events, which proved that he was worthy to bear the name of Running Wolf.

"When he was a boy fifteen years old, he was watching a large war party, of which his two older brothers were members, making ready to start on an expedition against the Snake (Shoshone) Indians. They rode to my grandfather's big lodge, in the centre of the camp, dressed in war clothes, and with horses painted, singing a wolf song and beating time on their parfleches. When they finished their song with the wolf-howl, Little Mountain directed his wives to go out and join them in another song, that their expedition might be successful. After smoking a pipe with their head chief, they marched four times around the camp circle, stopping to sing at the four largest tipis, located towards the four main directions (cardinal points). They then dispersed, and after saying farewell to their friends and families, started for the south. All these preparations were very thrilling to my father, and, as they rode away, he longed to accompany them, but he well knew that they would say he was too young. After the war party had gone, young Running Wolf secured his father's rifle, making the excuse that he was going on a hunt. Instead, he circled around, and, by fast riding, finally overtook them. The war-chief was not

[p. 420]

pleased to see him, and ordered him to turn back, explaining that they were starting upon a long and dangerous expedition, and that he, as their leader, would be held responsible for his safe return. Running Wolf made no reply, but his two brothers spoke: 'If he is so eager to go to war, let him come along. He can make himself useful by leading these two travois dogs.' No further objections were made, so Running Wolf took charge of the dogs and remained with the war party. Nothing of interest happened for many days. One night, after crossing the Yellowstone River, when the boy was sleeping on the outskirts of the camp, he was awakened by the growling of his dogs, and discovered not far away a band of Snake Indians. He gave the alarm, and the Blackfeet hastily made ready, but waited to make their attack just before dawn. When they were starting out, my two uncles directed Running Wolf to hand over his rifle, because it might be needed, and because he was too young to enter the fight. He pleaded with them to allow him to try at least one shot at the enemy. When the Snakes saw the Blackfeet coming, they hastily retreated towards some high cliffs. The Blackfeet warriors followed, but held their fire, thinking the Snakes were out of range. Young Running Wolf was the only one to fire a gun. He took a long shot, and, strange to say, killed a Snake warrior, the bullet entering his head. When he fell, my uncles ran out and took his scalp and clothes. The Snakes reached the cliffs, where they were in such a strong position that our warriors could not dislodge them. The victory had already belonged to the Blackfeet, so they left the country to return home. It was in midsummer when they came back. The people were all outside the lodges, the women playing a game of

[p. 421]

bones, and the young men gambling with the wheel and arrow, when a band of horsemen unexpectedly appeared upon a high butte. It was the returning war-party. They had come back so quickly, no one believed it possible they could have gone far enough to encounter the enemy. The warriors tied the scalp to some long willow branches. The chief instructed young

Click to enlarge
WAR-PARTY RIDING THROUGH CAMP HOLDING UP SCALPS.

[paragraph continues] Running Wolf to hold them aloft when they entered camp, and to cry out, 'My name is Running Wolf. I am the youngest of the war-party, but I was the only one to kill a Snake Indian. Behold! here is his scalp.' Then they marched around the camp, shooting their rifles in the air, and singing the song of victory, 'We have hair.' Many years afterwards the Blackfeet were told by the Snakes, that the man my father killed was also the son of their head chief, and that his name was Running Wolf.

[p. 422]

"My father was the leader of the clan of Grease Melters. Later, when he was chosen head chief of the Blackfeet, he was known by the name of Iron Shirt, because he wore a buckskin shirt decorated with pieces of shining metal. He was a large, muscular man, with a wonderful memory and a great knowledge of our customs. He could tell a horse's age by its whinny, and a man's by the sound of his voice. He kept winter counts on buffalo hides, marking the principal events in the history of the tribe. He recorded our tribal camps, the battles, the names of our leaders, when the great chiefs died, the years of sickness (scourge of smallpox), the summers of droughts and the hard winters, when game was scarce and snows lay deep.

"Sixty-nine winters have passed, since we had our first 'Great Sickness' (smallpox, 1836). Fifty winters, since eight Indian tribes assembled together in a big camp on the Yellowstone River, when Little Dog, Big Snake and Lame Bull were the head chiefs (1855). Thirty-one winters since the coming of the Mounted Police (1874), and twenty-nine since the severe winter, when many of our horses were frozen (1876). One year later, there was a big camp in the north, when Big Crow Foot was head chief (1877).

"Other important events that my father marked in his 'winter counts' were: the winter, when many of our people died from the 'Cough Sickness.'

"The winter, when the children broke through the ice.

"The winter, when the moose came into camp.

"The winter, when our horses had the mange.

"The winter, when it was necessary to eat dogs to keep from starving.

"The winter, when the antelopes broke through the ice.

[p. 423]

The winter, when buffalo were scarce.

"The winter, when we caught antelope in the deep snow.

"The winter, when a treaty was made with the white men.

"I was born in the year, when white men were seen for the first time in our country, and in the spring, during the moon, when the grass is green. Grass, as you know, is the head chief of everything. The animals depend upon the grass for food, and without the animals our children could not live.

"I was still a young boy when my father was made a member of the Medicine Pipe society. It happened at the time of the Sun-dance camp in midsummer. Wolf Child had owned a Pipe for four years. It was time for him to give it up and to select his successor. He chose my father, and told the society that they must catch him. Now my father was a Bear Man, that is, his power came from the grizzly bear. His medicine, which was a bear skin, always hung from the lodge poles over his bed It was for this reason, that the Medicine Pipe men had never chosen my father before. The word 'bear' was believed to exert an evil power over the Pipe, and should never be spoken in its presence. They feared to offer the Pipe to my father, with the bear skin so near, lest it bring misfortune upon all of the society. But, Wolf Child, the owner of the Pipe to be transferred, finally prevailed, urging that, 'Iron Shirt is head chief and is so powerful, no harm can come to him. For our part, I believe we can safely take the Pipe into the presence of the bear skin without danger, if all of us are careful to use the word 'Badger,' instead of 'Bear' and, at the same

[p. 424]

time, burn sweet pine as incense, which will avert the evil power. We must catch both Iron Shirt and his wife inside their lodge. Don't let either of them escape.' In this way he persuaded them and overcame their fears. It was after midnight, when I heard them come into our lodge. Wolf Child entered first, holding the sacred Pipe hidden beneath his blanket. My mother tried to run out, but Wolf Child held her fast, until the others entered. He offered the Pipe to my father and, when he grasped it with both hands, the society men began to drum and sing. When my father had finished smoking, he said: 'I have many horses, which of them is it you wish to take?' Wolf Child said: 'Your black buffalo horse.' He knew well that he was the most valuable of the herd and the fastest horse in camp. He was so high spirited that it required three raw hide bridles to hold him. My father answered quickly: 'Take him! He is yours.' It was an honour, but also a great burden for my father and mother to own a Medicine Pipe. But few men dare to refuse it, I remember the case of a young man, who declined a Medicine Pipe, because the society asked for his racehorse. As a result his father-in-law soon died, then the racehorse, and finally the young man himself.

"I was once camped with my grandfather and father on the Green Banks (St. Mary's River), close to the Rocky Mountains. They were digging out beavers, which were very plentiful. My father went off for a hunt to supply our camp with meat. He followed the trail of some elk up the side of a steep mountain, until he came to timber-line, where he saw a herd of mountain sheep. He followed them towards Nin-ais-tukku (Chief Mountain). When he drew near the summit, he discovered a dense, foul-smelling smoke rising from a deep

[p. 425]

pit. He pushed a huge boulder into it to hear it fall. There came back no sound, but a cloud of smoke and gas arose so dense and suffocating, that he turned to flee, but it was only to meet a black cloud coming up the mountain side. He was frightened and tried to escape, but suddenly there came a terrible crash, and my father fell to the ground. He beheld a woman standing over him. Her face was painted black and red zig-zag streaks like lightning were below her eyes. Behind the woman, stood a man holding a large weapon. My father heard the man exclaim impatiently, 'I told you to kill him at once, but you stand there pitying him.' He heard the woman chant, 'When it rains the noise of the Thunder is my medicine.' The man also sang and fired his big weapon. The report was like a deafening crash of thunder, and my father beheld lightning coming from the big hole on the mountain top. He knew nothing more, until he found himself lying inside a great cavern. He had no power to speak, neither could he raise his head, but, when he heard a voice saying, 'This is the person who threw the stone down into your fireplace,' he realised that he was in the lodge of the Thunder Maker. He heard the beating of a drum, and, after the fourth beating, was able to sit up and look around. He saw the Thunder Chief, in the form of a huge bird, with his wife and many children around him. All of the children had drums, painted with the green talons of the Thunderbird and with Thunder-bird beaks, from which issued zig-zag streaks of yellow lightning.

"We call the thunder Isis-a-kummi (Thunder-bird). We believe that it is a supernatural person. When he leaves his lodge to go through the heavens with the storm-clouds, he takes the form of a great bird with

[p. 426]

many colours, like the rainbow, and with long green claws. The lightning is the trail of the Thunder-bird.

"Whenever the Thunder Maker smoked his pipe, he blew two whiffs upwards toward the sky, and then two whiffs towards the earth. After each whiff the thunder crashed. Finally the Thunder-bird spoke to my father, saying, 'I am the Thunder Maker and my name is Many Drums (expressive of the sound of rolling thunder). You have witnessed my great power and can now go in safety. When you return to your people, make a pipe just like the one you saw me smoking, and add it to your bundle. Whenever you hear the first thunder rolling in the spring-time, you will know that I have come from my cavern, and that it is time to take out my pipe. If you should ever be caught in the midst of a heavy thunder-storm and feel afraid, pray to me, saying, 'Many Drums! pity me, for the sake of your youngest child,' and no harm will come to you. (This prayer is often used by the Blackfeet during dangerous storms.) As soon as my father returned, he added to his Medicine Bundle a Pipe similar to the one shown to him by the Thunder-bird."

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 427]

  

CHAPTER XXXII

  

EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN

Death of his father.--The sacred Pipe and leadership of the tribe were handed down to him.--He chose instead to become a medicine man.--His wise and benevolent manner of dealing with the people.--Eagle-catching his means of livelihood.--His method of trapping eagles.--The Spirit of the Mountain gives him a Medicine Robe.--His reasons for not using the sweat lodge.--He tells the names of his children and of their remarkable deliverance from a dangerous flood.

"MY father was not killed in battle, nor did he die of sickness, but of old age. When he knew the end was near, he called me to him, and gave into my care the Pipe of the Thunder Maker, explaining that it was a Long Time Pipe, and should not be buried with him. I still have it in my possession, and smoke it only upon important occasions. He also gave me a large silver medal, which he wore as head chief, saying, 'My son, it is yours now. Take with it also my wisdom and power, and lead our people straight.' After my father's death, I came north to live. I became deeply interested in the mysteries of the medicines, which I have continued to study diligently. I was formerly called A-pe-so-mucca (Running Wolf), and am still known to many by that name. But, afterwards, when I became the leader of their Sun-dance, and their instructor in the worship of the Sun, the North Piegans called me Natosin Nepe-e (Brings-down-the-Sun, literally the Sun Bringer). I have always tried to give my people

[p. 428]

sound advice, and to lead them in the right trail. Whenever they gather in assemblies, I go among them to guide them straight. At horse races, I endeavour to keep them from fighting, and, if they quarrel, I reason with them, and try to persuade them to hold the matter over until another day. I advise the women to be obedient to their men, and am continually impressing upon the young, to keep their hearts kind and not to be wild or quarrelsome. Some of our leaders become angry with the people, when they go wrong. I believe you have more power with men, if you are patient with them, when they wander from the right trail.

"For many years I have helped to support my family by catching eagles. I dispose of most of the feathers among the South Piegans, who use them for their headdresses and medicine bonnets. It is very difficult and exhausting work to take eagles alive. When I was a young man my father taught me his methods, for he was a skilled eagle-catcher. I camp in an unfrequented place, near the foot of the mountains. After digging a deep hole, so that I can stand erect inside, I kill a coyote and stretch the tanned hide on sticks, with raw meat laid along the sides, as if it had just been cut open. Long before sunrise, I enter the hole, covering the top over with branches and leaves. The coyote bait lies on top, just over my head. I must stand in the hole all day, not able to eat, nor drink, nor even smoke, lest the eagles scent the smoke. All day long I chant the coyote medicine song,

"'I want the eagles to eat my body.'

[paragraph continues] The power of this song draws the eagles towards the bait. First I see the Mami-as-ich-imi (Long Tails or Magpies) coming. They walk around chattering

[p. 429]

and talking, saying to each other over and over again, 'Magpies go on ahead, and hang your sack upon a tree.' An eagle sees the Longtails feasting, and swoops down beside the bait. He first walks suspiciously around and around the coyote, and at last steps over upon the branches and begins to eat. I then push my hands through the branches and, grasping him firmly, first by one leg and then by the other, I pull him quickly down into the hole, and kill him by breaking his back with my foot. In this way the wings fall to either side, and the feathers are uninjured. After sunset, my wife comes to the pit with food. She uncovers the top and helps me out. I desire most to catch the Peta (Golden Eagle), because its feathers are the most valuable. Its head and breast are light brown, with white beneath the wings. Its tail feathers are also white, with black tips. We never use Black Eagles, and White Heads (Bald Eagles) are very scarce, as well as dangerous. They are so strong, they have almost lifted me out of the pit.

"In former days, when grizzly bears were plentiful, eagle-catching was very dangerous. I remember one Indian, who was in his pit, when a big grizzly came to the bait, and started to drag it away. The man foolishly held to his bait, and the bear turned to investigate. He scratched off the branches and, seeing a man in the hole, dragged him out and, in a rage, tore him to pieces. His friends found nothing but his bones. There are now so many white men in the country, it is difficult to find a locality wild enough to catch eagles. At present I go to a place on the other side of the Porcupine Mountains."

Pointing towards the north, Brings-down-the-Sun said: "You can see from here the highest peak of the Porcupine Mountains. It is surrounded by a thick

[p. 430]

forest and no trail leads to that peak. Its summit is precipitous and covered with scrub pines. You will notice that our most severe storms come from the direction of that peak. When my eldest son died, I felt his loss so deeply, that I climbed to its summit and lay there fasting, for ten days and ten nights. During that time I had a dream, in which the Spirit of the Mountain appeared and gave me a Medicine Robe [*1] with a song. He instructed me how to make the robe, and said that, if I used it in doctoring, or when I appeared before the assembled people, I would be endowed with wisdom and supernatural power.

"The Spirit of the Mountain warned me never to enter the sweat lodge at the Sun-dance, lest my children should die; nor to use it even for purification, but to wash daily in the river instead, and afterwards, to purify my body in the sweet smoke of the incense. Since that time, I have bathed in the river every morning, even in winter, when it is necessary to break the ice. When I am in the water, I call to my sons to come in, that they might be clean. After the men have finished bathing, the women also go into the water. I believe that, by keeping the body clean, and by using the sweet smoke as incense for purification, sickness may be warded off. I am convinced that the reason O-mis-tai-po-kah and Running Crane lost so many members of their families by death was because of their continued use of the sweat lodge. O-mis-tai-po-kah lost a wife, three sons and a daughter, while Running Crane lost one of his wives and four children."

Brings-down-the-Sun remained in our camp for the evening meal. He took his seat at a little distance from the rest, where he waited in dignified silence,

[p. 431]

apparently paying no heed to the ceaseless chatter of the women, who were busily engaged around the outside fire preparing the food. Instead of allowing his plate to rest upon the bare ground like the rest, he produced a clean piece of paper, which he smoothed out and then placed his plate upon it. While the women were removing the food, he filled his everyday pipe for a smoke. When we were again seated around the fire, Menake was surrounded by a group of children, eagerly watching her making toy lodges out of leaves of the balsam poplar. She formed the two ears by cutting out the top of the leaf, then, winding it around her fingers, in the form of a lodge, she fastened it together by means of an inserted twig. After making several of these remarkable little lodges, she grouped them into a miniature camp, to the great delight of the children. Nitana was making whistles for Yellow Mink and Walks Underneath, by means of two pieces of cottonwood bark, with a leaf between. Long Hair, seated near Brings-down-the-Sun, held in her arms Feather Woman, her granddaughter, but a few months old, of whom she was evidently very proud. Its little buckskin dress was trimmed across the front with many kernels of corn. Long Hair was pleased at my notice of the baby, for she held it out towards me, and said to it, "Show A-pe-ech-eken how the good children look." I was surprised at seeing the little thing turn its diminutive face towards me and wrinkle up its nose (one of her baby tricks).

When I inquired of Brings-down-the-Sun as to the number of his children, [*1] he said, "There are nine living, four sons and five daughters; Running Wolf (named as directed by the Medicine Wolf), Iron Shirt (after his

[p. 432]

grandfather), Double Walker and Three Eagles. The daughters are: Long Hair (because of her unusually long hair when a young girl), Turns-back-the-whole-herd-alone (I once performed this feat in buffalo days), Whistling-all-night (she was born in January, the time the jack rabbit, like the bull elk, whistles at night, when calling his mate), also Good Kill and Double-Gun-Woman." At this point, Bird joined the circle, and Menake, pointing towards me, said, to frighten her, "Look out! Did you not notice your son-in-law sitting there?" The old woman turned to run, but, when she saw it was only intended as a joke, she laughed, saying, "A-pe-ech-eken, you should give me a good horse, even if you are not my son-in-law, because you gave me such a fright."

Brings-down-the-Sun, who had been smoking in silence, said: "This is the third summer since the heavy rain. It came during the moon of High Water, (June). At that time, I was in the country of the South Piegans, disposing of eagle feathers, and visiting my daughter Pretty Blanket. I also intended to remain for the Sun-dance, but a messenger came from the north with the news that the Crow Lodge River had overflowed its banks and my camp was washed away. I hastened back and found, that there had been such a storm that, in a few hours, the river came out from its banks. My son, Running Wolf, was here with our family. The river rose so suddenly in the night that, before they could realise it, they were upon an island, cut off from the mainland by the swift current. The water continued to rise so fast, that Running Wolf made the women and children climb into a big tree. There was no other way of escape. When daylight came, and the women felt the swaying of the tree, and

[p. 433]

could see the swift current, they became so dizzy and frightened, that Running Wolf had to tie them to the branches. They saw the carcasses of many horses and cattle floating past. One of my daughters had a young baby, which she held all the time in her arms. They were two days and two nights in the tree without food. When they were finally rescued, they were exhausted from exposure and lack of food."

Footnotes

^430:1 See [*Appendix].

^431:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 434]

  

CHAPTER XXXIII

  

THE OLD NORTH TRAIL

Brings-down-the-Sun comments on his boyhood name Running Wolf.--He tells about the Old North Trail formerly used by Indian tribes.--The Lone Pine Tree land-mark.--A former Blackfoot expedition into Mexico along the Old North Trail.--It returns with the Dancing Pipe.--Blackfeet names for rivers, mountains and other land-marks along the trail.

THE long silence following Brings-down-the-Sun's talk was broken by the mournful, long-drawn howl of a wolf from among the hills to the north. The sound suggested another topic to the old chief and he continued, "We consider the wolf a friend of man, and do not believe it is right to shoot him. We have a saying, 'the gun that fires upon a coyote or wolf will never again shoot straight.' Did you ever know of a wolf that did not wander? They never stay long in one locality. They raise their young in one place and then go to another. They are continually roving over the country and are always on the move. My father named me Running Wolf, and I believe that, by nature, I am like the wolf, for I love to roam over the prairies and among the mountains. I cannot stay still very long, I, too, have always kept moving.

"There is a well known trail we call the Old North Trail. It runs north and south along the Rocky Mountains. No one knows how long it has been used by the Indians. My father told me it originated in the

[p. 435]

migration of a great tribe of Indians from the distant north to the south, and all the tribes have, ever since, continued to follow in their tracks. The Old North Trail is now becoming overgrown with moss and grass, but it was worn so deeply, by many generations of travellers, that the travois tracks and horse trail are still plainly visible.

"On Crow Lodge River, just across from our present camp, a lone pine tree once stood. It was a land-mark for people travelling north and south along the Old North Trail, because it stood upon the plain and could be seen from a long distance. Finally the Lone Tree fell, but two children took its place. They have grown large and now they mark the former course of the North Trail. The Indians still speak of the spot as the Lone Tree. In many places the white man's roads and towns have obliterated the Old Trail. It forked where the city of Calgary now stands. The right fork ran north into the Barren Lands as far as people live. The main trail ran south along the eastern side of the Rockies, at a uniform distance from the mountains, keeping clear of the forest, and outside of the foothills. It ran close to where the city of Helena now stands, and extended south into the country, inhabited by a people with dark skins, and long hair falling over their faces (Mexico). In former times, when the Indian tribes were at war, there was constant fighting along the North Trail. In those days, Indians, who wanted to travel in peace, avoided it and took to the forest. My father once told me of an expedition from the Blackfeet, that went south by the Old Trail, to visit the people with dark skins. Elk Tongue and his wife, Natoya, were of this expedition, also Arrow Top and Pemmican, who was a boy of twelve

[p. 436]

at that time. He died only a few years ago at the age of ninety-five. They were absent four years. It took them twelve moons of steady travelling to reach the country of the dark skinned people, and eighteen moons to come north again. They returned by a longer route through the 'High Trees' or Bitter Root country, where they could travel without danger of being seen. They feared going along the North Trail because it was frequented by their enemies, the Crows, Sioux, and Cheyennes. Elk Tongue brought back the Dancing Pipe. He bought it nearly one hundred years ago and it was then very old. The South Man, who gave it to him, warned him to use it only upon important occasions, for the fulfilment of a vow, or the recovery of the sick. Whenever anyone was starting on a war, or hunting expedition, a safe return could be secured by vowing to give a feast to the Dancing Pipe. In the Medicine Bundle that went with it, were the skins of animals and birds. The otter and lynx were the largest, the otter belonging to the head man and the lynx to the woman. The South Man also told Elk Tongue that, it had been their custom, in giving the Pipe ceremonial, to cut open a badger, and to place inside a preparation mixed with paint. Everyone who attended the ceremonial looked into the badger, trying to see themselves. If their reflection looked black, or wrinkled, it was a sign of death, but, if they looked gray haired, they would live to be old. The South Man advised discontinuing this part of the ceremonial, saying it was not well to try to read the future, because people were made unhappy by it. When the Pipe was unrolled, it was shaken, and, if any of the skins, or feathers fell, misfortune would be sure to overtake the man who made the vow.

[p. 437]

"I have followed the Old North Trail so often, that I know every mountain stream and river far to the south, as well as towards the distant north. We call the Three Tetons in  south (Wyoming), Teat Buttes, because of their shape. North of the Mud Head Creek is a stream along whose banks many berries grow, so we named it Sweet Creek. North of it is another stream we call the Ghost Piskun [*1] Creek. On its shore is a miniature cliff about three feet high. At the base of the cliff are small circles of stones, similar to those made by the Indians for their lodge fires. It looks to us as if, at one time, there must have been a miniature Indian camp there. If you visit the place early in the morning you will see many mice. We believe these mice are the ghosts of buffalo, which take the forms of mice, whenever people look at them. North of the Ghost Piskun Creek is a place called 'Where-war-parties-meet.' Many years ago, a Blackfoot war party was travelling north by the Old Trail. The chief's name was Koko-nut-stoke (Owl), so called because of his large eyes. One day, when Owl was in advance of the others, he discovered a war party of Crow Indians coming south by the same trail. Owl ambushed himself in a thicket. The Crow war party had secured plunder and the chief was in advance, carrying in his arms the sacrifices he was about to make to the Sun. He happened to enter the same thicket and was preparing to fasten his gifts in a tree when Owl killed him and took his scalp. Ever since that time we have called that spot, and the stream near by, 'Where-war-parties-meet.' Farther south is Mosquito Creek. Anyone who is foolish enough to camp there, will be almost eaten up by mosquitoes. Just beyond is low

[p. 438]

ground which we have named 'Big Timber,' because trees grow very large there. Birch Creek was named because of the groves of birches along its shores; Badger Creek, on account of the many large badgers seen along its banks; Black Tail, because of the quantity of black tail deer in the thickets near that stream. Mud Head River was named, because of the

Click to enlarge
PISKUN NEAR TWO MEDICINE RIVER.
 (Top of cliff.)

piskun we had there. When we ran a herd of buffalo over the cliff they fell into the mud which was so soft it covered their heads. Two Medicine River was named, because we once had a double piskun there. We drove the buffalo over one, or the other, as we chose. Lee's Creek is called 'Banks-roped-together' by our people. An Indian when on a hunt killed a buffalo there, marking the spot by cutting the raw hide into strips

[p. 439]

and making them into a rope, which he fastened to stakes on both sides of the stream. When the Indians saw the rope they named the place 'Where-the-banks-are-roped-together.' The stream finally became known by that name.

"In the mountains, at the head of the Green Banks (St. Mary's), are two lakes. We cal] them the In Lakes,

Click to enlarge
PISKUN NEAR TWO MEDICINE RIVER.
 (Base of cliff.)

because they run so far into the mountains. At the head of Swift Current River, is another lake, surrounded by thick forests and high peaks, and with falls at the outlet. We have named it Moose Lake. When some of our people were once hunting there, a moose dived into the lake and escaped.

"At the place, where the Kootenai River flows out of the mountains, there is an old trail leading past some

[p. 440]

large rocks, which we have named the Rockies. It leads up to a pass over the Big Mountains (Rocky Mountains), which a large war party named Bad Luck Fat Pass. When they were crossing the summit, they were caught in a storm so severe, that they were forced to camp there. The snow was very deep and they spent their time hunting. They killed so many elk and moose, that it was very difficult to pack out the fat meat and hides, so they called the pass, 'Bad Luck Fat.'

"There is a high peak in the Rockies, where this river rises, which we call Crow Lodge Mountain, because it is the home for enormous flocks of crows. They gather every evening, and roost in the trees on the mountain side during the night, but they always leave in the morning. An Indian secured there the dream for the Crow Lodge, and we have given the river the same name, because he made the lodge in a ravine, not far from this camp. A short distance up the river, is a high cliff, called the Women's Piskun. It is the place where a large band of women once camped. They supported themselves by running buffalo and antelope over their piskun. We have a tradition, that men and women have not always lived separated into families, but ran in bands like the animals. Napi (Old Man) is said to have started our living together in families."

Footnotes

^437:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 441]

  

CHAPTER XXXIV

  

BLACKFEET SOCIETIES

A practical joke at my expense.--Irregularity in time of meals.--How women bake camass roots.--Brings-down-the-Sun receives present of medicinal plants. He asks for my family history.--In return he gives the origins of the Blackfeet Societies.--The Sinopaix (Kit-foxes) and their society dance.--He describes Tsin-ksi-six (Mosquitoes).--Kuko (Doves).--Muto-ka-iks (Buffaloes).--Knut-some-taix (Mad Dogs).

OUR camping ground had once been the old bed of the river and was covered with a plentiful deposit of loamy sand. When the grass and undergrowth were tramped down, the ground became very dusty and the fine sand, carried by the wind, penetrated our food and everything we had. The South Piegans noticed that I was frequently scratching myself and seized the opportunity for a joke at my expense. Menake said to Onesta, so that I could overhear, "During the past few days I have been feeling itchy. I believe we have become lousy from sitting on the blankets and robes of the North Piegans." Onesta replied without a smile, "I have had the same trouble, but got rid of them by bathing in the river." I had had my own suspicions of the cause of our discomfort, but, after this conversation, I imagined that lice were crawling in my hair and all over my body. To the great amusement of the entire camp, I hastened to the river, where I soon discovered that sand was the real cause of my affliction. Onesta told me afterwards,

[p. 442]

that few of the Blackfeet were troubled with vermin, but, that it was a common thing among the Crees, Gros Ventres and Assinniboines. The Blackfeet say that this fact made them feel uncomfortable, even to go near the Crees, or Assinniboines and because of it they disliked to fight with them, or use their spoils.

It is the custom of the Blackfeet to cook but two meals a day; one in the morning and the other late in the afternoon. The hours are very irregular, meal time coming when the women happened to feel hungry, or thought it convenient. When we were travelling, the morning meal was eaten very early, generally before sunrise. But, in a permanent camp, it sometimes did not come until noon, and if the women were not in the mood for cooking, they omitted it entirely. The evening meal varied from five o'clock until nine. Sometimes almost a day elapsed between meals, and I became so ravenously hungry that I resorted to the dried meats and pemmican, which the Indians ate at all times of the day, and which I finally acquired a liking for.

For baking the Mississa (camass roots, Camassia esculenta), Menake and Nitana dug a hole about three feet deep. They placed hot stones at the bottom of the hole, covering them over with long grass and leaves of the A-pono-kauki (Paper Leaves), Balsamorrhiza sagittata. The camass roots were placed in layers, with the grass and leaves between each layer. When the hole was filled, it was covered over and a fire built on the top. In this way the camass was thoroughly baked. Menake said that it required two days and two nights to prepare it properly for food. In former times, when the women were baking camass, it was contrary to their custom for men to come near the place. The

[p. 443]

camass roots, that Menake dug, were in size like a small potato, and had a very delicate sweet flavour. The women generally secured them in the mountains, where they grew in great abundance. It was at its best for eating after the blossoms had fallen.

Menake chose a day, when Brings-down-the-Sun came alone to our camp, to present him with a supply of roots she had brought from the south. The old chief was a doctor with much skill and reputation. Very few of her medicinal plants grew along the Crow Lodge River, so that Menake's collection was of great value to him. She first handed him a large plant called Eksisoke (Sharp Vine) by the Blackfeet (Bear Grass or Yucca glauca), which she had found when travelling along Sun River, 250 miles to the south. Brings-down-the-Sun was greatly pleased by this rare plant and, as he took it, uttered a prayer and chanted a sacred song. He said to Menake, "I am glad to get the Sharp Vine, because of its great healing properties. I prefer it above all other remedies for fractures, or sprains. I first grind the root up and then put it in boiling water. For a broken leg, or arm, or sprain I use it with thin willow sticks for splints and then hold the part in the rising steam to allay the inflammation."

Brings-down-the-Sun having carefully stowed the precious gift of roots in his medicine sack, came over to the big log and sat down by my side. He smoked awhile in silence, as was his custom, and then addressed me,

"From the time when you first came into my camp, I have been doing all the talking, while you have listened. I do not as yet know very much about you, but I want to know you better, and to come closer to you, because you are now my son. I now ask that you will talk to me. Tell me your age, and in what moon you were born, the ages of your father and mother, and what the country is

[p. 444]

like where you live." When I told him my age and that of my father and mother, he looked at me in surprise, saying, "You look like a mere youth, and have the voice of a young man. You were born in the year of the last great scourge of small-pox (Apicksosin, Great Sickness, 1869-70). It came during the winter, while you arrived in the spring. I have recorded three of these Great Sicknesses. The first was sixty years ago (1845). Twelve years intervened until the second (in 1857). The third and last came during the winter of 1870. I hope there will never be another. Your father was born in the year when Big Lodge, head chief of the Blackfeet, was killed. Your mother during the hard winter, when the snows lay so deep that many of our horses perished."

He inquired if I lived beyond the Big River (Mississippi). I endeavoured in my reply to use words and ideas he could easily understand, and said,

"My home (Pittsburg) is far away toward the rising Sun. It is beyond the Big River and not far from the Great Water (Ocean). There are many people where I live, more than the leaves on these trees. The sun seldom shines clearly there, for it is hidden by heavy clouds of smoke, like that from a great prairie fire. Great fire-places light up the night skies like a burning forest. We make the trails for the Iron Horse (Locomotive) in these fires. When the iron trails come first from the fires, they are red hot and glide around like huge snakes. The houses are built of stone, and some of them are so large and high they look like the peaks of the Rocky Mountains. My father lives down there now, and his heart feels warm towards the Indians."

During my talk, Brings-down-the-Sun sat, closely watching my every movement. My remarks brought forth exclamations of surprise and wonder, and, when I had finished, he said simply, "I would like to go to your home, that I may meet that new friend of mine, your father. If you can arrange it for me, I will go back with you." Then slowly shaking his head he said, "The white man does very wonderful things and does not seem to realise it." He sat smoking and musing, until I broke the long silence by asking that he would tell me about their different societies, or brotherhoods, which he described as follows:

[p. 445]

  

SINOPAIX (SOCIETY OF KIT-FOXES).

"None of the dances of this society have been given in the last twenty-five years. It was one of our old societies and had this origin: The Blackfeet once went on a war expedition against the Snakes. When they reached the Yellowstone country a man named Elk Tongue decided to turn back. After he left the expedition, he came to a prairie-dog village, where he saw two Kit-foxes run ahead of him for a short distance and then disappear in a hole. He sat down near the hole to rest, for he was very tired after his long, hard journey, and fell asleep. He dreamed that a Kit-fox came out and invited him to go inside. In his vision, he followed the little fox into a den, where he found the chief of the foxes with his mate seated beside him. They were kind to him, and finally explained to him their dance, and showed him how to dress for it. They instructed him to get a fox-skin and to carry it with him as his medicine, always wearing it on his back. On the right side of their lodge, Elk Tongue saw two spears covered with other skins and fringed with feathers, while on the left side, were two spears decorated with white swan's down, and fringed with bells and plumes, and bent into a circle at one end. Before Elk Tongue left the hole, the Fox Chief said: 'When you return to your people, gather some of the young men together, and form the society of Kit-foxes. Instruct the members to dress and to dance, just as we have taught you. If you will do these things; and not kill any more foxes, all of your members will have good fortune and long life. If any of you should harm a fox, it will surely bring misfortune.' When Elk Tongue

[p. 446]

returned to camp, he did just as the fox had directed. He wore the fox-skin for his medicine, and founded the society of Kit-foxes. He was the only one, who could explain the mysteries of the society. He directed the other members, but they did not understand the significance of the dances. When he died, the Fox-skin Medicine and the story were given to his son. From that time, they have been handed down from father to son. The Blackfeet used to trap foxes, but after this society was formed, the members did not allow their children to injure a fox."

  

DANCE OF THE SINOPAIX.

"When the Kit-foxes gave a dance, they opened up two large lodges and made them into one. For four days and four nights they sat inside, painting and dressing themselves, singing and making ready for the dance, only appearing at night, outside of the dance lodge. On the fifth day they marched through the camp. Their chief wore the fox-skin, with the head made into the form of a hood. The nose was in front, the ears on the top and the skin, with hells fastened to the tail, hung down his back. The face of the leader was painted green to look as frightful as possible and inspire the spectators with awe. The second in rank, called the White-Circle-Man, carried a spear, with one end bent into a circle. It had bells attached, and was covered with white swan's down and white plumes. The third held a spear of the same shape, covered with white feathers, but fringed with black and red plumes. The rest of the members carried pointed spears, covered with otter skins ornamented with feathers and bells.

[p. 447]

[paragraph continues] The Kit-foxes all painted their faces. They wore, for garters around their legs, wide bands of otter skins, with bells attached, and an eagle feather, decorated with red, green and yellow, in their back hair. White weasel-skins were also attached to either end of this feather, while a strip of otter skin was suspended from its centre. When they marched through the camp they formed in the shape of a fox head. The chief went first standing for the nose. Behind him were the second and third men for the eyes, and then came the rest of the society in a group, all together representing a fox head. The two second-men, as the eyes, watched the chief, who was the nose, or leader, and acted just as he directed, the rest following after. When they were ready to dance, they sat in lines. In the first line were the regular members. If there were men withdrawing from the society, or giving their spears to new candidates, they sat in the second line, while the wives of the members sat behind. As soon as the drum began, the chief started the dance. The two circle men with the white spears followed. After them came the other members, with otter spears. They danced in pairs,--the same way that Kit-foxes run together. They gave short regular jumps with their feet close together, imitating the movements of a fox, barking and moving about, first in one direction, and then in another, just as a fox does. The two second-men (eyes) danced between the two lines, barking and swinging their spears. They did not move in straight lines, because the fox never goes straight. His tail always seems to guide him. When the white-circle men shouted, 'That is enough,' the dance ceased and they all seated themselves. After a short rest the dance was continued."

[p. 448]

  

TSIN-KSI-SIX (SOCIETY OF MOSQUITOES)

"There was once a man who was thickly surrounded by mosquitoes. They stung him so badly that he wondered if they could kill him. Removing his clothes he lay upon the ground. The mosquitoes quickly covered him and bit him so severely, that he lost all feeling. In this condition, he dreamed that a mosquito came to him saying, 'because you have been generous and have allowed us to drink our fill from your body, we give you the Mosquito society and dance, and we make you its chief.' The Mosquito society wore bracelets of eagle-claws, and also buffalo robes, with the hair-side out. They painted themselves, and tied a plume in their back hair. When they danced, they sat in a circle, with the drummers in the centre. They jumped up, waving their robes like wings, dancing in a stooping posture, hovering close together and pushing each other, imitating the movements of mosquitoes. Whenever they were making ready to light, or sit down, they made a singing noise, like a mosquito. They danced four times. After the fourth dance, they scattered throughout the camp, some going on foot, others on horseback. Anyone whom they met, whether a chief, or Medicine Pipe man, they attacked and scratched with their eagle-claws. They were always specially delighted to catch a man without clothes. If anyone resisted, or ran away, the Mosquitoes followed, even into the lodges, just as real mosquitoes do, and scratched them hard. But, if a man bared himself and offered himself freely, they did not wound him, but passed on. If they caught a woman on the way to the river for water, and she held forth her hand saying, 'It is yours, fill yourselves up,' they did not hurt her, because, if

[p. 449]

you let a mosquito alone, until he fills up, the sting does not pain. If the Mosquitoes came to a lodge and decided to enter, one of their members, who had at some time entered the lodge of an enemy, opened the door, saying, 'I come in, because I was brave and once entered the lodge of an enemy.' If the women, and even the children, endeavoured to hide under the robes, or behind the lodge lining, he scratched them with his eagle-claws. If they resisted, the entire society followed, and all scratched them, until they yielded."

  

KUKO (SOCIETY OF DOVES).

"This society was originated in recent years among the South Piegans. When an expedition of our people went to visit them, they brought it back and started the dance over here. The Bloods afterwards borrowed it from us. There is a high hill, just north of here, where the society once went to feast and prepare for their dance. It was then named Dove Hill. The society originated in the dream of an old man named Change Camp. When the doves gave him the dance, they said to him: 'Gather together a band of people of all sizes, both young men and boys, that have no power in the tribe. If they band together, they will become strong and every one else will fear them.' They carried bows and arrows made of sarvis berry wood. Their quivers were made of the yellow skins of buffalo calves. They stripped and painted their bodies for their dance. The doves did many mean and cowardly acts and had no regard for anyone. They molested no one who obeyed their orders. If a prominent chief did not do as they said, they continually annoyed him. They played many mean tricks. In

[p. 450]

those days we did not have buckets, but used buffalo paunches for water bags. Sometimes the Doves lay in ambush, and, when they saw a woman returning from the river with her water bags filled, they shot their arrows into them and let the water run out. If she became angry, or if they could not pierce the skin, they sometimes destroyed the bags. If a woman was starting off to pick berries, and they ordered her not to go, and she disobeyed, they awaited her return and spilled her berries, or they took long willow sticks and beat the berries from the bushes where she was picking. They always took one woman into their society, who liked to dig roots and to pick berries, so that they could have an abundance for their feasts. She always followed them through the camp, carrying a bow and arrow just as they did, calling out, 'the Doves are now out. It will be better for everyone to stay inside.' All feared them. The head chief, and even the powerful societies, overlooked their mean actions and excused them, saying: 'the Doves are young and foolish and will go to any extreme to have their own way. It is dangerous to oppose them.'''

  

MUTO KA-IKS (BUFFALO SOCIETY).

"The Muto-ka-iks is composed entirely of women. Their dances are continued even to this day among the Bloods. A large lodge is erected, having a centre pole, to which is tied the sacred 'root digger,' as a cross piece. The women assemble clothed in the costumes of their society. They wear robes and headdresses of soft tanned buckskin. There are four leaders, called 'Snake Medicine Hats,' with bonnets of eagle feathers. One of these, 'Lodge-Pole' by

[p. 451]

name, is chief. Four more, wearing bonnets of hawk feathers, are called 'Hawk Medicine Hats.' Two others, called 'Old Bulls,' wear head-dresses with red plumes fastened to the horns. Old women and young children come before them and are painted on their foreheads with a red cross, symbolical of the 'centre pole' and the 'root digger.' A young boy, son of a prominent chief, is chosen to take part in the ceremonies. He is elaborately dressed and rides a horse to the lodge of the society, followed by his father and mother bearing presents in return for the honour conferred upon their son. When the dancers come forth from their main lodge, they walk slowly to a lake, or stream, like a herd of buffalo going to water. They lie down upon the shore and wait for the two bulls which follow slowly. When they too lie down, the boy rides to windward with a lighted buffalo chip, allowing the smoke to blow towards the dancers. They rise slowly to their feet. After sniffing at the wind and tossing their heads, in imitation of buffaloes, they start towards their lodge. The boy on horseback follows, imitating the call formerly used by Indians in driving buffalo. When the women reach the lodge, they run about the centre pole, until they fall exhausted. The old bulls do not join in the stampede, but walk slowly and deliberately, with heavy tread and bellowing, sometimes lowering their heads and running at each other like bulls fighting. Finally, they too enter the lodge and join those about the pole. The actions of the dancers, after smelling the smoke, are in imitation of buffalo driven by Indians to a piskun. When they enter the lodge, they are supposed to be driven over a cliff. When they run around the pole, their

[p. 452]

motions are in imitation of buffalo wounded by their fall, and caught in the corral at the bottom of the cliff."

  

KNUT-SOME-TAIX SOCIETY OF MAD DOGS).

"This society is sometimes also called Crazy Dogs. Two prominent Gros Ventre chiefs, Big Road and

Click to enlarge
MAD DOG SOCIETY WAITING FOR EXPECTED FEAST.

Wolf-skin-around-his-neck, who killed enemies in battle, by riding over them with their horses, were the founders. The society of Mad Dogs was secured from the Gros Ventres by the Blackfeet, through O-mis-tai-po-kah. One of the most influential of the Gros Ventre societies had refused to accept Wolf-skin-around-his-neck as a member, and he was so angry with them that, in retaliation, he disclosed the secrets and

[p. 453]

mysteries of the Mad Dog society, of which he was one of the founders, to O-mis-tai-po-kah, head chief of the Blackfeet. Many members of the Mad Dog society are living to-day, and they still give their dances in our big camps. They dress and prepare for their ceremonial together, in a large lodge. Before beginning to dance, they notify the camp of their readiness, by first marching around and singing their society song. There

Click to enlarge
MAD DOGS MARCHING THROUGH CAMP.

are two head men, or leaders on horseback, who are said to be braver than the other members, and represent the two Gros Ventre chiefs, founders of the society, The two leaders must see that the big dance lodge is erected, and their wives must cook food for the society feast. While marching through camp, the Mad Dogs stop beside the lodges of chiefs, who are under obligations to them for favours, and dance until they are given a feast, or suitable reward. If there should be

[p. 454]

no response, the society seat themselves in a circle and wait, attracting the attention of the entire camp, by drumming and by singing their songs. The mounted leaders move slowly along the line, riding in opposite directions, and making the others rise when it is time to begin the dance. The Mad Dogs formerly had great power, because they were composed of chiefs who had earned a reputation for bravery and everyone feared to act in opposition to them."

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 455]

  

CHAPTER XXXV

  

THE MUTSAIX (SOCIETY OF BRAVE DOGS)

Brings-down-the-Sun tells of its origin.--Weapons and characteristic dress of members.--Their society dance and customs.--A courageous mother saves the life of a Brave Dog.--Usefulness of Blackfeet Societies.

"I MYSELF am a member of the Mutsaix, which has the reputation of being the most exacting of the Blackfeet societies. We have even been known to kill men, who refused to obey our orders. It was started by Red Blanket and his wife, Generous Woman, who died of old age many years ago. She became so old, that she lost all. of her teeth, and, before she died, it became necessary to move her everywhere on a travois. Their graves are close together on the summit of a high ridge, near the entrance to Cutbank Canyon, overlooking the river and the plains.

"When the Blackfeet were once travelling across the plains, Generous Woman told her husband, Red Blanket, that one of her dogs was missing with a loaded travois. Red Blanket turned back, but could find no trace of the dog. When he came to their former camping ground, it was dark and he lay down to sleep. During the night he heard a strange voice calling, 'Lone Chief invites you to prepare for the dance.' Then a drum began to beat and Red Blanket, supposing he was in a camp, looked around, but saw no lodges, nor people;

[p. 456]

Click to enlarge
THREE LODGES OF BRAVE DOG SOCIETY NEAR THE CENTRE OF ENCAMPMENT.

[p. 457]

there was no sign of life,--nothing but the barren plains. When he lay down, he again heard a drum and the same voice calling, saying: 'Lone Chief invites you to come and eat, for he is ready to give a dance.' This time Red Blanket jumped to his feet, thinking he must be dreaming. While walking around the old camp, he found some dried meat that had been left behind. A

Click to enlarge
INTERIOR OF SOCIETY LODGE SHOWING MANNER OF HANGING CLOTHES AND HEADDRESSES.

female dog ran out from a thicket of willows and stood gazing at him. He supposed that this dog must have been doing the mysterious talking, so he threw her the meat, which she ate and immediately returned to the bushes. When Red Blanket lay down again, he went to sleep and the spirit of his lost dog came to him, saying: 'I am giving this dance here to-night, in behalf of a poor mother and her six little boy dogs.

[p. 458]

[paragraph continues] They were left behind, when the camp moved, and I am. trying to help them. If you feel sorry for this unfortunate mother and her children, carry them with you and save their lives. We will show you our dance and, when you return again to camp, you can make use of it to found a dog society.' In his dream, Red Blanket followed the dog spirit into the bushes, where he saw

Click to enlarge
BUCKSKIN SHIRT OF MAD DOG SOCIETY.
 (Decorated with beads and trimmed with ermine.)

many dogs dancing. One of their chiefs wore a long black robe, dragging behind like a tail, while others wore decorations and streamers, trailing behind for tails. In the morning, when Red Blanket awoke, he found the dog family among the willows. He took up the pups and, placing them in his shirt, carried them back to camp, followed by their mother. He then started the

[p. 459]

society of Brave Dogs, taking members as the dog spirit had instructed, and teaching them to dance, just as he had seen the dogs dancing. Red Blanket, as the founder, wore a small rattle tied through the flesh of his wrist, the medicine of the Brave Dogs. He first took in three prominent chiefs, Many Eagles, Lost Feather,

Click to enlarge
BUCKSKIN LEGGING.

and Lone Chief. They together selected other members. We formerly gave our dance, when the camp was to be moved. We first marched around, beating drums, and singing our society songs, and then we went to the centre of the camp, where we lay on the ground, curled up like dogs sleeping. We wore no clothes, but painted our bodies all over. Our moccasins were decorated with

[p. 460]

porcupine quills, but had no ankle-tops. Each man carried a knife, bow and a big quiver filled with arrows. Next morning, when camp was broken, we went around the deserted circle, and ate food that was left behind, just like dogs. Then we followed the tribe slowly, always coming in after the people had their lodges pitched and were settled. We first went to the head chief's tipi, where we danced four times, and then we

Click to enlarge
BUCKSKIN SHIRT FRINGED AND DECORATED WITH COLOURED PORCUPINE QUILLS.

went to the centre of camp, and curled upon the ground to sleep. We did this for four successive nights. On the fourth morning, all of the Brave Dogs returned to their own lodges, where we painted, dressed in our best clothes, ate good food, and acted like dogs no more, until our next dance. While we were giving our dance, we stole anything we wanted, even food, while it was cooking, just as dogs do. Sometimes we danced at the lodges of prosperous chiefs. If they gave us clothes as presents, we could not wear them until after our dance,

[p. 461]

so we gave them meanwhile into the care of our wives.

"We placed stones in a circle, near the centre or a new camp ground, where we intended pitching our big dancing tipi. We always entered it early in the morning of the day of our dance. We carried long sticks as spears, with the bark peeled off and wrapped with red and black cloth. Feathers, with small bells attached, were fastened at intervals along the staff and a spear point tied to the end. The leader was called Wolf-Skin-Man. He wore a coyote skin, with the head in front, and tail hanging behind. To the left of the chief sat two men, with white spears driven into the ground before them. Their bodies were painted white and they had yellow stripes across the nose and eyes. This was their distinguishing mark, because the others had red and black stripes over the nose and eyes. Another man, holding a long willow stick, wore a blanket made from an old lodge top, well browned with smoke. To his blanket were tied many buffalo hoofs, so that they would rattle when he moved. Two other men, called "Water Braves," painted black over their bodies, carried on their backs pieces of old lodges made into small bags, which were filled with back-fat and pemmican. They also carried water-bottles.

"There were two dancers representing Grizzly Bears. They were stripped, wearing only a waist band of bear skin. They always painted as hideously as possible to inspire the spectators with awe. They covered their faces with thick red paint, and made black streaks downward across their eyes. They made their front hair stand erect with thickened paint. They carried bows and arrows with large points, and wore headdresses made from grizzly bears' heads, with the ears on,

[p. 462]

and two buffalo horns added, to make them look like double ears. The bears were separated from the other dancers, lying in a hole for a den, and covering themselves over with robes. Wolf-Skin-Man, the leader, arose first to dance, the entire circle following him. All wore blankets and carried spears. They also held whistles in their mouths, which were blown while dancing. The two white-painted dancers pushed into the circle, driving the others away with their spears. When the black-painted water carriers passed the white dancers in the circle, they stopped. Then the man with the willow stick entered, but he could not sit down, until after the bears had stopped dancing. Every time these five leaders arose, the entire society must dance, with the exception of the bears. They always did as they pleased, lying lazily in their den, covered with robes. When the spectators, eager to see them dance, threw things at them, they pretended four times that they were going to begin. After the fourth feint, they stood up, holding their hands hanging down, just as bears hold their paws. While dancing, they carried their bows and arrows, pretending to aim at the dancers. The Brave Dogs kept going around in a circle, just like a dog looking for a place to lie down. When we had danced four times, the bears held the sharp pointed arrows ready to shoot, but, changing them quickly to two painted arrows without points, they took aim at the crowd, as if to shoot them, but the arrows were sent high over their heads. The rest of us ran off over the prairie, following in the direction the arrows flew, and throwing our moccasins into the air as we ran. Many boys followed us to pick them up, for we wore finely decorated dance-moccasins, but no one was allowed to pick up the two painted arrows, which the Grizzly Bears

[p. 463]

followed to recover. When the bears again returned to our ranks, we formed into line and marched through camp, singing our society song. If any of our members held back, the bears shot at them, or at any people, who might interfere with us. When we had completed the camp circle, we announced the events that would take place on the following day, and then entered our society tipi and feasted. After the feast, we went off on a hunt and killed two buffalo bulls. Each member took two pieces of the meat. One he left in the society tipi, the other he took back to his family. The Brave Dogs always said the opposite of what they really meant. The people understood this custom. If we announced that camp was not to be moved in the morning, we really meant that camp was to be moved. If we returned from a scouting expedition for game, and reported that there were no buffalo in sight, and that there was no need of their sharpening their knives and arrows, they felt glad and started at once to prepare for a hunt, for they knew well that buffalo were near at hand. If one of our members stepped into a hole and fell, when we were running and throwing away our moccasins, he could not get up by himself. He had to lie there and wait, until the society came back, when we lifted him up with our spears.

"A Brave Dog must always face the enemy, no matter how much he feared them. We were once camped near Chief Mountain, when the Pend d'Oreilles attacked us. It happened that one of our number, named 'Nose,' walked out alone and faced the enemy. According to the rules of our society, he could not turn back, unless one of his relatives drove him back like a dog, so he stood there in plain sight, chanting and shaking his rattle. His mother, Red Flower, realising her son's

[p. 464]

danger, ran through camp, imploring someone to drive her son back, but no one was willing. When the Pend d'Oreilles caught sight of him and began shooting, she ran out herself. She had to run in front of him, and strike him four times in the face with a switch, before he could turn. After her fourth blow, he ran for the brush like a dog, and they both escaped in safety. Because of this brave deed, the Piegans changed his name from 'Nose' to 'Brave Dog.'

"Whenever it became necessary to move camp, the Mad Dogs always prepared a feast, and sent a messenger to the head chief, inviting him to eat in our society lodge. After we had finished eating, and were seated, talking and smoking together, he would enquire:

"'My children! Why have you asked me to come here? What is it that you desire?' Our leader would then say, 'It is now the time for the tribe to move. The camp ground has become foul, the water supply is no longer good, and it has become necessary to drive our horses a long distance to secure good grass.' The chief would reply, 'It is too late for us to move to-day. Have your herald announce that we will break camp early to-morrow morning. Instruct everyone to bring in their horses before dark, and to picket them close to their lodges, that we may not be delayed in the morning. We shall start before sunrise.'

"Men did not join the Blackfeet societies for pleasure, but to fulfil vows, generally made because of sickness, or for some remarkable escape from danger. The leading societies ruled the camp, and helped the chiefs to administer public discipline. They protected the tribes' sources of food and secured equal opportunities

[p. 465]

for all. They strictly enforced the rule that private advantages must be surrendered to the public good. Under the exercise of such police regulations [*1] and the enjoyment by all of equal rights and a joint ownership of game and lands, no individual could claim or enjoy special privileges. The roaming herds of buffalo, a gift from the Great Spirit in the Sun, and their chief source of food and materials for shelter, were owned in common. The society-men alone had authority to decide when and how they should be hunted. If an Indian disregarded their authority, and hunted for himself alone, they followed him, forced him to return, and took away his horse and weapons. If his selfish hunting scared away the buffaloes, they punished him severely, destroying his saddle and tipi, stripping him of his clothes, and even whipping him. Sometimes, when several Indians started for a hunt, without their knowledge, the society-men took a position on a hill and waited, watching the direction the hunters had taken. If, in returning, the hunters sought to avoid them, the society-men followed them, and seized their meat and horses.

"If they had given an order against picking berries, and a woman disobeyed, they spilled all she gathered. If a husband and wife fought, and their quarrels disturbed other people, one of the societies would punish them, by cutting their lodge to pieces, or by destroying their saddles and parfleches. The societies compelled everyone to submit to their rule, but they never annoyed or interfered with people who obeyed their commands."

Footnotes

^465:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 466]

  

CHAPTER XXXVI

  

LEGENDS OF THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE GRIZZLY AND THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE WOLF

The North Piegans gather their winter supply of berries.--Brings-down the-Sun tells the legend of Nis-ta-e and the Medicine Grizzly.--A sole survivor and wounded after a fight with the Snakes, faces death in the mountains.--A supernatural grizzly feeds him and carries him back home.--Legend of Itsa-pich-kaupe and the Medicine Wolf.--The community of spirit between animals and men.--Some animals can read the future.--Coyote barks an omen of death.--Owls are dreaded because they are the unhappy spirits of evil doers.

DURING my visit at Brings-down-the-Sun's camp, the women were gathering their winter supply of sarvis berries. The bushes, which the old chief so carefully guarded, were loaded down with ripe fruit. Their method was to strike the bushes with sticks, catching the berries in blankets, and then spreading them in the sun to dry. Berry-bags for carrying them were made of small skins from deer legs, wolf-pups or unborn calves of large animals such as the elk, or deer, or, most often, of the buffalo. I saw a beautiful berry-bag made of a spotted fawn skin and ornamented with coloured porcupine quills. Sarvis berries are a favourite article of diet with all the plains-tribes. They are eaten raw or cooked in soups and stews. My Indian friends warned me that the berries sometimes make people very ill, who are not accustomed to eating them. Large quantities are dried for winter use. The dried

[p. 467]

berries, strung together in necklaces of many strands, are worn by women for ornament. They are also much used as sacred food in ceremonials. While in Brings-down-the-Sun's camp, I secured a quantity of them to take back with me to Montana for my friend Wolf Plume. I knew that they would be an acceptable present, as he owned a Beaver Bundle, which required in its ceremonial sarvis berries for the feast. One evening, while finishing our supper, a crowd of sarvis berry pickers, consisting entirely of women and children, filed past our camp, with bags and parfleches filled with the fruit. No man was allowed to accompany them, because they had to cross the river by wading. The children were in the lead, then followed the women in bright coloured dresses, some carrying babies on their backs, wrapped in blankets after the Indian fashion. Last of all came Kops-ksis-e (Swell-nosed-pup), Brings-down-the-Sun's faithful old watch dog, who brought up the rear with his canine followers. I was interested in watching the women dividing up the fruit, before separating to their tipis. Each woman seemed to know exactly the amount she had gathered, and there was no bickering.

Brings-down-the-Sun had noticed his wife, Bird, in the company, hurrying past our camp with a large sack of berries. Turning to Menake he said, "There goes Sis-tse (Bird), she is tired I know, and hungry after her hard day's work. I would be pleased if you could carry to her some tea and a little food." He then hastened to her side to tell her that he was being well cared for and that she need not cook for him. Menake soon carried a bountiful repast to the old woman and, on her return, reported to me, that she had overheard the chief say to his wife: "My white son in yonder camp will

[p. 468]

soon leave us to start for the south. I must go over this evening to talk to him, for he will want to hear more of my stories. I will not return, until the Last Brother points downward towards the prairie" (very late).

When he had taken his accustomed seat at our camp fire, I enquired about Calf Robe's (Nis-ta-e) expedition against the Snake Indians (Shoshones). Brings-down-the-Sun said, "I remember it well, and have seen the picture writings of the expedition among the records of my father. More than fifty marks represent the years that have elapsed since the battle; four symbols stood for the four leaders; a kettle on a tripod by a solitary pine tree indicated the location of the camp, and many tracks, leading up to it, told the story of the attack by the enemy: three red marks represented the three chiefs, Brave Breast, Lone Cutter and Poor Robe, who were killed; a circle enclosing arrows, pointing in every direction, told of the surrounding, the desperate fighting and wounding of Nis-ta-e, who was left alone to die."

  

LEGEND OF THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE GRIZZLY

"One morning, in the early spring, Nis-ta-e, a young chief, entered his father's lodge, saying, 'After the sun sets this evening, I will start on a long war expedition.' 'Where will you go?' inquired the old man. 'I intend to go with three other chiefs against the Snakes, for I hear they have many fine horses.' His father warned him that it would be a dangerous journey, but Nis-ta-e replied: 'I am not afraid. If I do not come back before the first big snow-storm in the autumn (November), do not be anxious, but if I do not come

[p. 469]

before the snow grows deep in winter (December), I will never return.' 'Go,' said his father, 'and I wish you good luck. Bring back both horses and scalps, for through brave deeds you will become a great chief.' Nis-ta-e and his companions travelled southward along the Rocky Mountains. One morning, after crossing the Yellowstone River, they came upon a fresh trail. Nis-ta-e said, 'These are the tracks we have been looking for. We are now in the country of the Snakes.' They followed the trail for several days, until one evening they saw from the summit of a high ridge, the camp of the enemy in the distance. 'To-night,' said Nis-ta-e, 'we will get some horses.' They drew near the camp, and lay in ambush, for the moon was bright. After midnight, when the moon had set, Nis-ta-e said, 'Wait here for me, I will go alone into the camp and drive out some horses.' When he returned driving a herd, his companions said, 'Let us run with what we have, for day will soon break.' Nis-ta-e replied, 'We have come a long distance and must have more horses.' He again entered the Snake camp, but this time the three waiting chiefs heard the barking of dogs, and at once realised their danger. Nis-ta-e came out on the run, shouting, 'Ride for your lives; the Snakes are after us.' He took the lead, directing the others to follow with the stolen horses. As they rode away in the gray light of the early dawn, they saw the sun's rays already touching the distant mountain peaks. Morning soon broke over the plains, and as the sun rose, Nis-ta-e saw in the distance a cloud of dust made by the Snakes in hot pursuit. He signed to the other three chiefs to drop some of the horses. When a shower of arrows flew by them, Nis-ta-e shouted, 'Hurry, let us get to shelter, for we will have a hard time to-day.'

[p. 470]

[paragraph continues] They made for a solitary pine, distant on the plain and surrounded by a thicket of poplars and underbrush. Jumping from their horses they sought shelter in the bushes. The Snakes surrounded them and shot arrows into the thicket. The Blackfeet dug a pit in which they lay and defended themselves as best they could. During the day, Brave Breast, Lone Cutter and Poor Robe were killed, while Nis-ta-e was shot through the knee. When night came on, the Snakes built fires around the thicket to prevent their escape. As he lay in the pit wounded, not daring to leave the cover of the bushes in the bright firelight, Nis-ta-e thought his time to die had come. There was small chance of escape, for the night was clear with no sign of rain. Knowing it would be sure death to remain in the bushes until daylight, Nis-ta-e took off his Otter Medicine, and kneeling, prayed to the Great Mystery in the Sun, that a heavy rain might come and put out the fires. Then, holding his Medicine in turn towards the north, south, east and west, and swaying his body to and fro, he chanted the sacred song,

"'The Otter is my medicine,
   His power is very strong.
   The Thunder is my medicine,
   He will help his children,
   He will help his children.'

"Nis-ta-e drew the Medicine to his breast and, holding it towards the sky, continued his song. While chanting, he felt upon his face the rising of a gentle breeze from the east. He then made a vow to the Sun saying:

"'Pity me, O Sun! Give me help that I may escape from my enemies. If I may return in safety to my people, I promise that I will torture myself at the next Sun-dance.'

[p. 471]

"A bank of clouds appeared in the north and the sky became overcast. Nis-ta-e knew that his Medicine was prevailing and his life would be saved. A light rain soon began to fall, gradually increasing into a heavy shower and making the fires of the Snakes burn low. He then crawled through the bushes and safely reached the open prairie. He travelled all that night, and, when daylight came, found himself close to the mountains. His leg was badly swollen from the wound and he felt he could go no farther. Stopping in the thick pine forest, he gathered a few poles and made a brush lodge by covering them with pine boughs. He lay under this shelter, and when he was thirsty crawled to a small stream nearby. He also gathered and ate a few roots. A coyote came to the lodge and made friends with him. In a few days Nis-ta-e became so weak from lack of food, that he was unable to crawl to the stream. One day, as he lay expecting death, and dreaming of his home far to the north, and his old father waiting for him in vain, he heard the sound of heavy footsteps back of the lodge. Nis-ta-e wondered if an enemy had found him. The footsteps approached and stopped. A huge form appeared suddenly in the entrance. Instead of an Indian, it was a grizzly bear. He stood there snuffing, grunting, moving his head from side to side and gazing steadily at Nis-ta-e, who thought his end had now surely come. He raised himself feebly and said, 'I suppose you have come to eat me. If you intend to kill me, do it quickly, that I may have no pain.' The grizzly walked in and smelled him from head to foot. Nis-ta-e was wondering which part he would eat first, when the grizzly began to smell his wounded leg. He concluded it would go first, hut, to his surprise, the bear only licked the wound.

[p. 472]

[paragraph continues] 'Bear,' said Nis-ta-e, 'you had something in mind when you came in here. Are you going to kill me, or help me?' The bear answered, 'Yes, I will help you. I have come to take you home, that you may again see your people. In four days we will start.' 'If you wait that long,' said Nis-ta-e, 'I will be too weak to travel, for I am starving.' 'You will not starve,' replied the bear, 'for I will hunt.' He went off and soon returned with a grouse. Every day the bear and the coyote hunted, always bringing in some game. Nis-ta-e became stronger, and, on the morning of the fourth day, the bear said, 'To-day we must start. Get upon my back. Hold tight to my hair and I will carry you safely.' Nis-ta-e stretched himself upon the grizzly's broad back, and held on to the long hair. The bear started towards the north, closely followed by the coyote. They travelled at a swinging trot until Nis-ta-e, becoming exhausted, said, 'Rest awhile my brother, for I can hold on no longer.' They stopped and, while Nis-ta-e lay upon the grass, the bear followed the trail of some elk. He soon returned with a bloody mouth, and carried Nis-ta-e to the place where he had killed a bull elk. The three friends feasted together and camped there for the night. Next day, while passing through a narrow defile in the mountains, they met another grizzly. The stranger raised upon his legs and was prepared to fight, but the Medicine Grizzly also stood erect, towering above the other bear. The coyote came next and behind him stood Nis-ta-e. The strange grizzly quickly made off and there was no fight. Again they started, travelling steadily, until, one evening from the top of a high ridge, Nis-ta-e looked down upon the camp of the Blackfeet on the Marias River. The bear said, 'You will now soon see your relatives.' He

[p. 473]

carried Nis-ta-e to the river and said he must leave him there. Nis-ta-e was sorry to part with his two faithful friends, the Medicine Grizzly and the coyote. He invited them to come and live with him, but the Grizzly refused, saying, 'The moon is now nearly past when the leaves fall off. It is time I should find a den, for the heavy snows of winter will soon come. The only favour I ask of you in return is, that you will never kill a bear that has holed itself up for the winter.' The Medicine Grizzly then turned toward the mountains, followed by the coyote, while Nis-ta-e signalled to some young men not far distant, who were trying their race horses. They swam their horses across the river, and carried him safely to camp.

"For the sake of the Medicine Grizzly, that saved the life of Nis-ta-e, the Blackfeet will not kill a hibernating bear."

  

LEGEND OF THE FRIENDLY MEDICINE WOLF.

"The events, which I will now relate, happened many years ago. The Blackfeet were moving camp. They travelled slowly and, when stretched out on the plains, their line extended so far, it was hard for those in front to see the people in the rear. As a protection against hostile war parties, the warriors were divided into two bands, one riding in front and the other in the rear. Between these two bands of warriors were the old men, the women and children. While passing through a hill country, a large party of Crow Indians, which had been hiding in ambush, attacked the line in the middle. Before the Blackfeet warriors came to their defence, the Crows had killed many women and children, and carried away some women prisoners. One of the captured was

[p. 474]

a young woman named Itsa-pich-kaupe (Sits-by-the-door), the mother of Calf Looking and grandmother of Ap-ai-kai-koa (Little Skunk). She was carried on horseback by the warrior who took her prisoner, over two hundred miles to the Crow camp on the Yellowstone River. There she was presented to one of his friends, who took her to his lodge and gave her into the care of his wife, an older woman. Itsa-pich-kaupe was so closely watched she could find no chance of escape. Every night the Crow man hobbled her feet, so that she could not walk. He also tied a rope around her waist, and fastened the other end to his wife. One day, when the Crow man was away, and the two women were together in the lodge, the Crow woman conversed with Itsa-pich-kaupe in the sign language, saying, 'I overheard my husband say last night that they intended to kill you. I feel sorry and will help you to escape to-night when it is dark.' That evening the Crow man hobbled Itsa-pich-kaupe as usual and tied her to his wife. When the lodge fire burned low, and the Crow woman knew from his heavy breathing that her husband was asleep, she crawled over to Itsa-pich-kaupe and unfastened the ropes. She then tied the loose end of the waist-rope to a lodge pole, so that if her husband should waken and pull upon the rope, he would not suspect her escape. She loosened the bottom of the lodge covering from the pegs and, giving Itsa-pich-kaupe a pair of moccasins, a flint and a small sack filled with pemmican, pushed her outside. Itsa-pich-kaupe travelled all that night as fast as she could go, away from the Crow camp. When daylight came she hid in some underbrush. The Crows tried to follow her but they could find no tracks and gave up the chase. When she had walked for four nights, and was a long

[p. 475]

distance from the Crow camp, she began travelling by day also, but her supply of pemmican soon gave out, and there were large holes in her moccasins. One day, when her feet were bruised and bleeding, she saw a large wolf following her. At first she was frightened and tried to run, but her strength was gone, and she sank down exhausted. The wolf stood watching her, and then crept nearer and nearer until he lay at her feet. When Itsa-pich-kaupe arose to walk, the wolf followed, and when she sat down again to rest, he lay down by her side. She then besought his aid, saying:

"'Pity me, brother wolf! I am so weak for food that I must soon die. I pray for the sake of my young children that you will help me.'

[paragraph continues] When she finished her prayer, the wolf trotted to the summit of a high butte, where he sat watching. He disappeared, but soon came back, dragging a buffalo calf he had just killed. With the flint the Crow woman had given her, she built a fire. After roasting and eating some of the meat, she felt stronger and started on, but her feet were so bruised and torn she could scarcely walk. When the wolf drew near, she placed her hand on his broad back, and he seemed glad to bear her weight. In this way the wolf helped Itsa-pich-kaupe, hunting every day and keeping her supplied with food, until he brought her safely home. When they entered camp together, Itsa-pich-kaupe led the friendly wolf to her lodge, where she related to her family the story of her escape from the Crow camp. She besought the people to be kind to the wolf, and to give him food. But she became very sick, after her return, and, as there was no one to look out for the wolf, the Indian dogs attacked him, and drove him into the hills. They would not allow him to remain in

[p. 476]

camp. The faithful wolf waited for a long time, watching in vain for Itsa-pich-kaupe. He came every evening to the summit of a high butte, where he sat gazing down at the lodge where she lay. Her relatives continued to feed him, until he disappeared, never to return. The Blackfeet never shoot at a wolf, or coyote, believing them to be good medicine. We have a saying, 'The gun that shoots at a wolf or coyote will never again shoot straight.'"

Brings-down-the-Sun continued: "At one time animals and men were able to understand each other. We can still talk to the animals, just as we do to people, but they now seldom reply, excepting in dreams. We are then obedient to them and do whatever they tell us. Whenever we are in danger, or distress, we pray to them and they often help us. Many of the animals are friendly to man. They are able to read the future and give us warning of what will happen.

"If a coyote comes near the lodge, and barks in front of a door, it is an omen that one of the family will soon die. I can remember, many years ago, observing a band of coyotes on a ridge overlooking our camp. Every one of them, one after the other, barked directly toward our lodge. The very same day, when I came suddenly upon a coyote among the willows, it turned and barked toward me. They were omens of death, for my sister died within a few days."

The camp fire was now burning low. Every one sat gazing silently into the glowing bed of coals. From the depths of the woods came the mournful hooting of an owl, called because of his appearance, Ko-ko-nut-stoke (Ears-far-apart). 

[p. 477]

[paragraph continues] The Indians listened in silent awe, believing it was a ghost. The Blackfeet have a superstitious dread of owls and say that "their ways are evil, because they dread the sun-light and travel only at night." They believe they are the restless and unhappy spirits of people long dead, who were transformed into owls because of their evil deeds. Being dissatisfied with their abode in the spirit world, they continue revisiting their old haunts, crying dolefully through the night, and seeking to bring misfortune to the living. When the hooting came nearer, and was joined by the voice of another owl, the people became uneasy. When he finally settled in a big tree, close to the camp, some of the women became greatly alarmed. Brings-down-the-Sun said, "Listen! he calls his own name, Ko-ko-nut-stoke; Ko-ko-nut-stoke; Ko-ko-nut-stoke (Ears-far-apart; Ears-far-apart; Ears-far-apart). You can easily distinguish the different voices in a family of owls: the deep notes of the father, the higher tones of the mother, and the small voices of the children." Nitana declared that, shortly before her sister died, an owl had been seen looking in at the door of her lodge. When Spotted Eagle, the medicine man, was told of the incident, he warned her sister that it was an evil omen and gave her a charm to use, if the owl ever returned.

In order to satisfy the women of our camp, and to effectually ward off any injury from the owl, Brings-down-the-Sun called back, "Noks-sto-mo-au (You are my relative)." The Blackfeet believed that an owl will do no harm to a company, if he thinks one of his relatives is present.

The old chief then arose, saying: "I see the Last

[p. 478]

[paragraph continues] Brother is pointing downwards toward the prairie, and it is time for us to sleep. The nights are now short and the light of day will come again quickly. When the sun rises, and is high in the sky, I will return to continue my talk."

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 479]

  

CHAPTER XXXVII

  

BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN TALKS ABOUT BIRDS AND THE STARS

Variety of song-birds in the Blackfoot Country.--Brings-down-the-Sun tells of the habits of the birds and explains their songs.--He gives the Blackfeet names for the moons.--How to read the signs in the skies.--He tells the ancient star-legends of The Seven Brothers (Great Bear), and The Lost Children (Pleiades).

IN the morning, I was awakened by the musical song of the western lark sparrow. I lay watching him seated on the tip top of a lodge pole, enjoying himself in the bright warm rays of the rising sun. Every few minutes he raised his crown, and throwing back his head, burst into his plaintive song, "Che-che-che-wee-che," the fourth syllable with a rising, and the last with a falling inflection. The Blackfeet call him the Gros Ventre bird, because they are unable to understand his song, which they say sounds like the Gros Ventre language.

The wonderful song of the western meadow lark, with its loud clear notes, was frequently heard both in the morning and at twilight. He closely resembles the meadow lark of the eastern states, although his song is very different, resembling more that of the hermit thrush.

One of the most interesting of the song birds of the Blackfoot country, is the chestnut collared longspur, called black breast by the Indians. He sang at all times, through the heat of midday and even during the night.

[p. 480]

[paragraph continues] When riding across the plains, I saw him along old trails and abandoned wagon roads, running swiftly ahead of my horse, or springing from the ground and mounting to a height of about fifty feet, when he extended his wings and fluttered slowly to the ground, always against the wind, and singing a cheerful, rippling

Click to enlarge
MEDICINE WEASEL'S CAMP NEAR THE ROCKIES.

song. I do not recall hearing a longspur singing while mounting into the air, but only when descending. His song reminded me of that of the English linnet.

During hot days in early summer, I often heard over Indian camps "pallid horned larks," singing so high up in the air, as to be entirely out of sight. But, if I watched closely, they would re-appear and sing, while floating downwards. From their continuous singing, while at a

[p. 481]

lofty height, it seemed as if they must he rejoicing in a cool breeze, discovered high above the sun-heated earth.

A few days before the formation of a large Blackfeet camp, while walking a half mile from the camp, I found a nest with five eggs, which a western lark sparrow had made in a moist meadow, where the grass and wild flowers grew luxuriantly. The grazing Indian horses soon stripped the ground of all vegetation as closely as. if cut with a scythe. Visiting the place a week later, I found three nearly fledged young larks in the nest. Their hatching and nurture had proceeded without interruption, notwithstanding the horses had tramped all around them, and had eaten away their protective covering, leaving them exposed and in plain view. Other birds that I had found on the Blackfeet plains, were the vesper sparrow, white-throated sparrow, chicadee, goldfinch, king bird, kingfisher, cat bird, raven, Brewer blackbird, long-billed curlew, Wilson snipe, herring gull, and yellow warbler.

When Brings-down-the-Sun had taken his seat on the log, and was placidly smoking his everyday pipe, I asked him to tell me the Blackfeet names for the different birds and to explain the meanings of their songs. The old chief said, "The birds that you see making so much disturbance near the camp, chattering while flying from tree to tree, and looking eagerly for scraps, are called Ma-mi-as-ich-imi (long tails or magpies). I look upon them as my friends because they always come first to my coyote bait, when I am catching eagles. They say to each other, 'Long tails fly on ahead and fasten your provision bag to another tree.' If you take notice you will see them flying ahead of each other, continually in search of food. The old

[p. 482]

women often sing these words as a slumber song to children."

A large woodpecker with red wings lighted on a dead tree near by. He hammered diligently with his bill on the hollow trunk, making a loud noise, but suddenly stopped to give his cry. Pointing up to him, Brings-down-the-Sun said: "That fellow was saying, in the Blackfeet tongue, to the worms and bugs in the old tree, 'Stick your heads out now for I want to eat you.

"The O-toch-koki (yellow breast, meadow lark, or prairie robin) is called big-stern bird, because he is so broad across the back. He is one of the first birds to come in the spring. We are always glad to see him, because we know that summer is near. He has many songs and sings in different tongues. All of the Indian tribes understand the songs of the yellow breast. He sings in Blackfoot, 'Nat-sia-ke-oa-se-kim-aki,' 'Good Whistler (his wife) is a selfish woman,' also 'Kit-o-kin-tsit-o-tsin-aicht,' 'The fat is part of his liver,' and another one, which we consider very impudent, 'Kitaki-ma-sik-sa-stoki,' 'Your sister has a black skin.'

"When the Isik-o-ka-e (black breast, or chestnut collared longspur) is flying, he sings, 'Kiowa-kinix-apis-is-tsis-ta-kits-itope,' 'Spread out your blanket and I will light upon it.'

"The Nepe-e, Summer bringers (white-throated sparrows), sing, 'The leaves are budding and summer is coming.' They also sing, 'It-sis-oks-is-taki,' 'Crushed inside.' Goldfinches are called grease birds, because they have the yellow colour of grease, or tallow. The cat bird is 'Pokaup' (the baby), because he cries so like a baby." When a king bird alighted among some berry bushes and began a loud chattering, Brings

[p. 483]

down-the-Sun said, "There is the Si-kim-e-newan (stingy-with-his-berries). The Blackfeet women gave him this name, for the reason that, when they are gathering berries and disturb him, he flies about, fussing and chattering, as if angry, because they are gathering his berries. There are some small dark coloured birds, which live in winter close to the springs that never freeze. Whenever we call 'Meat! Meat!' they begin to dance. The swallows are called fire birds, because there is a legend that they brought the first fire to the Indians.

"The Raven is very wise. He knows more than any of the birds. We have found that he always tells the truth, so we watch his actions very closely, that we may be able to look into the future. If we see a raven circling high in the air over camp, we know that a messenger will soon come from a distance bearing news. In former days, when we were on a buffalo hunt and found no game, if we saw ravens playing together on a ridge, we took our course in that direction, knowing we should soon secure meat. If we were on a war expedition, and saw ravens light in the trail ahead of us and two of them had their heads close together, as if whispering, we hurried to get into ambush, because the ravens knew an enemy was approaching, and were giving us warning.

"The kildeer is called Kit-se-pit-se-koye. They say that, if its nest is robbed of the eggs, or young birds, it grieves so deeply, and cries so hard, it will fall upon the ground. The Ma-pit-so-to-e, Brings-something from-the-water, is a little smaller than the kildeer, but of nearly the same colour.

"Snipe are called So-otak-skan, Shadow in the water, because they stand in shallow water, where they can see

[p. 484]

their own shadow. There is a bird a little larger than a snipe, with long legs and a black breast. The Stony Indians understand him and say he sings in their language, 'Buffalo! Buffalo!'

"The Rooster sings when he wakens in the morning, 'Nepo-aka. Get up!' The curlew is our Ma-ken-ima. If anyone kills a curlew, or steals its young, we believe a storm will arise. The Peta is the golden eagle. Se-ka-kin-eoa is the white headed eagle. Pekoke is the buzzard.

"The fish hawk is called Pa-tse-ksis-acom (Mistake Thunder), because he is so dangerous. It is said that an Indian once climbed to a fish hawk's nest, on a high cliff to secure the young birds. When he came to a dangerous place on the cliff, the old birds swooped down on him with such force, that he was thrown over the cliff and killed. Ever since that time, we have called them Mistake Thunder, meaning that they are as powerful and as dangerous as the Thunder (or lightning) "When a night hawk flew overhead, Brings-down-the-Sun, looking up, called out, "Pisto (Short face), shoot down now." I followed his gaze in time to see the night hawk fall like a flash, making the peculiar, rushing noise with his wings, which we call "booming," but the Blackfeet call it "tearing his wings off."

It was a very hot day, and the chiefs head evidently pained him, for he placed his hand upon his forehead, saying, "I have a long scar here, just over the temple, where a wild horse kicked me, when I was a young man. Ever since that time, whenever the sun is hot, or the wind blows hard, the old scar becomes quite painful. You have heard the old saying, 'My dogs are scattered, and I must gather them together and go away, but,

[p. 485]

when the sun is set, my dogs will come together again.'" This was a Blackfoot figure of speech, by which he meant that he was tired and must stop, but would continue his talk in the cool of the evening.

A golden sunset was fading over the Rocky Mountains, when Brings-down-the-Sun returned to our camp. With the night came a cool breeze from the mountains, which made us draw closely together around the outside fire. It was our last night in camp, and many of the North Piegans came for a farewell visit. At sunrise we were to start for the south. The camp fire lighted up the tops of the green cottonwoods, the swarthy faces of the Indians, with their brightly coloured blankets and clothes decorated with beads and porcupine quills, and the lodges, with their picturesque tops and crowns of tapering poles. Beyond the circle of the firelight was the black line of the forest. Menake, Long Hair and Nitana were roasting meat on long sticks. They also roasted over the hot coals peeled stalks of Po-kint-somo (wild rhubarb). The roasted stalk was sprinkled with salt and eaten hot. In early summer wild rhubarb, prepared in this way, has a delicious and delicate flavour. Menake also brewed from roots a refreshing drink, tasting like root beer. It was made by boiling, in a kettle, a mixture of the poch-coi-as-sukas (smell mouth, Western sweet cicely) and siksocasim (Indian horehound).

Brings-down-the-Sun, as was his custom, sat apart. He was quietly smoking, gazing dreamily into the fire. Knowing that he would soon begin his talk, I was busy preparing my writing materials and notebooks. The old chief had noticed my movements, for he said to Menake, "My white son over there reminds me of a

[p. 486]

gopher (ground squirrel). He runs in one direction, as if about to steal something, and then he quickly jumps up again and darts in another. He never sits still for a moment." When he finally came into the circle of the camp fire, and took his customary seat on the big log, the Indians knew he was ready to talk and became silent. Knocking the ashes from his pipe, he laid it beside him on the log, and began to speak.

"My father used to lie beside the fire on long winter evenings, giving me instructions, and recounting the interesting events that happened during his life. He taught me how to look into the future, by observing the warnings of the animals, and how to know the different moons, which enabled him to keep his records, by watching the changes in the seasons, and by studying the habits of birds and wild animals."

  

CALENDAR OF MOONS.

"We call the moon of early winter,--'After the first snowfall' (November), or 'Time of the first Chinook' [*1] (last of Dec. and early January).

"Midwinter,--'When the buffalo calves are black,' or, 'When the heavy snows come,' or, 'The time, when the jackrabbit whistles at night' (January).

"When we see the first signs of spring, we say, 'The home days are coming.'

"Early spring,--'The time for sore eyes' (snow blindness) (March), or, 'When the ice breaks up in the rivers' (April).

"We call spring,--'When the geese come,' or, 'The time when the leaves are budding,' or, 'When the buffalo plant is in flower,' or, 'When the buffalo calves are yellow,' or, 'When the grass becomes green.'

[p. 487]

"Late spring,--'Time of high water' (June).

"Early summer,--'The moon of flowers' (late June and early July).

"Summer is,--'Home days' (July and August).

"Autumn is,--'When the leaves are yellow' (September), 'Time of the first frost.'

"Late autumn,--'After the leaves fall off' (October), or, 'When the geese fly south' (last of Oct. and first of Nov.)."

  

FORETELLING EVENTS BY SIGNS IN THE SKY

"My father taught me to read the signs in the heavens: 'When the Akatsis (Lariat or Rain-Roper, i.e. Rainbow) appears in the sky I know the Thunder Chief is roping the rain and the storm will slow up. When the fires of the Northmen (Aurora) [*1] flash in the winter sky, it is a sign that a violent wind will arise. When the Sun paints both his cheeks, that is, when two Sun Dogs [*1] (Ick-ski) appear on both sides of the Sun, it is a warning that fierce storms, with violent winds and severe cold, are coming. When the Sun paints his face on the forehead, chin and both cheeks (four Sun Dogs), it is a warning that a chief will soon die.

"When a heavy storm is raging, I can foretell whether the weather will clear up by a certain cloud formation in the south west, at the time of sunset. When I see 'a star-feeding' (the Blackfeet name for Comet [*1]), it is a sign of famine and sickness, and when the Sun hides his face (Eclipse [*1]), I know that a great chief is about to die.' That bright star (pointing overhead), we call the Day Star. [*1] Sometimes, if you look carefully, even while the Sun is in the sky, you can see the Day Star shining almost overhead. My father

[p. 488]

told me many stories about the stars of the night sky, explaining how they came there. There is one family of stars in the northern sky, which we call 'The Seven Brothers.' [*1] When we wish to know the time at night, we say, 'How does the Last Brother point?' [*1] I will tell you the story of

  

"THE SEVEN BROTHERS (GREAT BEAR).

"There was once a camp of ten lodges. In one of them there lived a family of nine children, seven boys and two girls. While the six older brothers were away on the war-path, the eldest girl, Bear-Skin-Woman, married a grizzly bear. Her father was so angered that, with the help of the others, he surrounded the grizzly's cave and killed him. When Bear-Skin-Woman knew of her husband's death, she took a piece of his skin and wore it for her medicine. One night, by means of her husband's supernatural power, she was changed into a huge grizzly bear, and attacked the camp, killing everyone, including her father and mother. She spared her youngest brother and sister, Okinai (Body Chief) and Sinopa (Kit-Fox). Bear-Skin-Woman then changed herself into her former shape and returned to the lodge, occupied by her brother and sister. Okinai and Sinopa were greatly frightened when they overheard her talking to herself, planning how she might kill them. One day, when Sinopa went to the river for water, she met her six brothers returning from the war-path. Having explained to them the danger, they planned to rescue her. Gathering many prickly pears, they directed Sinopa to place them

[p. 489]

in front of the lodge in such a way, that the safe approach would be by a narrow path. At midnight the children quietly left the lodge, carefully avoiding the prickly pears, and safely passed out to their waiting brothers. But Bear-Skin-Woman, hearing them leave the lodge, followed, only to step on the prickly pears. Roaring with pain, she immediately changed herself into a bear and ran after her brothers. Okinai proved to be a medicine man, with supernatural power, even greater than his sister's. When Bear-Skin-Woman overtook them, he shot an arrow into the air. Immediately the brothers found themselves just as far in advance of their terrible sister as the arrow flew. When she again drew near, Okinai waved his Medicine Feather, which brought thick underbrush in her way. Then he made a lake to come between. Finally, for the fourth and last effort to escape, he made a large tree, into which the seven brothers and their little sister climbed. But the grizzly knocked the four lowest from the tree, and was about to kill them, when Okinai waved his Medicine Feather, and singing the song,

"'There is no place to be saved except in the sky,'

shot an arrow into the air. Immediately the little sister arose to the sky. He shot six arrows, and each time a brother went up. Finally, Okinai himself followed, and all of them together formed the family of the 'Seven Brothers.' They took the same position in the sky they had in the tree. The small star at one side (of the handle) is Sinopa, 'the little sister,' [*1] while the four at the bottom are the brothers who had been knocked from the tree by their terrible sister 'The Grizzly.'"

[p. 490]

  

LEGEND OF THE LOST CHILDREN. (PLEIADES.)

"There is also a family of six small stars we call the 'Lost Children' (Pleiades). [*1] These children were lost a great many years ago from a large camp of Blackfeet, during the moon, when the buffalo calves are yellow (spring). The Indians had been running buffalo over a piskun and had secured a large number, among them many buffalo calves. The little yellow hides were given to the children, who played with them a game of buffalo. There was a poor family of six children who were unable to secure any of the yellow skins and went naked. One day, when many of the children were on the prairie, playing buffalo together, putting the skins over their heads and running after each other, they made fun of the poor children, calling them 'scabby old bulls,' and shouting derisively that 'their hair was old and black and coming out.' The six children did not go home with the rest. They were ashamed because their parents gave them no yellow skins. They wandered off on the plains and were taken up to the sky. They are not seen during the moon, when the buffalo calves are yellow (spring, the time of their shame), but, every year, when the calves turn brown (autumn), the lost children can be seen in the sky every night."

Footnotes

^486:1 A warm wind from the Pacific Ocean.

^487:1 See [*Appendix].

^488:1 See [*Appendix].

^489:1 See [*Appendix].

^490:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 491]

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII

  

LEGEND OF POIA, THE CHRIST STORY OF THE BLACKFEET

Brings-down-the-Sun tells the beautiful star-legend of Poia, who was born in the sky as Star Boy, came down to earth, lived in poverty among the Blackfeet, and was called Poia (Scarface) in derision.--Through his bravery he reached the home of the Sun, where his scar was removed.--The Sun God sent him back to earth to instruct the Blackfeet in Sun worship.--After establishing the ceremonial of the Sun-dance Poia returned to the home of the Sun and became a Morning Star.--Brings-down-the-Sun explains the conjunction of two Morning Stars.--Tells about the constellations.--Sacred articles brought from the home of the Sun. His explanation of a brilliant meteor.--Interruptions to my slumber.--In early dawn on Lookout Butte I behold Venus and Jupiter in conjunction.--Sunrise on the plains.--An early start.--Farewell of Brings-down-the-Sun.

"THERE are two bright stars that sometimes rise together, just before the sun comes up, Morning Star and Young 'Morning Star or Star Boy (referring to the conjunction of the planets Venus and Jupiter before daybreak). [*1] I will tell you the story of these two Morning Stars, as it was related to me by my father, having been handed down to him through many generations."

  

LEGEND OF STAR BOY (LATER, POIA, SCARFACE)

"We know not when the Sun-dance had its origin. It was long ago, when the Blackfeet used dogs for

[p. 492]

beasts of burden instead of horses; when they stretched the legs and bodies of their dogs on sticks to make them large, and when they used stones instead of wooden pegs to hold down their lodges. In those days, during the moon of flowers (early summer), our people were camped near the mountains. It was a cloudless night and a warm wind blew over the prairie. Two young girls were sleeping in the long grass outside the lodge. Before daybreak, the eldest sister, So-at-sa-ki (Feather Woman), awoke.

Click to enlarge
SUMMER CAMP OF THE BLACKFEET NEAR THE MOUNTAINS.

[paragraph continues] The Morning Star was just rising from the prairie. He was very beautiful, shining through the clear air of early morning. She lay gazing at this wonderful star, until he seemed very close to her, and she imagined that he was her lover. Finally she awoke her sister, exclaiming, 'Look at the Morning Star! He is beautiful and must be very wise. Many of the young men have wanted to marry me, but I love only the Morning Star.' When the leaves were turning yellow (autumn), So-at-sa-ki became very unhappy, finding herself with child. She was a pure maiden, although not knowing the father of her child.

[p. 493]

[paragraph continues] When the people discovered her secret, they taunted and ridiculed her, until she wanted to die. One day while the geese were flying southward, So-at-sa-ki went alone to the river for water. As she was returning home, she beheld a young man standing before her in the trail. She modestly turned aside to pass, but he put forth his hand, as if to detain her, and she said angrily, 'Stand aside! None of the young men have ever before dared to stop me.' He replied, 'I am the Morning Star. One night, during the moon of flowers, I beheld you sleeping in the open and loved you. I have now come to ask you to return with me to the sky, to the lodge of my father, the Sun, where we will live together, and you will have no more trouble.'

"Then So-at-sa-ki remembered the night in spring, when she slept outside the lodge, and now realised that Morning Star was her husband. She saw in his hair a yellow plume, and in his hand a juniper branch with a spider web hanging from one end. He was tall and straight and his hair was long and shining. His beautiful clothes were of soft-tanned skins, and from them came a fragrance of pine and sweet grass. So-at-sa-ki replied hesitatingly, 'I must first say farewell to my father and mother.' But Morning Star allowed her to speak to no one. Fastening the feather in her hair and giving her the juniper branch to hold, he directed her to shut her eyes. She held the upper strand of the spider web in her hand and placed her feet upon the lower one. When he told her to open her eyes, she was in the sky. They were standing together before a large lodge. Morning Star said, 'This is the home of my father and mother, the Sun and the Moon,' and bade her enter. It was day-time

[p. 494]

and the Sun was away on his long journey, but the Moon was at home. Morning Star addressed his mother saying, 'One night I beheld this girl sleeping on the prairie. I loved her and she is now my wife.' The Moon welcomed So-at-sa-ki to their home. In the evening, when the Sun Chief came home, he also gladly received her. The Moon clothed So-at-sa-ki in a soft-tanned buckskin dress, trimmed with elk-teeth. She also presented her with wristlets of elk-teeth and an elk-skin robe, decorated with the sacred paint, saying, 'I give you these because you have married our son.' So-at-sa-ki lived happily in the sky with Morning Star, and learned many wonderful things. When her child was born, they called him Star Boy. The Moon then gave So-at-sa-ki a root digger, saying, 'This should be used only by pure women. You can dig all kinds of roots with it, but I warn you not to dig up the large turnip growing near the home of the Spider Man. You have now a child and it would bring unhappiness to us all.'

"Everywhere So-at-sa-ki went, she carried her baby and the root digger. She often saw the large turnip, but was afraid to touch it. One day, while passing the wonderful turnip, she thought of the mysterious warning of the Moon, and became curious to see what might be underneath. Laying her baby on the ground, she dug until her root digger stuck fast. Two large cranes came flying from the east. So-at-sa-ki besought them to help her. Thrice she called in vain, but upon the fourth call, they circled and lighted beside her. The chief crane sat upon one side of the turnip and his wife on the other. He took hold of the turnip with his long sharp bill, and moved it backwards and forwards, singing the medicine song,

"'This root is sacred. Wherever I dig, my roots are sacred.'

[p. 495]

"He repeated this song to the north, south, east and west. After the fourth song he pulled up the turnip. So-at-sa-ki looked through the hole and beheld the earth. Although she had not known it, the turnip had filled the same hole, through which Morning Star had brought her into the sky. Looking down, she saw the camp of the Blackfeet, where she had lived. She sat for a long while gazing at the old familiar scenes. The young men were playing games. The women were tanning hides and making lodges, gathering berries on the hills, and crossing the meadows to the river for water. When she turned to go home, she was crying, for she felt lonely, and longed to be back again upon the green prairies with her own people. When So-at-sa-ki arrived at the lodge, Morning Star and his mother were waiting. As soon as Morning Star looked at his wife, he exclaimed, 'You have dug up the sacred turnip!' When she did not reply, the Moon said, 'I warned you not to dig up the turnip, because I love Star Boy and do not wish to part with him.' Nothing more was said, because it was day-time and the great Sun Chief was still away on his long journey. In the evening, when he entered the lodge, he exclaimed, 'What is the matter with my daughter? She looks sad and must be in trouble.' So-at-sa-ki replied, 'Yes, I am homesick, because I have to-day looked down upon my people.' Then the Sun Chief was angry and said to Morning Star, 'If she has disobeyed, you must send her home.' The Moon interceded for So-at-sa-ki, but the Sun answered, 'She can no longer be happy with us. It is better for her to return to her own people.' Morning Star led So-at-sa-ki to the home of the Spider Man, whose web had drawn her up to the sky. He placed on her head the sacred Medicine

[p. 496]

[paragraph continues] Bonnet, which is worn only by pure women. He laid Star Boy on her breast, and wrapping them both in the elk-skin robe, bade her farewell, saying, 'We will let you down into the centre of the Indian camp and the people will behold you as you come from the sky.' The Spider Man then carefully let them down through the hole to the earth.

"It was an evening in midsummer, during the moon when the berries are ripe, when So-at-sa-ki was let down from the sky. Many of the people were outside their lodges, when suddenly they beheld a bright light in the northern sky. They saw it pass across the heavens and watched, until it sank to the ground. When the Indians reached the place, where the star had fallen, they saw a strange looking bundle. When the elk-skin cover was opened, they found a woman and her child. So-at-sa-ki was recognised by her parents. She returned to their lodge and lived with them, but never was happy. She used to go with Star Boy to the summit of a high ridge, where she sat and mourned for her husband. One night she remained alone upon the ridge. Before daybreak, when Morning Star arose from the plains, she begged him to take her back. Then he spoke to her, 'You disobeyed and therefore cannot return to the sky. Your sin is the cause of your sorrow and has brought trouble to you and your people.'

"Before So-at-sa-ki died, she told all these things to her father and mother, just as I now tell them to you. Star Boy's grandparents also died. Although born in the home of the Sun, he was very poor. He had no clothes, not even moccasins to wear. He was so timid and shy that he never played with other children. When the Blackfeet moved camp, he always followed barefoot, far behind the rest of the tribe. He feared to

[p. 497]

travel with the other people, because the other boys stoned and abused him. On his face was a mysterious scar, which became more marked as he grew older. He was ridiculed by everyone and in derision was called Poia (Scarface).

"When Poia became a young man, he loved a maiden of his own tribe. She was very beautiful and the daughter of a leading chief. Many of the young men wanted to marry her, but she refused them all. Poia sent this maiden a present, with the message that he wanted to marry her, but she was proud and disdained his love. She scornfully told him, she would not accept him as her lover, until he would remove the scar from his face. Scarface was deeply grieved by the reply. He consulted with an old medicine woman, his only friend. She revealed to him, that the scar had been placed on his face by the Sun God, and that only the Sun himself could remove it. Poia resolved to go to the home of the Sun God. The medicine woman made moccasins for him and gave him a supply of pemmican.

"Poia journeyed alone across the plains and through the mountains, enduring many hardships and great dangers. Finally he came to the Big Water (Pacific Ocean). For three days and three nights he lay upon the shore, fasting and praying to the Sun God. On the evening of the fourth day, he beheld a bright trail leading across the water. He travelled this path until he grew near the home of the Sun, when he hid himself and waited. In the morning, the great Sun Chief came from his lodge, ready for his daily journey. He did not recognise Poia. Angered at beholding a creature from the earth, he said to the Moon, his wife, 'I will kill him, for he comes from a good-for-nothing-race,' but she interceded and saved his life. Morning Star, their only

[p. 498]

son, a young man with a handsome face and beautifully dressed, came forth from the lodge. He brought with him dried sweet grass, which he burned as incense. He first placed Poia in the sacred smoke, and then led him into the presence of his father and mother, the Sun and the Moon. Poia related the story of his long journey, because of his rejection by the girl he loved. Morning Star then saw how sad and worn he looked. He felt sorry for him and promised to help him.

"Poia lived in the lodge of the Sun and Moon with Morning Star. Once, when they were hunting together, Poia killed seven enormous birds, which had threatened the life of Morning Star. He presented four of the dead birds to the Sun and three to the Moon. The Sun rejoiced, when he knew that the dangerous birds were killed, and the Moon felt se grateful, that she besought her husband to repay him. On the intercession of Morning Star, the Sun God consented to remove the scar. He also appointed Poia as his messenger to the Blackfeet, promising, if they would give a festival (Sun-dance) in his honour, once every year, he would restore their sick to health. He taught Poia the secrets of the Sun-dance, and instructed him in the prayers and songs to be used. He gave him two raven feathers to wear as a sign that he came from the Sun, and a robe of soft-tanned elk-skin, with the warning that it must be worn only by a virtuous woman. She can then give the Sun-dance and the sick will recover. Morning Star gave him a magic flute and a wonderful song, with which he would be able to charm the heart of the girl he loved.

"Poia returned to the earth and the Blackfeet camp by the Wolf Trail (Milky Way), the short path to the earth. When he had fully instructed his people concerning

[p. 499]

the Sun-dance, the Sun God took him back to the sky with the girl he loved. When Poia returned to the home of the Sun, the Sun God made him bright and beautiful, just like his father, Morning Star. [*1] In those days Morning Star and his son could be seen together in the east. Because Poia appears first in the sky, the Blackfeet often mistake him for his father, and he is therefore sometimes called Poks-o-piks-o-aks, Mistake Morning Star.

"I remember," continued Brings-down-the-Sun, "when I was a young man, seeing these two bright stars rising, one after the other, before the Sun. Then, if we were going on a war, or hunting expedition, my father would awake me, saying, 'My son, I see Morning Star and Young Morning Star in the sky above the prairie. Day will soon break and it is time we were started.' For many years these stars have travelled apart. I have also seen them together in the evening sky. They went down after the sun. This summer, Morning Star and Poia are again travelling together. I see them in the eastern sky, rising together over the prairie before dawn. Poia comes up first. His father, Morning Star, rises soon afterwards, and then his grandfather, the Sun.

"Morning Star was given to us as a sign to herald the coming of the Sun. When he appears above the horizon, we know a new day is about to dawn. Many medicine men have dreamed of the Sun, and of the Moon, but I have never yet heard of one so powerful as to dream of Morning Star, because he shows himself in the sky for such a short time.

"The 'Star that stands still' [*1] (North Star) is different from other stars, because it never moves. All

[p. 500]

the other stars walk round it. It is a hole in the sky, the same hole through which So-at-sa-ki was first drawn up to the sky and then let down again to earth. It is the hole, through which she gazed upon the earth, after digging up the forbidden turnip. Its light is the radiance from the home of the Sun God shining through. The half circle of stars to the east (Northern Crown) is the lodge of the Spider Man, and the five bright stars just beyond (in the constellation of Hercules) are his Eve fingers, with which he spun the web, upon which So-at-sa-ki was let down from the sky. Whenever you see the half-buried and overgrown circles, or clusters of stones on the plains, marking the sites of Blackfeet camps in the ancient days, when they used stones to hold down the sides of their lodges, you will know why the half-circle of stars was called by our fathers, 'The Lodge of the Spider Man.'

"When So-at-sa-ki came back to earth from the lodge of the Sun, she brought with her the sacred Medicine Bonnet and dress trimmed with elk teeth, the Turnip Digger, Sweet Grass (incense), and the Prongs for lifting hot coals from the fire. Ever since those days, these sacred articles have been used in the Sun-dance by the woman who makes the vow. The Turnip Digger is always tied to the Medicine Case, containing the Medicine Bonnet, and it now hangs from the tripod behind my lodge."

Brings-down-the-Sun then arose saying, "The Last Brother is now pointing towards the horizon. Day will soon dawn and it is time for us to sleep." As we turned to gaze at the constellation of the Great Bear, a ball of fire suddenly appeared high in the northern sky. It flashed across the heavens, leaving in its wake a beautiful light, and burst into a shower of sparks. as

[p. 501]

it vanished in the southern sky. The Indians were filled with awe and broke out in exclamations of wonder and of fear. Some said it was a Dusty Star (Meteor), others that it was too large for a Dusty Star, which is always small and looks like a star changing its place in the sky. Those, who were filled with dread, spoke of it in subdued whispers as Is-tsi,--"The Fire"; and said it was an omen of bad luck.

Brings-down-the-Sun had been silent. When I asked his explanation of the strange sign, he said, "The Sun God is all powerful, he watches over every one and sees everything. The Great Mystery may have sent this wonderful star as a warning, that there will be much sickness during the coming winter, or, it may be a sign that a great chief has just died. By a great chief I mean a man who had a good heart and has lived a straight life." When Brings-down-the-Sun had finished speaking, the North Piegans quietly withdrew to their lodges.

When I laid down on my blankets, beneath the big cottonwood, the moon had risen over Lookout Butte, and was shining upon my bed, through an opening in the trees. My mind was filled with thoughts of the poetical beauty of the legends I had just heard from Brings-down-the-Sun; of the wonderful imagination of the ancient Blackfeet medicine men who originated them; of the brilliant beauty of the night skies, which had inspired them, and of the scrupulous care with which they had been handed down from father to son.

These inspiring thoughts about the heavens were rudely interrupted by my old enemy, Kops-ksis-e, the North Piegan watch dog. He came prowling through the trees, as if in search of lurking enemies. But he

[p. 502]

was really on a thieving expedition to our camp for food. creeping stealthily along, like a moving shadow in the moonlight. When he came very suddenly and unexpectedly on my bed, covered with white canvas, he was at first startled, and stood with half-suppressed growls, but when he discovered that it belonged to the white man, whom he had, from the first, hated and distrusted, his fear quickly changed to anger. With fierce barks and bristling hair, he advanced to drive me out. Fortunately, I understood the ways of Indian dogs. If I had shown any sign of fear, he would have attacked me with a sudden rush. But I seized a big stick, and went so quickly into action, that the thoroughly frightened Kops-ksis-e gave a series of frightened yelps and fled into the forest.

Returning to my blankets, I had no sooner fallen into a light sleep, than I was again aroused, by the sound of an Indian riding furiously down the steep embankment from the plain. When I heard him enter the woods, the thought at once flashed through my mind, that it was Bull Plume, the defeated medicine man, coming to make me the victim of some vindictive purpose, before I could leave his country. My bed was near a small path, a short cut from the main trail, which ran around our camp. I heard the rider coming down the trail, until he had turned into the side path, which would bring him directly to my bed. Jumping from my blankets, I hid in the thick underbrush. When his horse came to my canvas, shining in the moonlight, it reared and with a snort plunged to one side. For a moment, the rider lost his balance and swayed, as if to fall, but, quickly recovering himself, he tried to force his horse across my bed. But the frightened animal went crashing aside into the underbrush and, to my

[p. 503]

great relief, disappeared in the forest, his rider singing a Wolf song until lost in the distance.

When the moon was high, I fell asleep. It seemed but a brief interval, until I was aroused, before daybreak, by Menake and Nitana preparing our morning meal. I rolled from my warm blankets into the chill air, with a "tired feeling." I was soon refreshed by a cold bath in the river and by the fresh air of the woods in the early dawn. Taking my lariat, I hurried past the silent white lodges of the North Piegans to the hills, where our horses were feeding. Passing from the shadows of the big trees to the open prairie, I was met by a gentle breeze, coming from the mountains, fragrant with the sweet odour of wild flowers and growing grass. I climbed Lookout Butte and, from its summit, saw the shadowy forms of our horses in a meadow nearby. On the eastern horizon I beheld the two magnificent planets, Venus and Jupiter, now in conjunction. Jupiter had risen first, and I realised that he was Poia (Scarface), and that the other planet was his father, Morning Star.

While driving the horses back to camp, I heard the distant cries of wolves and coyotes. The Rockies were beginning to flush with a soft rosy light, reflected from the eastern sky. Then the higher summits were touched by the first direct rays of the sun. The red glow crept slowly down, lighting up in turn the dark timbered slopes below, until, at length, the sun rose majestically above the plains, and the whole landscape was flooded with the brilliant and glorious light of a new day. Directly, there burst forth, on all sides, a bird chorus of wonderful harmony and gladness, as if all nature joined in welcoming the Sun-God's coming. I recognised the bird notes of thrushes, white-crowned

[p. 504]

sparrows and Maryland yellow-throats, from the willows and cottonwoods of the river valley, and of prairie larks, Savanna sparrows and horned larks, from the near-by ridges of the plains.

The camp had been dismantled and the morning meal was ready, when I returned. When our outfit was packed, and we were prepared to start, Brings-down-the-Sun and his family came to say farewell. We wondered at seeing the old chief leading his favourite saddle horse, Soks-kinne (Loud Voice). Soks-kinne, with his beautiful head and long silvery mane and tail, was a familiar friend with all the tribe. Although a noted race-horse, he was intelligent, docile and reliable, and a child could safely ride him. Brings-down-the-Sun was greatly attached to him, as to an old and faithful friend. To our astonishment, he presented the horse to Menake, saying: "I now give you Soks-kinne, because I have felt grateful to you, ever since you cared for the dead bodies of my daughter, Pretty Blanket, and her three children. I know that your heart is good, because you alone, of all your people, were not afraid to go to them, when they were murdered in your country by Wakes-up-last, when he was crazed by the white man's fire water." [*1] But Menake refused to take Soks-kinne, explaining that she knew how highly he valued the horse, and she wanted no reward. Brings-down-the-Sun laid his hand affectionately on Soks-kinne's head, saying, "I prize this horse more than anything else that I possess. I resolved to give him to you, because you were kind to my dead children, but I am glad that you have refused to take him, and now I know that your heart is good. Whenever any of your friends or relatives may come to visit in our

Click to enlarge
SUNRISE FROM LOOKOUT BUTTE

[p. 505]

country, they will always be well cared for in my camp."

I shook hands with all of my Indian brothers and sisters. When I came to say farewell to the old chief, he presented me with his stone pipe, explaining that it was his "everyday pipe," which he had smoked for many years. He said in his farewell talk, "My children, I have never before gone into any camp to sit and talk, day after day, with strangers, as I have done with you. My heart will be heavy after you have gone, and I will feel lonely every time I look at your camping ground."

When I mounted my horse, the old chief gazed towards the rising sun and, lifting his hand impressively, prayed,

"Hear, Oh Sun! May he go safely while travelling afar!
  May we live long and continue to be friends!
  May we both meet and be happy again!"

In Blackfeet:

Haiyu! Haiyu! Natosin! Nach-ki-tach-sa-po-au ach-kach-pinna
 Acksi-sam-a-ik-so-ko
 Ita-ma-tau-tat-si-sinna.

As we rode slowly away towards the open plains, I turned in my saddle for a last look, and saw Brings-down-the-Sun walking with bowed head, along the wooded trail toward his camp, leading his favourite horse, Soks-kinne, and followed by his faithful old dog, Kops-ksis-e.

Footnotes

^491:1 See [*Appendix].

^499:1 See [*Appendix].

^504:1 See [*Appendix].

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 506]

  

CHAPTER XXXIX

  

THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF THE BLACKFEET

Appalling inroads of death upon the Blackfeet chiefs.--Decline in the tribal spirit and religion.--Pathetic appeal of an old chief to the young men to "keep up their old religion."--A government agent's prohibition of the annual Sun-dance causes despondency and indignation.--I attend a council of the Chiefs.--Stock-stchi's speech in behalf of the Sun-dance.--Challenges me to name anything harmful in its observance.--My reply.--Changed conditions bring to an end the development of the noble line of unselfish and patriotic Blackfeet Chiefs.--The passing of the buffalo gave the death-blow to their tribal organisation and brought poverty, government relief, pauperisation and moral decline.--The government passes remedial legislation.--President Roosevelt and Indian Commissioner Leupp give new impetus to the progressive policy.--The medical and practical missionary both needed.--The Blackfeet a promising field for Christian Missions.

FOURTEEN years have passed since I first went among the Blackfeet. In the meantime death has made appalling inroads upon the ranks of their leading chiefs and medicine men, and but few of my friends are left. There have passed over the "Wolf Trail" O-mis-tai-pokah, the head chief; Mad Wolf, their greatest orator and leader of the Sun-dance; Running Crane, leader of the southern division; Sik-si-ka-koan, the scout; Double Runner; Elk Horn; Little Plume; Flat Tail; Drags-his-robe; Morning Plume and Running Rabbit; the doctors Ear Rings and Awunna; and the medicine men Spotted Eagle and Bull Child, and many others.

At the last Sun-dance of the Blackfeet, I could not suppress a feeling of sadness, because of the absence of

[p. 507]

the familiar and inspiring figures of so many of their leaders and because of the visible indifference of the people towards the old chiefs, who were still living.

I found the once noted chief and medicine man, Brings-down-the-Sun, in a small poor lodge on the outskirts of the camp, unnoticed and seemingly unknown by the younger generation of the Blackfeet. He had come from his home in Alberta to attend their tribal festival, and to lead in the ceremonials of the Sun-lodge. I saw him standing in his customary position before the sacred booth, praying and waiting. But, instead of having the people come before him for his blessing, as in former days, they were thronging the horse races and social dances, and the young men were engaged in a base ball game by the side of the Sun-lodge.

I heard the sorrowful entreaty of an elderly chief, made to the younger men, exhorting them to keep up the religion of their fathers. He said:

"Young men, come forth and help us! You now have homes of your own and should do your share in keeping up the worship of the Sun. You no longer are helpers, but sit idly by and seem willing to abandon all of our old religious customs. While we live, we should keep up our religion. You now seem to care only for whisky, gambling, and horse racing."

I was present when the Blackfoot agent permitted the tribe to assemble in their annual summer encampment, but his arbitrary interference prevented the religious ceremonies of the Sun-dance. Much preparation had already been made to fulfil the vow made by a woman to give the Sun-dance to secure the recovery of her sick son. The subsequent death of the boy and the prevalence of sickness and mourning for deceased relatives, during the encampment, filled the people with gloom and despondency. They very naturally attributed

[p. 508]

their misfortunes to their inability to fulfil the vow. At that time a council of chiefs, to which I was invited, was

held beside the unfinished Sun-lodge. While I was seated in their midst, Stock-stchi, an old friend of Mad Wolf's, arose and addressing me said:

"You have been among us for many years, and have attended many of our ceremonials. Have you ever seen a disturbance, or anything harmful, that has been caused by our Sun-dance?"

Then turning towards the council he continued very earnestly,

"We know that there is nothing injurious to our people in the Sun-dance. On the other hand, we have seen much that is bad at the dances of the white people. It has been our custom, during many years, to assemble once every summer for this festival, in honour of the Sun God. We fast and pray, that we may be able to lead good lives and to act more kindly towards each other. I do not understand why the white men desire to put an end to our religious ceremonials. What harm can they do to our people? If they deprive us of our religion, we will have nothing left, for we know of no other that can take its place. We do not understand the white man's religion. The Black Robes (Catholic Priests) teach us one thing and the Men-with-white-neckties (Protestant Missionaries) teach us another; so we are confused. We believe that the Sun God is all powerful, for every spring he makes the trees to bud and the grass to grow. We see these things with our own eyes, and, therefore, know that all life comes from him."

Then, turning again towards me, Stock-stchi said,

"If the Indians should go to a church, where the white men were holding their religious ceremonials, and would order them to stop, what would they do?"

[paragraph continues] The attention of the council was fixed upon me, and they waited in dignified silence for my reply. After considering for a moment, I said,

"The white men, where I live, know nothing about your religion. Many things have been told to them about you that are not true. I have come to live among you, that I might learn the truth from you, and then tell the truth to the white people. The hearts of many of the white men feel warm towards their red brothers, and when they know the truth about you, they may act more wisely."

[p. 509]

With these words, I arose to depart and the council broke up.

These incidents in my recent experience indicate the drift of events and the changed conditions of the Blackfeet, which have brought to an end the development of such illustrious chiefs as O-mis-tai-po-kah, Mad Wolf, Brings-down-the-Sun and Running Crane. The growth of such strong and noble characters, out of the seemingly unfavourable moral soil of Sun Worship seems unaccountable. Their unselfish and patriotic lives, devoted to the welfare of their tribe, rise before me in strange and painful contrast with the selfish and sordid lives of many of the rich and powerful of my race. The latter's wealth and power, notwithstanding the advantages of education and Christianity, are not devoted to the amelioration, but tend rather to increase the suffering and degradation of their fellow men.

The constantly increasing migration of white settlers, like the rising tide of the sea, meant the inevitable extinction of the herds of buffalo, which had formerly sustained the Blackfeet, and the other plains-tribes, with food and shelter. The extermination, in 1883, of the last of these great herds, gave the final death-blow to their tribal organisation and suddenly cut off their food supply, necessitating governmental relief to prevent their perishing of starvation. Then followed the governmental policy of herding the Indian tribes on reservations, and supporting them on a ration-system, which included blankets, clothing and food supplies, conditioned upon their remaining upon their reservations and refraining from acts of violence. The gratuitous support of the government and an enforced life of idleness inevitably tended to pauperise and degrade them.

[p. 510]

[paragraph continues] And, as if to doubly seal their fate, their contact with the white race was chiefly with its worst representatives, who had gathered along the frontier to seek their fortunes. These looked upon the Indian as only an obstacle to their personal advantage, a hindrance to the progress of civilisation and of necessity to be exterminated. No race, civilised, or uncivilised, could long withstand such adverse conditions. Moral decline was the swift and sure result. Then came the economic necessity of cutting down the Blackfeet Reservation limits, through selling their lands to the government by treaty, and the investment of the proceeds in cattle and supplies, with a view to making them self supporting. But, because of the inability of the Indians, from lack of experience, to adapt themselves to the new conditions, and because of the incompetency of government agents to properly handle their interests, their resources were wasted. Their cattle perished in large numbers, and their rich grazing lands, which had long been a coveted prize to the cattle-men, were depleted through over-grazing and the machinations of the cattle kings. Their condition and the similar condition of other Indian tribes simultaneously reached an acute stage. Dispossessed of their ancestral domains, their armed resistance overcome, their source of subsistence destroyed, they had become the helpless dependents of the American nation, requiring immediate action and the highest statesmanship and constructive philanthropy for their redemption.

The accession of Theodore Roosevelt to the presidency in 1905 and of Francis E. Leupp, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, gave great impetus to the humane and progressive Indian policy of the government. This new policy, in general, seeks to dissolve the tribal organisation, to individualise the Indian, to make him a

[p. 511]

self-supporting citizen, and to ultimately assimilate him with the white race. Under it the Indian receives full recognition of his rights and, at the same time, protection for his interests. Under it, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs cuts up the reservations, giving to all Indians a generous farm-allotment, and selling the remaining, or surplus Indian lands to the public for settlement. The proceeds of such sales are set aside as tribal funds, to be used for their general benefit by the government under a wise and provident trusteeship, which safeguards their interests.

In pursuance of this policy, the House of Representatives, in 1906, passed a bill to survey and open for settlement lands formerly included in the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana, comprising about one and a half million acres. The disposal of these lands is now well under way. Irrigation systems are also being constructed at the expense of the tribal funds, which will give increased value to land heretofore unavailable for agriculture.

Under the passing of the old conditions and the coming in of the new policy, the younger generation of Blackfeet is already responding, and manifesting a capacity for improvement. They are becoming the owners of real estate, and are developing thrift and an ability to provide for the future. A visitor to-day, in the Blackfeet country, unless he should happen to come at a time when they have quit work and have assembled for a few days' recreation in their tribal camp, would not know that he was among Indians. He would now see a marked advance towards civilised conditions, and a striking contrast between the older generation of Indians, who, because of their fixed habits of hereditary savagery, are incapable of work, or a

[p. 512]

settled occupation, and their children, who are being educated and trained to work and to industrial pursuits. The industrious are rapidly becoming self-supporting. Some of them live in well-made and comfortable houses, and own ranches, with large herds of cattle and horses. They wear white men's clothes, purchased from the trading stores, own high priced wagons and buggies and make use of modern farming implements.

The mental and spiritual slavery of the Blackfeet, under their "Medicine" superstitions, and the unchecked ravages of tuberculosis and other diseases, which have come with the white men, offer a promising field of usefulness for the medical missionary. There is also a great opportunity for the practical missionary, who will not only teach the Blackfeet Christianity, but also by personal contact and personal example teach them how to live, in respect to hygiene, industry and thrift, how to become self-supporting and make the most out of their environment.

The whole question of lifting up the Indian is one of economical, educational, and moral difficulty to both state and church. They are together responsible for its solution, the work of each supplementing the other.

Christian missions among the Blackfeet have not yet made equal progress with the government. Nevertheless, the virility of the Blackfeet character, and the robustness of their physical manhood, under the old conditions of barbarism, give assurance of what should be forthcoming under Christianity, rightly applied. The Blackfeet stock is endowed with as favourable qualities for grafting upon it the fruits of our Christian Civilisation, as was the Anglo-Saxon before its conversion to Christianity.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 513]

  

APPENDIX I

  

BLACK FEET INDIAN SONGS

Click to enlarge
LOVE SONG

(<page 242>)

 

Click to enlarge
WOLF SONG

(<page 243>)

Blackfeet songs are generally sung without words.

[p. 514]

Click to enlarge
SIOUX DANCE

(<page 243>)

 

Click to enlarge
WAR SONG

(<page 277>)

 

Click to enlarge
SIOUX CELEBRATION SONG

(<page 280> and <page 282>)

 

Click to enlarge
RIDING SONG

(<page 281>)

 

[p. 515]

Click to enlarge
NIGHT SONG

(<page 281>)

 

Click to enlarge
TRIBAL HYMN, "RAISING THE POLE"

(<page 308>)

 

Click to enlarge
CHILDREN'S GAME SONG

(<page 391>)

 

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 516]

  

APPENDIX II

Page <page 15>[15].--"This region should be reserved as a National Park and Game Preserve."

There is a Bill before Congress which proposes to create this tract of mountain country into a National Park. The Public Lands Committee of the Senate in reporting the Bill to the Sixtieth Congress said:

"This Bill proposes to create a National Park which will be fittingly called 'Glacier National Park.' The territory embraced contains about 1,400 square miles with approximately equal areas on the east and west of the summit of the main range of the Rocky Mountains and immediately south of the International Boundary line.

"The park will embrace more than 60 glaciers, 250 lakes and many streams. From this area waters flow to the Hudson Bay, Gulf of Mexico, and the Pacific Ocean. The mountain scenery is of unparalleled grandeur and beauty. Mt. Cleveland, the highest peak, has an elevation of 10,434 feet and there are numerous other rugged peaks and mountains varying in heights from 6,000 to 10,000 feet above the sea level. Mountain goats, mountain sheep (Bighorn), grizzly and black bears, deer, wapiti, and moose are still to be found, as well as a great variety of birds, and it is believed these game animals and birds will increase in numbers, if protected by law, to such an extent as to furnish in the overflow from the park a tempting supply to sportsmen for all time to come."

The following Editorial concerning the proposed National Park is from the Outlook, New York, April 16, 1910.

"In North-western Montana, fronting on the Canadian boundary line, lies a tract of mountainous country which it is proposed in a Bill now before Congress to turn into a National Park. It is not a large tract--from south to north it covers approximately sixty miles. Yet within its limits is comprised the most beautiful portion of the range of the Rocky Mountains lying within the limits of the United States. The range there is narrow. The great grass-covered

[p. 517]

northern prairies sweep up to within twenty miles of the Continental Divide. There is no intervening mass of foothills to break in upon and tone down the abruptness of the approach. From out on the prairies can be seen, within easy distance, the precipitous crags and the hanging glaciers of a typical Alpine region; and, on the other hand, from the summit of Chief Mountain on a clear morning one may look out on an ocean of prairie in which the Sweet Grass Hills, over a hundred miles away, appear to twinkle in the very foreground. The tract contains also an apex of the continent. In its centre rises the Blackfoot Mountain, with the great Blackfoot Glacier, containing almost as much ice as the Gorner Glacier at Zermatt, descending from its eastern slope. The water from this glacier forms the St. Mary's River, which, running north-westward, joins the Saskatchewan and ultimately finds its way into Hudson Bay. Near another slope of the mountain rises Cutbank Creek, flowing southwesterly into the Marias, the Missouri, the Mississippi, and ultimately the Gulf of Mexico; while on the western slope of the mountain is found one of the sources of the Flathead, a tributary of the Columbia, flowing westward into the Pacific.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

"The proposed park would make a wonderful recreation ground for the American people. The summer and autumn climate is cold and bracing. The mountains and glaciers offer the only chance for mountaineering of real Alpine character (except that afforded by the Coast Range and Alaska) to be found within the limits of the United States. The trout of the cold St. Mary waters fight with a vigour that is seldom seen even in the famous streams of eastern Canada. And the mountains still shelter a sufficient number of our game animals (including our three most splendid species, the mountain sheep and goat and the grizzly bear) to enable the tract to become in time an important animal refuge. If by the action of Congress the pending Bill becomes a law and the Glacier National Park is established we shall have added to our system of National parks one which in many features is unlike, and which in its beauty and opportunities for wholesome pleasure will fitly supplement those which we already have."

Page <page 29>[29], <page 30>[30], <page 35>[35].--"Sacred bundle of the Beaver Medicine"--"Medicine Pipe" and "Medicine Bonnet."

The word "medicine," when used as a noun by itself, means something endowed with supernatural power; but, when used as an adjective-prefix, it also means sacred, or set apart for use in religious ceremonials. "The sacred bundle of the Beaver Medicine" is a bundle containing many skins of birds and animals thus set apart. It was believed to have been given originally to the Blackfeet by the Beavers, and to have been handed down from generation

[p. 518]

to generation. (See legend of its origin in Chapter 6.) It was only opened upon an important religious occasion,  by a ceremonial. For more extended comments on the significance and use of the word "Medicine" see Chapter XI.

Page <page 50>[50].--"Parfleches." A raw-hide case used for packing in horse transportation and also as a trunk or receptacle for use inside the tipi. The "parfleches" and "pemmican bags" were a necessity for a nomadic people. Both were favourite objects for decoration to gratify their sense of the beautiful. They ordinarily used conventional designs of triangles combined in quadrangular forms and painted in red, blue and yellow.

Page <page 53>[53].--"Their lodge poles were worn too short." When changing camp, the small ends of the lodge poles were fastened to the horses' sides, the large ends dragging behind upon the ground. The Blackfeet changed camp so frequently that their poles were soon worn too short for the lodges, requiring a new set of lodge poles every year.

Page <page 152>[152], <page 504>[504].--"When Wakes-up-last murdered all of his children." The murder of Brings-down-the-Sun's daughter (Pretty Blanket) and her three children, and Wakes-up-last's suicide, was the result of the sale of bad whiskey, consisting largely of wood alcohol, to Blackfeet Indians by white saloon-keepers in the town of Cutbank, Montana. Their bodies lay for some time uncared for, because of the superstitious dread of touching the dead, until Menake prepared them for burial. Although the sale of whiskey to Indians is prohibited by United States Law the saloon-keepers escaped punishment.

Page <page 157>[157].--Father De Smet was a Jesuit priest noted in his day for his influence with the Indian tribes in the North-West. His diary records that in 1841 he secured 30 brave Pend d'Oreilles to accompany him through the country of the Blackfeet, because the latter were so hostile to the whites that they never gave them any quarter. Later, in 1846, while living among the Blackfeet, he reported them equal in hospitality with other Indian tribes.

Page <page 137>[137], <page 193>[193].--"Travois." A horse litter made of poles. Two poles were fastened like shafts to the sides of a horse, the small ends crossing above and in front of the horse's head, while the large ends dragged behind on the ground. A cross-framing supported a network of raw-hide strips. Upon this simple but ingenious device young children, the aged and sick were transported, also provisions and camp equipage. Sometimes a canopy, constructed of bent branches and a skin covering, was used for protection from sun and rain.

Page <page 283>[283].--"Indian music should be preserved."

Deeply impressed with the great possibilities of Indian music, I persuaded Arthur Nevin, an American composer, to go with me to

[p. 519]

the camps of the Blackfeet. During his stay in my Indian tipi, I proposed his composing an opera founded on the story of Poia. (page <page 491>), the most ancient tradition of the Blackfeet, using an Indian environment and Indian musical themes. The opera, which was named "Poia," was completed by Mr. Nevin in the spring of 1906. Mr. Randolph Hartley of New York wrote the libretto. The music was played for the first time in concert form by the Pittsburg Orchestra, January 16th, 1907. Poia was accepted for production by the Berlin Royal Opera House in June, 1909. The premier performance took place April 23, 1910, and was followed by three other performances. The opera was superbly staged, both as to scenery and costumes, and was sung by a strong cast of the Berlin Royal Opera. The second performance was attended by the Crown Prince and Crown Princess and other members of the Royal Family.

Page <page 307>[307].--"Counting Coups."

To "count coups" is to narrate deeds of valour. The bravest coup was to strike, or even touch an enemy before killing him. It was also counted as a coup to capture a weapon or article of clothing such as a shield, war shirt, or war bonnet.

Page <page 312>[312].--"Bull Child wore a robe famous among the Blackfeet." This robe was purchased by Dr. Clark Wissler for the American Museum of Natural History, New York City, and is exhibited in their collection from the Blackfeet. Its design and the instructions as to how it should be made, were given to Brings-Down-the Sun in a dream (page 430).

Page <page 425>[425].--"We call the thunder Isis-a-kummi (Thunder-bird)." Nearly all of the widely spread tribes of the Algonquian stock, as well as other ethnical divisions of the Red Indians, had a myth concerning the awe-inspiring mystery of nature we call thunder and lightning. They personified this mysterious and supernatural power in the Thunder-bird, which they worshipped and to which they made propitiatory sacrifices. We find it among the Micmacs of Nova Scotia, the Passamaquoddies of Maine; the Hurons, Ottawas, and Mississiquas of Lake Ontario; the Ojibways of Lake Superior, the Crees of Hudson Bay; the Athabascan tribes of Northern Canada, the Illinois of the middle west, the Comanches of the southwest, the Moquis of Arizona, all the plains-tribes and those of the north-western Pacific Coast.

The Blackfeet have a tradition that the Thunder-bird was once overcome by a snowstorm and descended into their camp. It was taken to the lodge of the head chief, where many of the tribe assembled. Its feathers had many colours like the rainbow and its claws were long and green. When it suddenly flew from the lodge, the Indians rushed out and saw it disappearing among the storm clouds.

[p. 520]

The Indian belief made the storm cloud the Thunder-bird's vehicle, behind which he moved through the air, making peals of thunder by flapping his wings, and shooting forth lightning flashes by the blinking of his all-penetrating eyes.

The legendary habitation of the Thunder-bird was usually in a high mountain, or inaccessible crag in the tribe's vicinity. The Blackfeet believed its home to be in a great cavern near the summit of Chief Mountain, one of the most precipitous peaks of the Rocky Mountains. The family of Thunderers of the Passamaquoddies of Maine were said to dwell in the great cavern of Mount Katahdin. The Pottawotomies located the Thunder-bird in one of the high mountain peaks of Thunder Bay on Lake Superior. The Ojibways assigned their Thunder-bird to a high mountain west of them. The Illinois, now almost extinct, had a legend about the "Paieusen" or "Man-Devouring-Bird," which dwelt among the high cliffs on the Mississippi River, near the present town of Alton. Its effigy was carved and painted in large dimensions on the face of a perpendicular cliff overlooking the Mississippi River. Father Marquette gives a vivid description of it in the narrative of his voyage down that river in 1673. The Makah Indians of Cape Flattery named the mountain back of Clyoquot on Vancouver Island as his dwelling place, where, "on the shores of a small lake are quantities of whales' bones, which the Thunder-bird had killed." The Thlinkeets (Esquimaux) of Alaska have a tradition of a mythical person named Chethl, "who, in the form of a great bird, frequented the crater of Mount Edgecumbe, near Sitka, feeding upon whales, which he carried there in his talons."

The Thunder-bird was frequently represented in Blackfeet religious ceremonials. Its symbol was also painted on shields, weapons and war clothes for inspiring courage, and on tipis for invoking protection in behalf of the family.

Page <page 437>[437].--"Piskun:" A natural trap, usually a perpendicular cliff or cut-bank, used for capturing game on a large scale and requiring the co-operation of many Indians. This method of killing buffalo by frightening and rushing them over a cliff to their death, was used by the Blackfeet in ancient times, when the buffalo were plentiful and their weapons primitive, but was abandoned after the introduction of horses and fire-arms. The approaches to the piskun were fenced to guide the frightened animals to the verge of the cliff. This hunting device for securing by wholesale their winter supplies of meat resembles the "deer-fences," which formerly the Chippewa Indians constructed with much ingenuity and labour, extending for miles through the unbroken forests of Michigan, and across the general direction of the deer-migration, bringing them within the range of the Indians' weapons in ambush. The

[p. 521]

[paragraph continues] Blackfeet also built a corral about the foot of the cliff, to prevent the escape of any buffalo, which were not killed outright by the fall. The locations of piskuns are still easily recognised by the darker green of the grass, showing the soil-enrichment from animal slaughter. Numerous flint arrowheads and other relics of the chase are also found there.

Page <page 465>[465].--Tribal regulations for hunting buffalo were not characteristic of the Blackfeet alone, but were used by the other plains-tribes as a necessary protection for their common interests. According to the journal of Alexander Henry (a partner in the North-Western Company of Montreal, 1806), the tribal policy of the Mandans, in the matter of hunting buffalo, was one of comity towards neighbouring tribes at peace with them, of provident conservation in hunting them, and of humane consideration of the poorest and helpless in the distribution of the meat. The exercise of police power to prevent private exploitation of the natural resources owned in common, fell into disuse with the advent of the whites. The Blackfeet, together with the other plains-tribes, finally joined with the white hunter in a blind and reckless slaughter of the vast herds of buffalo, until they became practically extinct in 1883.

Page <page 478>[478].--"I see the Last Brother is pointing downwards towards the prairie." The pointing of the "Last Brother" furnished the Blackfeet with their night-sky clock. This method of telling time in the night is well known to shepherds and cattle herders, whose night occupation keeps them continually in the open. Observation soon teaches them that the "Last Brother" or end star of the handle of the Great Dipper, describes a great circle around the North Star once in twenty-four hours and therefore, that its pointing or relative position with the horizon would mark the time, as on a great dial-face.

It should be noted, however, that "star time gains three minutes and fifty nine seconds on solar time every twenty-four hours. If, therefore the 'Last Brother' occupied a certain position in the sky at midnight of June 1st, on September 1st it would have the same position at 6 p.m. This variation would not affect the Indians' use of this method, for they never had need for other than an approximate record of time, that being the one thing they had more of than they knew what to do with." (Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 487>[487a].--"When the Akatsis (Lariat, or Rainbow) appears in the sky." The rainbow symbol is sometimes used in Indian decoration to represent the Thunder-bird. Other tribes call it "The Rain's Hat," "The Great Spirit's Fish Line," and "Strong-medicine-to-drive-away-rain."

Page <page 487>[487b].--"When the fires of the Northmen (Aurora Borealis) flash in the winter sky."

[p. 522]

The Aurora Borealis is also called by the plains Indians, "The Light of the Northern Dancers," "Sacred Cloud," "The White Man's Fire," and "The Mysterious Fire of the North." The Indians of Vancouver Island believe that the light is caused by the fires of a tribe of Indian manikin, who live near the North Pole and boil out their blubber on the ice.

Page <page 487>[487c].--"When the sun paints both his cheeks, that is, when the Sun-dogs (Ick ski) appear." The concept, used in Indian sign-language to represent Sun-dogs, is "Fires to warm the Sun." The Shoshones' name for the phenomenon is "The Sun's Winter Ear-rings."

"When the parhelia, or Sun-dogs appear in very cold weather, the Sioux say that 'the Sun has kindled a fire.' When the Sun is eclipsed, they say it 'faints or dies.' The Sun 'travels' while the ground is motionless." (Rev. J. O. Dorsey.)

Page <page 487>[487d].--"When I see a star feeding (Blackfeet name for comet)." "Comets have been regarded among all nations from the earliest ages as portents of evil. It is therefore not surprising that this superstition should be found among the Blackfeet. The appearance of several very bright comets during the 16th and 17th centuries caused universal alarm. Andrew Pare writes of the comet of 1528: 'This comet was so horrible and so dreadful and inspired such terror in men's minds, that some died from fear alone, others by illness caused by fear.' Famine was generally supposed to follow the appearance of a comet. The recent return of Halley's Comet stirred up dormant superstition in the minds of multitudes of people, even those of intelligence, and from every part of Christendom, we have learned of the fear and dread associated with the comet's near approach to the sun and to the earth. It is true that the tail of the comet came in contact with the earth, as has occurred with other comets in the past, but it is known that it is built up of such tenuous matters, that it could have no effect upon the earth that could be detected with the most refined instruments. Sir Robert Ball has well said, The effect could not be greater than the contact of a rhinoceros with a cobweb.'" (Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 487>[487e].--"When the sun hides his face."

"A total eclipse of the sun is commonly regarded as the forerunner of war, disease and death among the nations of the earth. The writer of this note observed a total eclipse of the sun among a tribe of Winemucca Indians in Nevada, January 1st, 1900. They looked upon the phenomena in dread silence and yet with stolid bravery while, at the same time, a Chinese settlement near by made a dreadful noise by beating upon tin and other vessels to drive off the supposed dragon from the face of the sun."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 487>[487f].--"Day Star." In general the plains-tribes had more

[p. 523]

special names for stars and constellations than the mountains tribes. The Blackfeet called Mars the "Big-Fire-Star," and Venus "The Day Star" because visible in the daytime.

"When at its greatest brilliancy, the planet Venus can easily be seen overhead in a clear sky, even at midday. The period of visibility covers several weeks, but varies slightly from year to year."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 488>[488].--"'The Seven Brothers' (Great Bear), also known in England as the 'Plough' and 'Wain.'" According to a Sioux legend, "the four stars of the bowl of the dipper are called the 'bier.' It is borne by four men, behind whom comes the train of mourners. The second star in the handle has a very small one (the Little Sister) beside it. The Sioux say, 'it is she, who goes with her young one weeping'" (following the bier).

(Rev. J. O. Dorsey.)

Page <page 489>[489].--"The Little Sister" star is the smaller one of the two stars, at the bend in the handle of the dipper. In the older astronomy the brighter star is called "Mizar," and its companion "Alcor." Mizar itself is a double star, one of the most beautiful visible to the naked eye.

Page <page 490>[490].--"There is also a family of six small stars we call the 'Lost Children' (Pleiades)." "This beautiful and brilliant group of seven stars, bringing its name Pleiades down from the ancients, has always been the central object in the astronomy of the world. It has been mentioned by many writers during the past ages. Job refers to them twice and the prophet Amos once. Only six stars are visible to the ordinary vision, but the seventh can readily be seen with a favouring atmosphere, and when the observer knows just where to look for it. Professor Langley has seen thirteen stars in the Pleiades in the clear sky of Mount Etna. The telescope shows many stars in the environs of this beautiful constellation. The photographic camera reveals to us the fact that the brighter stars are surrounded with vast fields of nebulous matter."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 491>[491].--"Morning Star and Young Morning Star or Legend of Star Boy (Later Scarface, or Poia)." "The conjunction of two planets, that is their near approach to each other, has always been of deep significance to the untutored nations of the earth; indeed to many of the learned it was considered a portent fraught with great good or evil. Even Bacon in his 'Astrologia Sana' tells us that these phenomena are not to be rejected lightly.

"There can be conjunctions of any of the planets, but their importance seem to have been derived both from their near approach to each other, and from the increased brilliancy of their light. The degree of brilliance depends upon their distance from the earth at the time of conjunction.

[p. 524]

"In July, 1905, the date when the Star Boy legend was narrated by Brings-down-the-Sun, Venus and Jupiter were in conjunction as Morning Stars. The Indians were doubtless attracted by the brilliant spectacle of the two planets 'travelling together,' but very probably recognised them by their characteristic colours.

"Because of the remarkably close approach of these two planets to each other, it was a rare and brilliant conjunction attracting the attention of astronomers all over the world. Between the 3rd and 4th of July they seemed to the naked eye to be almost in contact. They were both included in the field of the telescope at the same time, being separated by only a minute in right ascension, or about one-thirtieth of the diameter of the moon, and, north and south, by a little more than one-half of the diameter of the moon, i.e., fifteen minutes. Jupiter (Star Boy) came up first, followed by Morning Star (Venus).

"Venus and Jupiter were in conjunction just before sunrise, October 14th, 1908. They were in conjunction again August 11th, 1909. The conjunction of Venus and Saturn on June 5th, 1910, will be very beautiful on account of their near approach to each other, which will be closest just before sunrise."

(Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

Page <page 499>[499].--"The Star that stands still." "The North Star has a motion around the true pole at this epoch of one and one-third degrees, or in other words, it is nearly three times the diameter of the Moon away from the true pole of the heavens. This motion is so slow and so limited in extent that the unaided eye would not likely detect it. In fact, the Pole Star has been near enough to the true pole of the heavens for many generations to satisfy all demands of the tutored as well as the untutored observers." (Dr. J. A. Brashear.)

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

Appendix II (continued): Catalog of Botanical Collection

Page <page 364>[364].--"My botanical collection."

This collection of herbs and plants, with a description of their Indian names, uses and methods of preparation by the Blackfeet, is deposited in the Carnegie Institute of Pittsburg. The specimens were identified by Mr. O. E. Jennings, Assistant Curator of Botany.

The same list was published by the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology and History (Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, Heft 2, 1909), after a lecture by the author in the Imperial Museum for Ethnography, March 6, 1909.

  

1. MATERIA MEDICA OF THE BLACKFEET.

KATOYA. Sweet Pine.--Balsam Fir. Abies lasiocarpa. Burned for incense in ceremonials. It was used in poultices for fevers and colds in the chest, also for hair oil by mixing with grease and for

[p. 525]

perfume. It is more fragrant than ordinary balsam. When it grows in dry places it has a more concentrated and sweet odour.

SE-PAT-SEMO. Sweet Grass. Vanilla Grass.--Savastana odorata. After drying, Sweet Grass was generally kept by plaiting several strands. It was burned for incense and used also for making hair tonic by soaking in water. In northern Europe and Sweden it is called Holy Grass, because, with other sweet scented grasses, it is strewn before the churches. It is found throughout the world in the cold north temperate zone, northern Europe, and Asia, Newfoundland to Alaska, south to New Jersey and Wisconsin to Colorado.

EK-SISO-KE. Sharp Vine.--Bear Grass. Yucca glauca. The roots were boiled in water and used as a tonic for falling hair. The Blackfeet thought there was no better remedy than the Ek-siso-ke for breaks and sprains. The roots were grated and placed in boiling water. The inflammation was reduced by holding the injured member in the rising steam. The roots were also placed upon cuts to stop bleeding and to allay inflammation.

NITS-IK-OPA. Double Root.--Squaw Root. Carum Gairdneri. Used for sore throat and placed on swellings to draw out inflammation. It was also eaten raw or boiled as a vegetable and used for flavouring stews.

OKS-PI-POKU. Sticky Root, also called AP-AKS-IBOKU. Wide Leaves.--Tufted Primrose or Alkali Lily. Pachylobus caespitosus. The root was pounded up and applied wet to sores and swellings to allay inflammation. It grows in alkali soil and is generally found in gravel beds.

APOS-IPOCO. Tastes Dry.--Alum Root. Heuchera parvifolia. It was pounded up and used wet as an application for sores and swellings. It grows on gravel bottoms and alkali flats.

MATOA-KOA-KSI. Yellow Root or Swamp Root.--Willow Leaved Dock. Rumex salicifolius. It was boiled and used for many complaints but generally for swellings. It grows in swamps.

MAIS-TO-NATA. Crow Root.--Dotted Blazing Star, named because of the brilliant scarlet of its flowers. Lacinaria punctata. It was called Crow Root by the Blackfeet because it was eaten by crows and ravens in the autumn. The root was boiled and applied to swellings. A tea was also made with it for stomach-ache. It was sometimes eaten raw.

O-MUCK-KAS. Big Turnip.--Parsnip. Leptotaenia multifida. Belonging to the carrot family, the Big Turnip is found on the sides of hills, growing in sandy loamy soil. It was gathered in the fall. The root was used to make a hot drink as a tonic for people in a weakened condition, and to make them fat. The root was also pounded up and burned for incense. When horses had the distemper

[p. 526]

they were made to inhale smoke from this root. It was also mixed with brains and used in soft tanning.

PA-KITO-KI. Gray Leaves.--Double Bladder Pod. Physaria didymocarpa. It is to be found growing on gravel bottoms. The Blackfeet chewed the plant for sore throats, also for cramps and stomach trouble. It was also placed in water with hot stones and used to allay swelling.

A-SAT-CHIOT-AKE. Rattle Weed.--Purple Loco Weed, Crazy Weed. Aragallus lagopus. Some of the flowers are purple, others blue, yellow and white. It grows on gravel bottoms. The Blackfeet chewed it for sore throats to allay swellings.

A-SA-PO-PINATS. Looks-like-a-plume.--Windflower or Round Fruited Anemone. Anemone globosa. It is adapted for a windy place and is found growing on hillsides where the wind strikes it, either on the plains, or in the mountains. In midsummer the flower turns into cotton which the Blackfeet burn on a hot coal for headache.

ET-AWA-AST. Makes-you-sneeze (Snuff). American White Hellebore. Veratrum speciosum. The plant grows to be about six feet high and is found in the mountain forests. The root is poisonous for eating. It was gathered by the Blackfeet both in the fall and in the spring and was used for head-ache. They broke off a small piece of the root which was very dry and snuffed it up the nose.

SIXA-WA-KASIM. Black Root.--Red Bane Berry. Actaea arguta. The berries are both red and white. It is found near the mountains in the underbrush along rivers. The roots were boiled and used for coughs and colds.

SIXIMAS. Black Root.--White Bane Berry. Actaea eburnea. The root was boiled and used for coughs and colds.

SIX-OCASIM. (Indian Horehound). It is not found on the prairies but in the mountains along streams. It was generally used after compounding with other plants, for babies' colds.

KAKSAMIS. She Sage.--Sweet Sage, Old Man, Pasturage Sage Brush. Artemisia frigida. The roots or tops were boiled and used as a drink for mountain fever. It was also chewed for heartburn. Sage was generally tied to articles that were offered as sacrifices to the Sun.

OTSQUE-EINA. Blue Berry.--Oregon Grape. Berberis aquifolium. The roots were boiled and used for stomach trouble, also for hemorrhages. It grew in the forest on the mountains.

APOKS-IKIM. Smell Foot.--Northern Valerian. Valeriana septentrionalis. A hot drink was made from the roots for stomach trouble.

A-MUCH-KO-IYATSIS. Red Mouth Bush.--Paper Leaf Alder. Alnus tenuifolia. A hot drink was made of the bark and taken

[p. 527]

for scrofula. The bark split readily and was also used for making stirrups, which were covered with raw-hide. The Blackfeet name originated because the bark when chewed made their mouths red.

MA-NE-KA-PE. Young Man.--Horse Mint. Monarda scabra. An eye wash was made by placing the blossoms in warm water and was used to allay inflammation.

SO-YA-ITS. Lies-on-his-belly.--Long Plumed Avens. Sieversia ciliata. It grows on the plains and in the mountains. The Blackfeet boiled it in water and used for sore and inflamed eyes.

KINE. Rose Berries or APIS-IS-KITSA-WA.--Tomato Flower. Says Rose. Rosa Sayi. A drink was made of the root and given to children for diarrhoea. The berries were sometimes eaten raw.

OMAKA-KA-TANE-WAN. Gopher Berries.--Wild potato, Ground Cherry, Cut Leaved Night Shade. Solanum triflorum. The berries were boiled and given to children for diarrhoea. The plants grow on prairie-dog hills.

KITA-KOP-SIM. Garter Root or Pachsi, Dry Root.--Silver Weed. Argentina anserina. The root was used for diarrhoea.

NUXAPIST. Little Blanket.--Indian Kemp, Dog Bane. Apocynum cannabinum. A drink was made by boiling the root in water and taken for a laxative. It was also used as a wash to prevent hair falling out. It grows on high cliffs and was gathered at all times of year.

A-PO-PIK-A-TISS. Makes-your-hair-gray.--Pore Fungus. Polyporus. A small quantity was used as a purgative. It was said to make the hair gray if too large a dose was taken. It was also used for cleaning buckskin.

AT-SI-PO-KOA. Fire Taste.--Sharp Leaved Beard Tongue. Pentstemon acuminatus. The Blackfeet named it At-si-po-koa because of its biting flavour. It was boiled in water and taken internally for cramps and pains in the stomach. It was also used to stop vomiting.

SIX-IN-OKO. Juniper.--Red Cedar. Juniperus scopulorum. The berries were made into a tea to stop vomiting. The Juniper was used ceremonially on the altar of the sacred woman at the Sun-dance.

AKS-PEIS. Sticky Weed.--Gum Plant. Grindelia squarrosa. The root was boiled and taken internally for liver trouble. It grows on the prairies.

OPET-AT-SAPIA. Gutierrezia diversifolia. Grows on the prairies in the foothills to the mountains. The roots were used by medicine men in doctoring. They placed red hot stones in water with the roots and made the patient inhale the steam.

E-SIMATCH-SIS. Dye.--Evernia vulpina. A lichen that grows on pine trees. It was used as a yellow dye for porcupine quills.

[p. 528]

[paragraph continues] The quills were placed with the dye in boiling water. It was also used for head-ache.

E-SIMATCH-SIS. Dye.--The Yellow Orthocarpus. Orthocarpus luteus. Used for dyeing gopher skins red. The plant was first pounded up and then pressed firmly upon the skin. It grows on the prairies.

ANA-WAWA-TOKS-TIMA. Buffalo Food.--Yellow Cancer Root. Thalesia fasciculata. Used by Buffalo medicine men in doctoring wounds. They chewed and blew it upon the wound.

SA-PO-TUN-A-KIO-TOI-YIS. Joint Grass.--Scouring Rush. Equisetum hiemale. The grass was boiled in water and used as a drink, for horse medicine.

PACH-CO-I-AU-SAUKAS. Smell Mouth.--Western Sweet Cicely. Washingtonia divaricata. It was given to mares in winter. The Blackfeet say that it put them in good condition for foaling. They placed it in the mares' mouths and made them chew it. A pleasant drink was made with a small piece of the Western Sweet Cicely root, a little more of the Sixocasim (Indian Horehound) to three cups of water. It was taken hot for colds or tickling in the throat.

  

TOBACCO.

KA-KA-SIN. Larb or Kinnekinick.--Bear Berry. Arctostaphylus uva ursi. The leaves which are thick and evergreen were dried and used for smoking. The berries were eaten raw and also used mashed in fat and fried. It grows in northern North America also northern Europe and Asia.

O-MAKSE-KA-KA-SIN. Big Larb.--Pipsissewa, Princess Pine. Chimaphila umbellata. It flourishes among decaying leaves in a sandy soil in the mountain forests of Northern North America. The dried leaves were used for tobacco by all the Mountain Indians. The Blackfeet had a special preference for the Big Larb in smoking.

  

2. PLANTS FOR CEREMONIALS.

PONO-KAU-SINNI. Turnip Elk Food.--Narrow Leaved Puccoon. Lithospermum linearifolium. The tops were dried and used for burning as incense in ceremonials.

SO-YO-TOI-YIS. Spring Grass or I-TA-PAT-ANIS, Cut-your-finger.--Slough Grass Sledge. Carex nebrascensis praevia. The Blackfeet said it was the favourite grass of the buffalo and for this reason the medicine men tied it around the horns of the sacred buffalo head used in the Sun-dance ceremonials. It grows in marshy places on the prairies.

A-PONO-KAUKI. Paper Leaves or O-TO-KAP-ATSIS. Yellow Flower.--Arrow Leaved Balsam Root. Balsamorrhiza sagittata. The

[p. 529]

large leaves were used in a ceremonial, while roasting Camass roots.

  

3. BERRIES AND WILD VEGETABLES USED FOR EATING.

OK-KUN-OKIN. Berry.--Sarvis Berry, June Berry, Service Berry, Shad, May Cherry. Amelanchier oblongifolia. A tall shrub or small tree growing on the prairies, along side hills and in river bottoms. The berries ripen in midsummer generally about the middle of July. The Blackfeet used them in great quantities with stews, soups and meat. They also dried them for winter use. Violent pains often followed the eating of raw Sarvis Berries.

PUKKEEP. Choke Cherry.--Western Wild Cherry. Prunus demissa. The Blackfeet say it does not ripen till later than the Sarvis Berry, generally September or even October. They were used for soups, eaten raw, and pounded up and mixed with meat. The bark was boiled and used internally in combination with roots of the Western Sweet Cicely, Northern Valerian, and Sixocasim (Indian Horehound).

MISS-IS-A-MISOI. Stink Wood.--Buffalo Berry, Silver Berry. Elaeagnus argentea. The Blackfeet gave it the name of Stink Wood because of the bad smell of the smoke. In gathering firewood a person was ridiculed if he brought in Stink Wood. The berries were used for soup. The bark was very tough and made strong rope for tying skins and parfleches when raw-hide was not at hand.

IM-A-TOCH-KOT. Dog Feet.--Disporum trachycarpum. It bears yellow berries which are eaten raw.

PO-KINT-SOMO. Wild Rhubarb.--Cow Parsnip. Heracleum lanatum. In the spring the stalks were eaten after being roasted over hot coals. The Blackfeet say the stalks are of two kinds which they designate by Napim (He) and Skim (She). They peeled and split the stalk of the Skim before roasting but only peeled the Napim. A stalk of the PO-KINT-SOMO was placed on the altar of the Sun-dance ceremonial.

PACH-OP-IT-SKINNI. Lumpy Head.--Wild Potato, Spring Beauty. Claytonia lanceolata. The Wild Potato grew on the prairies and in the foothills of the mountains. The Blackfeet dug them in spring for eating, preparing them for eating by boiling.

EK-SIK-A-PATO-API. Looks Back.--Smart Weed. Polygonum bistortoides. The root was used in soups and stews.

PESAT-SE-NEKIM. Funny Vine.--Wild Onion. Allium recurvatum. Eaten raw and also used for flavouring.

KACH-A-TAN. Tender Root.--Carolina Milk Vetch. Astragalus carolinianus. The root was gathered in the spring or fall and

[p. 530]

eaten raw or cooked by boiling in water. It grows on the gravel bottoms, or side-hills of the prairies.

EKS-IX-IX. White Root.--Bitter Root, State Flower of Montana, Red Head Louisa. Lewisia rediviva. The Blackfeet believed it was healthy food. They prepared it by boiling in water. It grows plentifully in the mountains.

SAX-IKA-KITSIM. (Quick Smell).--American Wild Mint. Mentha canadensis. The leaves were placed in parfleches to flavour dried meat. It was also used to make tea.

MASS. Wild Turnip.--Elk Food. Lithospermum linearifolium. The roots were prepared for eating by boiling or roasting. It grows on the prairies.

O-MUCK-AI-IX-IXI. Big White Root.--Evening Primrose, Alkali Lily. Musenium divaricatum. The Blackfeet say the root has no flavour until dried. It was gathered in the fall and eaten raw. It grows on the prairies.

MISS-ISSA. Camass.--Camassia esculenta. The roots were generally dug in the fall after the blossoms had fallen. They were baked by placing in a deep hole with heated stones and a covering of leaves and grass. A fire was also kept burning on top of the ground. It was said to require two days and two nights to cook them thoroughly in this way.

  

4. PERFUMES.

AT-SINA-MO. Gros Ventre Scent.--Meadow Rue. Thalictrum occidentale. The berries were dried and placed in small buckskin bags.

KATOYA. Sweet Pine.--Balsam Fir. Abies lasiocarpa. The leaves had a delightful odour when confined in a buckskin bag. Sweet Pine was also mixed with grease in making hair oil to add fragrance.

MAT-O-AT-SIM. Perfumed Plant.--Rayless Camomile, Oregon Dog Root, Dog Fennel. Matricaria matricarioides. The blossoms were dried and used for perfumery.

SE-PAT-SEMO. Sweet Grass.--Vanilla Grass. Sevastana odorata. Sweet Grass was the most popular perfumery among the Blackfeet. It was made into braids and placed with their clothes or carried around in small bags. It was also used for a hair-wash and as incense.

Pieces of punk from the Cottonwood Tree, leaves of the Balsam Poplar, and the Ring-bone from a horse's leg were also used for perfumes.

[p. 531]

  

5. BLACK FEET NAMES FOR FLOWERS.

SIK-A-PIS-CHIS. White Flower.--Aster commutatus.

OTA-KAP-IS-CHIS-KIT-SIMA. Yellow Flower.--Clasping-leaved Arnica. Arnica amplexifolia.

A-PIS-IS-KIT-SA-WA. Tomato Flower.--Red Rose. Rosa Sayi.

OT-SKA-A-PIS-IS-KIT-SA. Blue Flower.--Oblong Leaved Gentian. Gentiana affinis.

A-SA-PO-PIN-ATS. Looks-like-a-plume.--Round Fruited Anemone. Anemone globosa. Its name was derived from the appearance of the flower when it turns into cotton and resembles a soft, downy feather.

A-PO-NO-KAU-KI. Paper Leaves.--Arrow-leaved Balsam Root. Balsamorrhiza sagittata. In the hot weather its large leaves become very dry and resemble paper.

STO-O-KAT-SIS. Ghost's Lariat.--Columbian Virgins Bower. Atragene columbiana. A vine, with a beautiful light blue flower that trails along the ground and also climbs trees. The Blackfeet have named it Ghost's Lariat because it catches people and trips them up unexpectedly.

      The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 532]

  

Page <page 431>[431]. Genealogical Table of Brings-down-the-Sun's Family

Click to enlarge
Page 431.--GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF BRINGS-DOWN-THE-SUN'S FAMILY.

     The Old North Trail, by Walter McClintock, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 533]

  

INDEX

  

A

Alberta (Canadian province), <page 1>, <page 334>, <page 363>, <page 370>, <page 507>

Almost-a-Dog Mountain, <page 14>, <page 113>

Altar Sun-dance, <page 294>

American Museum of Natural History, <page 519>

Antelope dance, <page 265>, <page 406>

Apache Indians, <page 371>

April, name for, <page 486>

, Blackfeet name for author, <page 93>; dance by, <page 100>; meeting with Brings-down-the-Sun, <page 383>; explanation of name, <page 401>

Arapahoe Indians, tradition of, <page 402>; sign for, <page 404>

Assinniboine Indians, <page 206>, <page 238>, <page 442>

August, name for, <page 487>

Aurora Borealis, <page 487>; names for, <page 521>-<page 2>

Autumn season, name for, <page 487>

Awunna, medicine man, <page 102>; methods of doctoring, <page 244>-<page 250>; practical jokes by, <page 298>, <page 506>

  

B

Back-bone-of-the-world, <page 13>

Badger Creek, <page 19>, <page 438>

Baldy, pack horse, <page 37>, <page 41>, <page 113>, <page 121>

Bannock Indians, <page 206>

Barren lands, <page 435>

Bear grass, use by Indians, <page 10>, <page 443>, <page 525>

Bear knife, <page 361>

Bear spear, <page 352>; legend, <page 354>

Beavers, a home of, <page 389>

Beaver Bundle, <page 35>, <page 80>, <page 103>, <page 111>, <page 467>

Beaver dam, photograph, <page 106>

Beaver Medicine, owned by Mad Wolf, <page 29>, <page 35>; ceremonial of, <page 78>; legend, <page 104>; photograph, <page 107>, <page 153>, <page 367>, <page 517>

Beaver Pipe, <page 104>

Beaver tipi, <page 212>

 River, <page 364>

Benton Fort, <page 33>

Big Crow Foot, <page 422>

Big Eyes gives author tipi, <page 23>; decorations of tipi, <page 223>

Big Lake, chief, <page 157>

Big Moon, <page 201>

Big Nose, chief, <page 57>

Big Rock tipi, <page 210>

Birch Creek, <page 438>

Bitter Root country, <page 436>

Birds, eastern slope, <page 389>, <page 479>-<page 486>; western slope, <page 11>

Blackbird Brewer, <page 481>

Blackfeet, burial customs, <page 148>-<page 150>; diet, <page 22>, <page 237>; divisions of, <page 1>; herbs and plants used by, <page 524>-<page 30>; marriage customs, <page 184>-<page 191>; methods of doctoring, <page 247>-<page 250>; mourning customs, <page 150>-<page 153>; number, past and present, <page 4>; perfumes used by, <page 364>; pets, <page 246>; proper names, <page 395>-<page 405>; proverbs and familiar sayings, <page 402>, <page 476>, <page 478>, <page 484>, <page 485>; religious beliefs, <page 167>-<page 170>, <page 352>, <page 353>; skill in sign language, <page 403>; societies, <page 441>-<page 465>; songs, <page 282>, <page 518>; starvation of, <page 4>, <page 509>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>; present condition, <page 506>-<page 512>; names for flowers, <page 531>

Blackfeet tribal camp, first sight of, <page 18>, <page 208>, <page 481>, <page 495>; scenes in, <page 225>, <page 340>

Blackfoot Glacier, <page 14>, <page 517>

Blackfoot Mountain, <page 14>, <page 517>

Black Tail Creek, <page 438>

Black Weasel, dance leader, <page 274>

Blessing in ceremonial, <page 32>; on food, <page 34>, <page 181>, <page 367>

Blizzard in mountains, <page 58>

Blizzard on plains, <page 128>, <page 234>

Blood Indians, <page 1>, <page 206>; camp, <page 364>; characteristics, <page 368>; sign for, <page 404>

Blue Jay, <page 47>

Bonnet Medicine, <page 294>, <page 296>, <page 302>, <page 388>

Botanical collection, <page 364>, <page 524>

[p. 534]

Brashear, J. A., <page 521>-<page 4>

Brave Dog Society dance, <page 299>, <page 455><page 465>

Brings-down-the-Sun, medicine man, robe of, <page 312>, <page 327>; camp of, <page 378>; meet with, <page 380>; hospitality, <page 388>; character, <page 415>; vow to tell the truth, <page 418>; meaning of name, <page 427>; children of, <page 385>, <page 431>; farewell prayer of, <page 505>; genealogical table of family, <page 532>

Buffalo dance, <page 99>

Buffalo tipi, Black, <page 215>, Yellow, legend of, <page 162>

Buffalo Society, <page 450>

Buffalo tongues as sacred food, <page 178>

Bull Child, medicine man, <page 310>; robe of, <page 312>, <page 316>, <page 506>, <page 519>

Bull Plume, North Piegan, <page 130>, <page 387>, <page 414>

Bull Shoe (famous racehorse), <page 278>

Burial customs, <page 148>, <page 164>

Butterfly (lodge decoration), <page 408>

Buzzard, <page 484>

  

C

Calgary, <page 435>

Camass, <page 52>; baking, <page 442>, <page 530>

Canada, <page 325>

Cardston, <page 374>

Carnegie Institute, <page 524>

Catholic priest, <page 143>, <page 159>

Catlin, <page 2>

Catbird, <page 389>, <page 481>, <page 482>

Celebration song, <page 280>, <page 282>, <page 514>

Chastity of women, <page 185>

Cheyenne Indians, sign for, <page 404>

Chicadees, <page 11>, <page 481>

Chief Mountain, <page 173>, <page 424>, <page 463>, <page 520>

Children's game song, <page 515>

Chinook, wind, <page 156>, <page 358>

Clan names, <page 201>, <page 308>; marriage, <page 187>

Clark, Capt. W. P., Sign language, <page 402>, <page 404>

Cleveland Mount, <page 516>

Climate, country of Blackfeet, <page 4>; western slope of Rocky Mountains, <page 9>; eastern slope, <page 17>, <page 128>, <page 156>, <page 372>, <page 376>

Clown, <page 292>

Comet, <page 487>, <page 522>

Conjunction of two planets; legend of, <page 491>, <page 503>, <page 523>

Conservation of trees and berry bushes, <page 385>

Continental Divide, <page 12>, <page 44>, <page 517>

Coups, counting on the Centre Pole, <page 301>, <page 307>, <page 316>, <page 519>

Coyotes as pets, <page 244>; attack Indian, <page 56>; as omens, <page 476>

Cradle Blackfoot, <page 203>, <page 230>

Cree Indians, <page 206>, <page 238>, <page 338>, <page 442>

Cree Medicine, <page 190>

Crow Beaver ceremonial, <page 407>-<page 410>

Crow Indians, <page 2>, <page 359>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>, <page 437>, <page 473>

Crow Lodge (tipi), <page 208>; origin of, <page 440>

Crow Lodge Mountain, <page 440>

Crow Lodge River, <page 328>, <page 346>, <page 377>, <page 435>, <page 443>

Curlew, long-billed, <page 481>, <page 484>

Custer, General, defeat by Sioux, <page 6>

Cutbank Canyon, <page 18>; Medicine Grizzly of, <page 51>, in winter, <page 72>, <page 455>

Cutbank Pass, altitude, <page 13>, <page 51> Cutbank River, <page 15>, <page 517>

Cutbank trail, <page 16>, <page 17>, <page 40>

Cypress Hills, <page 160>

  

D

Day Star, <page 487>, <page 522>

December, name for, <page 486>

De Smet, Father, <page 157>; Indian name, <page 401>, <page 518>

Diet of Blackfeet, <page 22>, <page 237>, <page 238>, <page 442>, <page 485>; Author's, <page 23>; Cree, <page 238>

Doctoring the sick, <page 142>, <page 174>, <page 247>-<page 250>

Dog dance, <page 100>

Dogs, death of Red Rover, <page 155>; trained, <page 246>; foraging, <page 254>

Dog feast, Assinniboine, <page 238>

Don't Laugh clan, origin of name, <page 201>

Dorsey, Rev. J. O., <page 522>-<page 3>

Dove, <page 11>

Dove society, <page 449>

Dreams, origin of names, <page 396>; butterfly bringer of, <page 408>; dream of author, <page 412>

Dream People, <page 396>

Dusty stars, <page 217>, <page 363>, <page 501>

  

E

Eagles, catching of, <page 62>, <page 428>

Eagle, golden, feathers of, <page 429>, <page 484>; white headed, <page 484>

Ear Rings, doctor, <page 323>, <page 506>

Elk Horn, the herald, <page 257>, <page 271>, <page 506>

Elk medicine, home of, <page 62>

Eclipse of sun, <page 487>, <page 522>

  

F

Fairy Rings, <page 363>

Fasting of sacred woman, <page 194>, <page 202>; medicine men, <page 314>

[p. 535]

Father-in-law customs, <page 187>

Feasts, ceremonial of adoption, <page 34>; beaver medicine, <page 102>, <page 467>; marriage, <page 186>; at birth of child, <page 188>; manner of inviting guests, <page 226>; Assinniboine <page 238>; Sun-dance, <page 302>, of sacred tongues, <page 311>; Crow Beaver ceremonial, <page 408>

Flathead Indians, <page 7>, <page 51>, <page 157>, <page 206>, <page 226>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>

Flicker, <page 11>

Flinch's Peak, <page 14>

Flowers, western slope of Rocky Mountains, <page 10>; eastern slope, <page 41>; on prairie, <page 18>; Blackfeet names for, <page 531>

Forest Commission, National, <page 6>

Four Bears, medicine man, <page 321>

Four Bears Mountain, <page 14>, <page 113>

  

G

Gambling game, <page 67>; songs, <page 68>

Games, kinds of, <page 391>; children's song, <page 391>, <page 515>

Garden wall, <page 14>

Ghost stories, <page 139>-<page 142>; Crow Eagle and, <page 145>; our experience with, <page 330>; as owls, <page 477>

Gives-to-the-Sun (wife of Mad Wolf), <page 29>, <page 173>; vow to give Sun-dance, <page 174>, <page 178>, <page 296>, <page 302>, <page 309>, <page 315>

Gifts, generosity of Blackfeet, <page 261>, <page 367>; exchange of, <page 381>

Glacier National Park, <page 15>, <page 517>

Goat Mountain, <page 114>

Goats, mountain, <page 12>; hunting, <page 113>

Going-to-the-Sun mountain, <page 14>, <page 113>; meaning of name, <page 115>

Goldfinch, <page 389>, <page 481>, <page 482>

Government, W.S., former policy, <page 509>; present policy, <page 510>, <page 511>

Grasshoppers, way of colouring wings, <page 377>

Grease Melters, clan of, <page 57>; origin of name, <page 201>

Great Bear constellation, <page 218>; legend of, <page 488>, <page 500>, <page 523>

Grinnell Glacier, <page 14>

Grinnell Mountain, <page 14>, <page 116>

Grizzly bear, author's night experience with, <page 48>-<page 51>;  experience with, <page 44>; Medicine Grizzly of Cutbank Canyon, <page 51>-<page 55>; legend, <page 62>-<page 70>, <page 468>-<page 473>; Medicine Pipe, <page 253>

Grizzly Bear dance, <page 264>, <page 406>, <page 461>

Grizzly Bear clan, <page 62>-<page 70>

Grizzly Bear spear, <page 356>-<page 361>

Gros Ventre Indians, <page 53>, <page 159>, <page 206>, <page 238>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 442>, <page 452>

Grouse, ruffed, <page 11>; drumming imitated in Medicine Pipe ceremonial, <page 259>

Gull herring, <page 481>

  

H

Hair Parter's Society, dance of, <page 271>

Hard Top Knot clan, origin of name, <page 201>

Hartley Randolph, <page 519>

Hawk fish, <page 484>

Hawk, night, <page 484>

Helena city, <page 405>

Henry, Alex, <page 402>, <page 521>

Hercules, constellation of, <page 500>

Hide, ceremonial of cutting, <page 306>

Horses, Blackfeet, food in winter, <page 71>

Horse races, <page 278>

Hudson's Bay Divide, <page 128>, <page 328>

Humour of Blackfeet, <page 298>

  

I

Infidelity of wife, penalty for, <page 185> Iron Shirt, chief, <page 422>; initiation into Medicine Pipe Society, <page 423>

  

J

Jackson Mountain, <page 14>

Jackson, William (scout), <page 6>

James Mountain, <page 14>

January, Blackfeet name for, <page 486>

Jennings, O. E., <page 524>

July, Blackfeet name for, <page 487>

Junco, <page 11>

June, Blackfeet name for, <page 487>

Jupiter as morning star, legend of, <page 491>, <page 503>, <page 524>

K

Kainau (Blood Indians), <page 1>, <page 364>

Kildeer, <page 483>

Kingbird, <page 481>, <page 482>

Kinglet, golden crowned, <page 11>

Kissing dance, <page 243>

Kit-fox Society, <page 445>-<page 447>

Kootenai River, <page 374>, <page 439>

Kutenai Indians, <page 52>, <page 206>; sign for, <page 404>

[p. 536]

  

L

Lame Bull, chief, <page 422>

Lark, pallid horned, <page 480>

Lark, western meadow, <page 479>; song of, <page 482>, <page 504>

Lee's Creek, <page 438>

Leupp, Francis E., Commissioner of Indian Affairs, <page 510>

Lewis and Clark, <page 2>

Little Big Horn, battle of, <page 6>

Little Chief Mountain, <page 14>, <page 113>

Little Dog, head chief, <page 422>

Little Dog, war chief, <page 291>

Little Mountain, chief, <page 418>, <page 419>

Little Plume, war chief, <page 277>; photograph, <page 289>, <page 290>, <page 206>

Little Sister, the, <page 523>

Lodge poles, cutting of, <page 52>, <page 518>

Lone Dog, Sioux chief, <page 278>

Lone Eaters' clan, origin of name, <page 201>

Longspur, chestnut collared, <page 479>; song, <page 482>

Loon, <page 11>

Lookout Butte, <page 380>; view from, <page 393>, <page 501>, <page 503>

Lost children, <page 218>; legend of, <page 490>, <page 523>

Love medicine, <page 191>

Love song, <page 242>, <page 283>, <page 318>, <page 411>, <page 513>

Lynx dance, <page 95>

Lupine blue, abundant, <page 19>

  

M

Macgillivray, warbler, <page 11>

Mackenzie, explorer, <page 3>

Macleod, Canada, <page 389>

Mad Wolf (Siyeh), chief, first meeting with, <page 20>; ceremonial of adoption, <page 26>-<page 35>; prayer by, <page 33>; his fight with Kutenai Indians, <page 52>; gives ceremonial of Beaver Medicine, <page 76>-<page 102>; tells legend of Beaver Medicine, <page 103>-<page 112>; his home on Cutbank River, <page 124>; tells the legend of the Snow Tipi, <page 133>-<page 138>; tells of Father De Smet, <page 157>-<page 166>; his letter of invitation, <page 171>; his summer camp, <page 173>; final disposal of author's letters, <page 150>, <page 173>; Sun-dance of, <page 174>-<page 323>; leads ceremonial of Sweat-lodge, <page 285>; his farewell speech, <page 322>; death, <page 323>, <page 506>

Mad Wolf (Siyeh) Mountain, <page 14>, <page 113>

Mad Dog Society as police, <page 206>; in ceremonial of Sweat-lodge, <page 284>; origin, <page 452>-<page 454>; costume, <page 458>

Mad Indian, tragedy of, <page 372>-<page 374>

Magpie, <page 428>; song, <page 481>

Maker of storms, <page 137>, <page 352>

Mandan Indians, <page 206>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 521>

March, name for, <page 486>

Marias River, <page 215>, <page 472>, <page 517>

Marmots, hoary, <page 12>

Marriage customs, <page 184>

Meals, time of, <page 442>

Meat, preparation of, <page 237>

Medicine, meaning of word, <page 168>, <page 517>

Medicine Bonnet, <page 294>, <page 296>, <page 302>, <page 496>, <page 500>

Medicine Grizzly, legends of, <page 51>-<page 55>, <page 468>-<page 473>

Medicine lore, <page 190>; Cree, <page 190>

Medicine man, origin of name, <page 168>

Medicine men, doctoring sick, <page 142>-<page 144>, <page 174>, <page 244>-<page 250>; as weather makers, <page 128>; in Sun Lodge, <page 314>, <page 320>, <page 321>

Medicine Pipe, used in time of sickness, <page 143>; in burial, <page 164>, <page 253>, <page 254>; ceremonial of, <page 253>-<page 270>; ceremonial at time of first thunder, <page 387>; dances, <page 406>; origin of a, <page 424><page 426>; Pipe Society initiation of members, <page 252>-<page 270>, <page 423>-<page 426>

Medicine Robe, <page 312>, <page 430>, <page 498>

Medicine Wolf, legend of, <page 473>-<page 476>

Menake, <page 203>, <page 245>, <page 325>, <page 518>

Menepoka attacked by coyotes, <page 56>

Meteors turn into Dusty Stars, <page 217>, <page 501>

Mexico, <page 3>, <page 435>

Milk River, North Fork of, <page 334>

Milk River Ridge, <page 124>; in blizzard, <page 128>-<page 130>

Milky Way, <page 324>, <page 498>

Missions, Christian among Blackfeet, <page 512>

Moon used in decoration, <page 218>, <page 313>; prayers to, <page 288>, <page 333>, legend of, <page 493>

Moons, origin of, <page 109>; calendar of, <page 486>

Morning Eagle and his war-horse, <page 226>

Morning Plume, <page 29>, <page 324>, <page 506>

Morning Star, prayers to, <page 157>, <page 288>, <page 324>; in lodge decoration, <page 219>, <page 491>, <page 492>, <page 503>, <page 523>

Mosquito Society, <page 448>

Mother-in-law customs, <page 187>, <page 408>, <page 432>

Mountain Chief, <page 201>; speech, <page 276>

Mourning customs, <page 150>, <page 152>, <page 153>, <page 164>, <page 165>, <page 369>

Mud Head Creek, <page 437>, <page 438>

[p. 537]

Mu-koi-sa-po (Wolf Plume) owner of Yellow Buffalo Tipi, <page 164>; owner of a Beaver Bundle, <page 467>

Music, Indian, <page 282>, <page 283>

N

Names, Blackfeet, <page 385>; for trees, <page 386>; superstition against telling <page 395>; selection of, <page 396>, <page 397>, of females <page 399>; of males, <page 400>; animals, <page 401>; origin of Running Wolf, <page 418>; Iron Shirt, <page 422>; topographical, <page 434>-<page 440>; of birds, <page 481><page 484>; moons, constellations, etc., <page 486>-<page 488>

Napi (Old Man), <page 56>, <page 78>, <page 337>, <page 440>

Natosin, from North Blackfeet, vow by, <page 229>, <page 285>, <page 294>, <page 303>

Natosin Nepe-e, medicine man, <page 327>; meaning of name, <page 423>

Nevin, Arthur, Indian name, <page 400>; composer of Opera Poia, <page 518>

Nez Perce Indians, <page 206>, <page 371>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>

Night song, <page 281>, <page 282>, <page 515>

North Blackfeet, <page 1>, <page 206>

Northern crown, constellation, <page 500>

North Piegans, <page 375>

North star, <page 499>, <page 524>

North Trail, Old, <page 3>, <page 18>, <page 328>, <page 434>-<page 437>

November, name for, <page 486>

Nuthatch, red-breasted, <page 11>

  

O

October, name for, <page 487>

Old agency, <page 333>

Old Man, <page 56>, <page 337>; stories, <page 338>-<page 348>, <page 440>

Old Man's River, <page 377>

O-mis-tai-po-kah, head chief, <page 34>, <page 77>; prayer of, <page 95>, <page 297>, <page 308>, founder of Mad Dogs, <page 452>-<page 506>

One Spot (blood), <page 367>

Onesta, <page 325>, and Bear Spear, <page 352>

Otter Tipi, <page 218>, <page 219>

Owl, medicine pipe, <page 254>; on ghosts of dead, <page 148>, <page 477>

  

P

Pack horses, characteristics, <page 36>

Paint, sacred red, Mad Wolf paints author, <page 32>, <page 94>; origin of, <page 108>; for doctoring sick, <page 143>; specialists, <page 214>; how secured, <page 215>

Paint, yellow, used in ceremonial of

Snow Tipi, <page 136>; sacred to buffalo, <page 163>, where secured, <page 215>; used by a doctor, <page 250>

Painted Tipis, <page 134>, <page 162>, <page 207>-<page 224>

Parade, tribal, <page 290>; of Sioux warriors, <page 280>

Pare, Andrew, <page 522>

Parfleches, making of, <page 231>, <page 518>

Pemmican, preparation of, <page 237>

Pend d'Oreille Indians, <page 206>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 463>

Perfumes used by Blackfeet, <page 364>, <page 530> Pets, <page 245>, <page 246>

Photographing Beaver medicine ceremonial, difficulty in, <page 153>, also of women, <page 231>; Medicine Pipe ceremonial, <page 258>

Picture-writing on tipis, <page 217>-<page 224>; on war horse, <page 226>; on medicine man and his robe, <page 312>, <page 313>; in tribunal records, <page 422>, <page 423>, <page 468>

Piegan Indians, <page 1>; sign for, <page 404> Pinchot Gifford, <page 6>

Pinchot Mountain, <page 14>

Pipe, Beaver, <page 86>, <page 98>, <page 104>; origin of, <page 111>

Pipe-dance, <page 86>, <page 98>, <page 264>

Pipe-dancing, <page 436>

Pipe, Long Time, <page 427>

Pipe, smoking customs, <page 31>, <page 188>

Piskun, <page 346>, <page 437>-<page 439>; women's, <page 440>, <page 451>, <page 520>

Pleiades constellation, in lodge decoration, <page 218>; on medicine robe, <page 313>; legend, <page 490>, <page 523>

Poia legend, <page 491>, <page 503>; opera, <page 519>

Pole, ceremonial of Raising Centre, preparatory service, <page 293>, securing material for, <page 300>, <page 301>; gifts tied to, <page 307>

Pole hymn, Raising the Centre, <page 308>, <page 311>, <page 513>

Police, Blackfeet, <page 206>; societies as, <page 465>

Police, Canadian Mounted, <page 371>, <page 372>, <page 422>

Polygamy, reasons for, <page 188>

Porcupine Mountains, <page 328>, <page 377>, <page 429>

Preservation of Blackfeet songs, <page 283>

Preservation by North Piegans of trees and berry bushes, <page 385>, <page 386>

Prongs used in ceremonial, <page 79>; origin of, <page 500>

Proverbs and familiar sayings of Blackfeet, <page 402>, <page 476>, <page 478>, <page 484>, <page 485>

Purification of a woman, <page 97>

  

R

Rabbit snow-shoe, <page 74>

Rainbow, <page 487>

[p. 538]

Raven, <page 481>, <page 483>, <page 498>

Raven Society, <page 146>

Records, keeping of tribal, <page 220>, <page 221>, <page 422>, <page 423>, <page 468>

Red Eagle Glacier, <page 14>

Red Eagle Mountain, <page 43>, <page 113>, <page 120>

Red Fox singing night song, <page 282>

Religious beliefs of Blackfeet, <page 167>-<page 170>, <page 352>, <page 353>,

Reno Mayor, retreat of, <page 7>

Rhubarb, wild, used in ceremonial, <page 295>, <page 296>, <page 485>, <page 529>

Riding song, <page 242>, <page 281>, <page 514>

Rising Wolf Mountain, <page 43>, <page 126>, <page 242>, <page 325>

Robe Medicine, <page 312>, <page 430>, <page 519>

Robe, sacred elk-skin, <page 302>, <page 498>

Robin, <page 11>

Rocky Mountains, <page 1>, <page 7>; names for, <page 13>, <page 36>, <page 113>, <page 125>, <page 440>, <page 503>

Roosevelt, Theodore, <page 510>

Rooster, song of, <page 484>

Root Digger, <page 87>, <page 494>, <page 500>

Running Crane, chief, <page 192>, <page 205>; speech of, <page 276>, <page 323>, <page 506>

Running Rabbit, ghost of, <page 141>

Running Wolf, origin of name, <page 418>, <page 427>, <page 434>

  

S

St. Mary's Lakes, <page 113>, <page 122>, <page 439>

St. Mary's River, <page 122>, <page 334>, <page 424>, <page 517>

Sand Hills, <page 144>; description of, <page 148>, <page 324>

Sarcee Indians, <page 206>

Sarvis berries as food supply, <page 385>; for feast, <page 408>, <page 466>, <page 529>

Saskatchewan River North, <page 1>, <page 517>

Scarface, <page 296>, <page 308>; legend, <page 491>, <page 503>

Screaming Owl, head chief, <page 331>

Serpent Tipi, <page 211>

September, name for, <page 487>

Sexton Glacier, <page 14>

Seven Brothers (Great Bear constellation), <page 218>, <page 312>; legend of, <page 488>, <page 500>, <page 523>

Sign for Buffalo, <page 83>; Antelope, <page 85>, <page 262>; Elk, <page 263>; Swan, <page 265>, Sign language, <page 402>-<page 405>

Siksikakoan (Mr. Jackson), record of, <page 6>; death, <page 7>; character, <page 23>, <page 506>

 Indians, <page 1>

Sham battles, <page 277>

Shoshone Indians, <page 468>

Sioux Indians, <page 206>, <page 278>, <page 371>; sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>

Sioux dance, <page 243>, <page 514>; celebration song, <page 514>

Siyeh (Mad Wolf), chief, <page 20>; letter from, <page 172>

Siyeh (Mad Wolf), Mountain, <page 14>, <page 116>

Skunks, clan, origin of name, <page 201>

Smallpox epidemics, <page 4>, <page 422>, <page 444>

Small Robes, clan, conversion to Christianity, <page 166>, <page 201>

Snipe, <page 483>

Snipe Wilson, <page 481>

Snake Indians, sign for, <page 404>, <page 405>; expedition against, <page 419>, <page 468>

Snake Woman, doctor for Mad Wolf, <page 324>

Snow Tipi, legend of, <page 133>, <page 134>

Societies, Blackfeet, Raven, <page 146>; Mad Dog, <page 206>, <page 284>; Brave Dog, <page 299>, <page 455>-<page 465>; Kit-fox, <page 445>-<page 447>; Mosquito, <page 448>; Dove, <page 449>; Buffalo, <page 450>

Songs, Black feet, <page 242>, <page 277>, <page 280>, <page 281>, <page 282>, <page 293>, <page 297>, <page 308>, <page 318>, <page 376>, <page 410>, <page 411>, <page 513>

Sparrow, chipping, <page 11>; Savanna, <page 173>, <page 504>; white crowned, <page 389>, <page 504>; white throat, <page 389>, <page 481>; song, <page 482>; western lark, <page 479>, <page 481>; vesper, <page 481>

Spear, sacred, <page 277>

Sperry Glacier, <page 14>

Spotted Eagle, medicine man, <page 182>, <page 286>, <page 305>, <page 310>, <page 312>, <page 320>, <page 334>, <page 477>, <page 506>

Spring Season, name for, <page 486>

Star Boy, legend of, <page 491>

Stony Indians, <page 484>

Stuyimi, doctoring of, <page 244>-<page 250> Strikes-on-both-sides, daughter of Mad Wolf, <page 30>; costume, <page 77>; dance, <page 99>, <page 176>

Summer Season, name for, <page 487>

Sun-dance, meaning of, <page 170>; beginning of, <page 178>; ceremonial, <page 284>-<page 290>, <page 293>-<page 297>, <page 302>-<page 311>,; decline of, <page 507>-<page 509>

Sun-Dogs, <page 56>, <page 487>, <page 522>

Sunflowers, velvet leaf, <page 19>

Sun-lodge, erection of, <page 308>; ceremonials inside, <page 312>

Sun Worship, <page 167>, decline of, <page 507>-<page 509>

Superstitions, Medicine Pipe, <page 267>-<page 269>

Swallow tree, <page 11>, <page 483>

Swan dance, <page 265>, <page 407>

Sweat-lodge, erection of and ceremonial, <page 284>-<page 290>, <page 430>

Sweet grass incense, <page 31>, <page 78>, <page 173>, <page 180>, <page 296>, <page 306>, <page 498>, <page 500>; as perfume, <page 364>, <page 530>

Sweet Grass Hills, <page 77>, <page 517>

Sweet pine as incense, <page 268>, <page 296>; as perfume, <page 364>, <page 530>

Sweet Pine Hills (or Sweet Grass Hills), <page 77>, <page 122>, <page 215>

Swift Current Pass, <page 15>

Swift Current River, <page 439>

[p. 539]

  

T

Tanning hides, <page 230>

Tetons, <page 437>

Thrush, hermit, <page 11>; olive backed, <page 11>, <page 503>

Thunder-bird, lodge decoration, <page 135>, <page 265>; dance, <page 407>, <page 408>; home of <page 425>, <page 519>-<page 20>

Thunder Chief, <page 253>; gives Pipe, <page 352>, <page 487>

Thunder Maker, <page 425>, <page 427>

Thunder Tipi, <page 213>, <page 407>, <page 408>; rules of, <page 410>, <page 413>

Tipi, author's, <page 222>; making, covering of, <page 232>; at night, <page 242>; pitching of, <page 234>; Painted, <page 205>-<page 224>

Tobacco, origin of, <page 108>; kinds used, <page 528>

Tongues, sacred, <page 178>, <page 303>, <page 305>, <page 316>

Torture, self, of warriors, <page 318>, <page 319>

Toys of children, <page 390>, <page 431>

Travelling song, <page 281>

Travois, <page 193>, <page 194>, <page 198>, <page 518>

Tribal hymn, <page 515>; regulations, <page 521>

Triple Divide, <page 14>

Tuberculosis, <page 512>

Turtle Mountain, <page 378>

Two Medicine Falls, <page 43>

Two Medicine Lake, <page 325>

Two Medicine River, ghosts along, <page 141>, meaning of name, <page 438>

  

U

Underground Animals, <page 286>

Underground Spirits, <page 317>

  

V

Venus, morning star, legend of, <page 491>, <page 503>, <page 524>

Vireo, <page 11>

Vow, to give Sun-dance, <page 143>, <page 174>, <page 183>; to attend Sun-dance, <page 229>, <page 333>, <page 384>; to give Beaver Medicine ceremonial, <page 110>, <page 124>; in behalf of sick, <page 124>, <page 304>; to give Medicine Pipe ceremonial, <page 269>; to give ceremonial of Painted Tipis, <page 212>, <page 214>; to give Medicine Bonnet ceremonial, <page 388>; of Warriors, <page 318>, <page 319>; of Brings-down-the-Sun to speak the truth, <page 418>

  

W

Wakes-up-last, murder of family, <page 152>, <page 304>, <page 504>, <page 518>

Warbler, myrtle, <page 11>; yellow, <page 11>, <page 481>

War horse of Morning Eagle, <page 226>

War Song, <page 277>, <page 421>, <page 514>

War Tipi, <page 219>-<page 221>

Wheel and arrow game, <page 392>, <page 421>

Whisky sale to Indians prohibited by Government, <page 518>

White Calf, head chief, <page 34>

White Grass, medicine man, <page 77>, <page 323>

White Throat, <page 389>

White Weasel, Blackfeet name for author, <page 93>, <page 401>

Willow Creek, <page 193>, <page 199>

Windmaker, home of, <page 60>, <page 352>

Winter Season, name for, <page 486> Wissler, Dr. Clark, <page 519>

Wolf Medicine, legend of, <page 473>-<page 478>

Wolf Plume (Mu-koi-sa-po), owner of Beaver Bundle, <page 153>, <page 467>; initiation in Medicine Pipe Society, <page 257>-<page 270>

Wolf Song, <page 243>, <page 410>, <page 503>, <page 513>

Wolf Trail, <page 324>, <page 498>, <page 506>

Wolves, ravages of game by, <page 74>

Woman's Pipe, <page 266>

Women, morality of Blackfeet, <page 184>, <page 185>; position of, <page 188>, <page 189>; industries of, <page 230>-<page 237>

Woodpecker, <page 11>; song, <page 482>

Wren, winter, <page 11>

  

Y

Yellowstone River, <page 1>, <page 216>, <page 469>

Yellowthroat, <page 389>; Maryland, <page 504>

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: oon.txt =====


    
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

 

ORACLES OF NOSTRADAMUS

 

BY CHARLES A. WARD

 

London, The Leadenhall Press; New York, C. Scribner & Welford

 

[1891]

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, June 2003. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

"Gentem quidem nullam video, neque tam humanam atque aoctam neque tam immanem tamque barbaram, quae non significari futura, et a quibasdam intelligi praedicique posse censeat."

CICERO, De Divinatione, i. 2.

'Quorum potentia intellectualis immediate a Deo agitata creditur, prophetae dicuntur; quorum voluntas heroes; at quorum intellectus et voluntas censetur agitata a potentiis invisibilibus dependentibus, appellantur magi."

--CHRIST. THOMASIUS, in Brunck, Hist. Phil. v. 512.

Tu te mocques aussi des prophetes que Dieu
 Choisit en tes enfants et les fait au milieu
 De ton sein apparoitre, afin de te predire
 Ton malheur a venir; mais tu n'en fais que rire.
 Ou soit que le grand Dieu l'immense eternite
 Ait de Nostradamus l'enthousiasme excite,
 Ou soit que le demon bon ou mauvais l'agite ...
 Comme un oracle antique, il a de mainte annee
 Predit la plus grand part de nostre destinee."

RONSARD, To Nostradamus.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

TO MY MOTHER

Oyden en anthrupoisi patros kai metros amenon
 Epleto, tois osie, Kurne, memele dike.

THEOGNIS, p. 16, ed. 1766.

"But higher far my proud pretensions rise,--
 The son of parents passed into the skies."

COWPER, On My Mother's Picture, line 110.

IF THERE CAN BE ANYTHING IN A BOOK LIKE THIS WORTHY OF DEDICATION TO A BEING SO NOBLE AS THOU IN LIFE WERT EVER, A BEING NOW MORE ENNOBLED STILL BY THE HEAVEN-BLEACHED RAIMENT OF IMMORTALITY PUT ON; TO THEE, PURE SOUL SERENE! TO THEE DOES THY STILL LOVING SON, EARTH-HAMPERED, DEDICATE THIS THE BEST LABOUR OF HIS HEART AND HEAD AND YEARS. THE BEST OF IT IS THINE INDEED ALREADY; AND WERE THE REST WORSE HARVESTED THAN PERHAPS IT IS,--MORTALITY BEING ALLOWED FOR DULY,--THY SOUL RECEIVING MUST BE MUCH CHANGED BY EXALTATION, IF QUEEN-LIKE, IT CANNOT MAKE A SORRY LOVE-GIFT RICH BY GOLDEN WELCOME GIVEN IT.

IF THINGS OF KITH BE KIN, GOD WILLING, WE SHALL MEET AGAIN ERE LONG. TILL WHEN, FROM THIS BARE HEATH TERRENE AND HOMELESS, I SPEED THE WORD ADIEU. DEAR ONE! FOR A LITTLE WHILE ADIEU.

THY SON,          
 Mr. C. A. W.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vi]

 

THREE PROPHECIES OF OLD TIME

That Troy should triumph in Rome--

Nun de de Aineiao bie Truessin anaxei,
 Kai paidun paides, toi ken metopisthe genuntai.

 Iliad, xx. 306.

That America should be discovered--

           "Venient annis
 Saecula seris, quibus Oceanus
 Vincula rerum laxet, et ingens
 Pateat Tellus, Tiphysque novos
 Delegat orbes; nec sit terris
 Ultima Thule."

SENECA.

French Revolution, 1788-89, predicted in 10th Century.

"Des le V siecle, Albumasar avait calcule que l'annee mil sept cent quatre-vingt-neuf serait feconde en revolutions sociales, a cause de l'une des grandes conjonctions de Saturne. L'astrologie est vanite, erreur, mensonge, tout ce que vous voudrez; mais enfin voila une prediction d'une authenticite irrecusable."--ALBUMASAR, De Magnis Conjunctionibus Tract. ii., Different. 8. Vide MIGNE, Dict. des Propheties, ii. 339.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

 

Preface

THIS is no doubt a strange book. An attempt to gather a meaning out of a few of the involved, crabbed, and mystical quatrains of the great seer of France, the greatest perhaps that the world has ever seen, must of necessity be strange. My treatment, too, may possibly seem to many no less strange than the subject-matter itself. I will speak specially as to this latter point towards the close of the preface.

In last December treating upon Nostradamus in the Gentleman's Magazine, I had occasion to remark that every honest man of awakened powers is a kind of prophet, and has to do with the future, or eternity, as it is usually styled. Since then I have come upon the same idea in the writings of Philo Judaeus. He thinks that the Scriptures testify in some sort that every good man is a prophet:

"For a prophet says nothing of his own, but everything that he says is strange, and prompted by some one else; and it is not lawful for a wicked man to be an interpreter of God, as also no wicked man can be properly said to be inspired; but this statement is only appropriate to the wise man alone, since he alone is a sounding instrument of God's voice."--PHILO, Heir of Divine Things,  section 52, Bohn, ii. 146.

Again, at page 30 of this book, it will be seen that I have described the faculty of anticipating the future, a thing so remarkably developed in Nostradamus, as being, if once we admit its existence in him, a perceptive endowment of the whole human race, that must be classified as a sixth sense. I have since found, with no little delight, that Coleridge, in

[p. viii]

his "Table Talk" (ed. 1836, p. 19), designated such faculty as "an inner sense," for, speaking of ghosts and dreams, he says;

'It is impossible to say whether an inner sense does not really exist in the mind, seldom developed, indeed, but which may have a power of presentiment. All the external senses have their correspondents in the mind; the eye can see an object before it is distinctly apprehended; why may there not be a corresponding power in the soul? The power of prophecy might have been merely a spiritual excitation of this dormant faculty." [*1]

[p. ix]

In the matter of prophecy, Photius says, in his "Amphilochia," that prophecy is by no means necessarily connected with virtue: for that Herod pre-announced, as it were, that the Gentile magi, Judaea, and the world were about to recognize Christ for King, and so he desired to make away with him. In this way he played the part of prophet to the whole human race. Caiaphas, he thinks, was not conscious of what he said; in the mania of a desire to kill, his lips prophesied that it was right that one should die to save the whole world. "Let his blood be upon us and upon our children," is a foreboding instinct of the same description. In the council of the Pharisees (John xi. 48), it was prophetic, "If we let him alone, the Romans will come and take away our place and nation;" and though they followed out then own counsel, this is just what happened. "And see," he adds, "the ass in the Old Testament could forecast future things." He was an heretical writer, Photius, but he was evidently not so far away, as the world is now, from believing that prophetic endowment is a sense widely distributed to humanity in general. These hints alone may furnish us with food for useful meditation.

[p. x]

Now, with all this a reader will very likely say, Supposing we grant you the prophetic as a sixth sense, to be henceforth reckoned as a permanent though generally latent endowment of the race, what is the good of such a sense, supposing, with you, that your prophet can never be understood till after the event has taken place, and then only when some drudging interpreter has untwisted his tortuous language and thrown it into the intelligible vernacular?

There are several ways of replying to this. First, are there not thousands of objects in the domain of nature that man has not yet discovered the use of? Anatomists are still at a stand to tell us what is the use of the spleen. What naturalist can say for what reason the noxious serpent is sent into the world? Why was the Georgium Sidus only discovered by Herschel in 1781, instead of by Pythagoras, a much greater man? Sensible men have commonly to content themselves with simply ascertaining the existence of a fact, and they have to rest all the while in total ignorance of why this fact exists. Again, suppose you believe, as the majority do, in the Christian revelation; how can you account for the multiplicity of sects who read the Bible each in its own way? Can you account for a divine revelation that reveals one thing to one man and a contrary thing to another? Obviously, then, there are many things that exist as facts, and yet no man living can assign the reason for them. With regard to any fact that can be asserted, the first thing to establish is, Is it a fact? That once settled, you may wait for the rest of it until you can get it.

But again, and with special regard to Nostradamus, you will see (and by referring to the index you may find the various places at which I treat of it) that he must have had the whole sequence of visions passing clearly before his eyes, with some vocal utterances occasionally accompanying

[p. xi]

them, by which the names of men and places and things were announced to him. His method was to set this down in prose narration, either during the sitting or instantly afterwards. On inspection, at cooler intervals, and when he had descended from the heat and ecstasy of fatidical rapture, he would discern at once that the sequence must be broken and the names concealed. If, as it stood in prose, it had been understood by the world, it would have fallen not as a prophecy but as a thunderbolt; not as a thing in book-form, but as an earthquake, that must have changed or shaken the face of Europe, and so have interfered perpetually with its own realization.

Seeing this, he followed the practice of the elder oracles of Delphi, Dodona, and the rest. He broke up the sequence, threw the utterances into metre, mingled much learning linguistic to darken them, and obscured the names, of the great men introduced, under the impenetrable mask of the anagram. Thus regarded, it is not a subject for wonder that he did this: it would have been akin to madness to have done anything else.

It now becomes desirable that I should furnish some clue to enable a reader to arrive rapidly at the pith of this book and its oracular forecasts, so that he may discern for himself in a few minutes, whether, or whether not, the topics treated of have for him a sufficient interest to lead him on to make a thorough study of the book, or to decline it altogether. There is a huge prejudice in this our day that sets in strongly with the multitude against anything that endeavours to deal seriously, or by mystical insight, with things occult, spiritual, or future.

The reader, first of all, should glance over the life of Nostradamus. It will be for him to determine whether my vindication of his name from imposture be adequate or not.

[p. xii]

[paragraph continues] Dr. Cobham Brewer is the most recent writer who asperses him as a "charlatan" (see his "History of Germany," p. 164). The reader will see that Nostradamus is of Jewish birth. Coleridge remarks ("Table Talk," p. 31) that all other nations

"Seem to look backwards, and also to exist for the present; but in the Jewish scheme everything is prospective and preparatory; nothing, however trifling, is done for itself alone, but all is typical of something yet to come."

Further than this, Thomas Burnet, in his eloquent Latinity, tells us ("Archae. Philos," Book I. chap. vii. p. 59, ed. 1727) that Apollonius said bitterly of the Jews that they were the most inept of barbarians, and never invented a single thing useful to mankind. That they were what Bacon would call a people of "no fruit." They taught nothing in their schools, says Burnet, of the circle of the sciences, "ad encyclopaediae studia," as we do now, but that no race in the world so abounds with prophets, and men endowed with the celestial spirit, as "the Jews."

Those who care anything for the occult processes, that incite to prophetic utterance, would now do well to read the chapter on magic, commencing at <page 67>. It gives a few hints as to the practices of adepts, and of the Roman superstitions about tripods, alphabetic interrogatories, and so forth; and it becomes tolerably clear from all this, that Nostradamus was skilled in all the known methods of incantation, astral, pharmaceutic, or electrical, and that he practised them in all their fulness, though with reticent circumspection, and very reluctant and enigmatic avowal. The account of the conspirators against Valens (<page 77>) strongly resembles the modern table-turning. But, as this chapter is more curious by far than necessary, it may be passed over by all those who merely wish to appraise quickly the value of Nostradamus

[p. xiii]

as a figure in history with claims to prophetic faculty hanging on to it.

From the Historical Fragments, commencing at <page 81>, it will be seen that he clearly prophesied the violent death of Henri II., to whom he dedicates his "Luminary Epistle." The historical context is very interesting, as showing not only the exact fulfilment of the forecast of Nostradamus; but, that another astrologer, who was consulted by the king, had forewarned him in almost the same words of the same danger threatening, that he should die "in duel." We see the king adhering to the literal word duel, and out of court etiquette feeling the manifest impossibility of the prophecy being fulfilled. We get also the gossip of the court about it, and about the value of horoscopes, from the Princesse de Cleves; furthermore, we learn about the obstinate blindness with which the king forced on his own destruction at the very close of the day and tournament, by the indulgence of a pure whim against the advice and wish of everybody around him. The murder of Henri III., in like manner, is announced, together with the death of his father, at <page 88>; at <page 110> it is foreshadowed again as proceeding from the hand of a young monk; and at <page 111> the name of Clement is hinted by a play upon the French words signifying mild and clement. The massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day, at <page 94>, stands out in all its vivid horror, and as proceeding from the very hands of le roi farouche; but, compressed into four lines only.

The coming of Henri IV. to the French throne is introduced with the very name of his family, Vendome, figured in the anagram Mendosus. Here we find also (<page 116>) the execution of the Marshal de Biron; his name is actually given as Robin, which yields it letter for letter in anagram. This, too, is concerning a man not probably born when the

[p. xiv]

stanza was devised. The name of the marshal is disguised, because it would have marked him out too distinctly when he came upon the stage of public life; but, the name of Lafin is given, the subordinate individual who betrayed Biron to the King. It occupies pages to describe this event, but with the terseness, reappearing constantly, which is so remarkable a feature in the style of Nostradamus, he compresses the whole event, and all that he has to say upon it, into six lines.

The chapter on Louis XIV. (<page 132>) teems with curiosities of the same inscrutable order; though less startling than what we have already pointed out, yet is it quite sufficient to have made the reputation of an ordinary man.

We may now pass to England (<page 146>), and the quatrain relating to its seven governmental changes, throughout a period of two hundred and ninety years; this is as startling as anything of the kind can well be. The next instance, that on the Stuart Dynasty (<page 149>), conveying, as it does, the struggle between Charles I. and Cromwell, is simply miraculous; and it should challenge the attention of a listening world. This would seem to be the inevitable result, unless the learned of all orders and degrees can, singly or combined, do away with the interpretation put upon it. Lonole is now for the first time pointed to as being the anagram of Old Noll, or Oliver Cromwell. But before this transpired, M. le Pelletier had none the less applied the quatrain to Charles and Cromwell. If this fails to convince a reader that he is in the presence of a seer and worker of wonders, I do not know what can bring recognition home to him. The single line (<page 152>)--

	 
		"Senat de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy."
		
		 has, as presenting the execution of Charles I., made, in former

[p. xv]

but forgotten days, the round of the world, and from time to time has served to keep alive a sort of dumb admission that there had once been a fatidical diviner of note called Nostradamus. Burns remarks, what we all know, that "the passion of prying into futurity, makes a striking part of the history of human nature." It does not look much like it, though, when such a prophecy as this has been allowed to pass out of memory; so that few even of educated men could re-syllable it to you, or furnish you with any better criticism on the man who penned it, than that he was an old French impostor and astrologer. They know ten times as much about Mother Shipton, concerning whom little or nothing is authentic; whilst Nostradamus's book has been probably in print for nearly three hundred and fifty years.

The next is a quatrain on Cromwell exclusively (<page 156>), "more butcher than king," as Nostradamus calls him; and he will be found to regard Napoleon (<page 206>) in very much the same light. He gives England an ascendancy of the seas (<page 159>) for a stretch of more than three hundred years,--a term which, I think, will be found to be on the point of expiring now. Of course his quatrains relating to England are, on the whole, much inferior in interest to those relating to France. What stands collected under the heading of "England" will, nevertheless, well repay perusal. The Battle of Dunbar, for instance (<page 179>) is in its way as vivid, though conveyed in but four lines of verse, as Carlyle's famous account of the engagement which is given in the Cromwell Letters. He prophesies the death of Cromwell (<page 184>) to fall on the 3rd of September, seven years later than the battle of Worcester. It is true we gather this by implication, but with all the other wonders duly weighed, a candid reader will admit this to be the probable intention

[p. xvi]

and true meaning here. The Fire of London is given as falling out in 1666 (at <page 187>).

His name for the French Revolution is Le Commun Advenement, which I render The Vulgar Advent. This, right up to the very end, is the most astounding part of all that has been recorded by Nostradamus, or brought into intelligibility by his commentators. This preface would run to far too great length were I to attempt even to touch upon all of the points of interest, that we here find to be so strangely dealt with. Take merely the first stanza (<page 198>). Napoleonism is spoken of, almost before it has been announced, as proscribed; and, to spring up again as it did in 1848; and then to sink finally seventy-three years after. At that passage (at <page 198>) the reader may see how, out of the mouth of Napoleon himself, the exact term of seventy-three years proves to be the correct period. This has never been so much as hinted before. If anything be miraculous, in the accuracy of prevision, I think this may,--and with but little superstition,--be deemed to be so.

There is a remark to be made of some importance, to my thinking, because it establishes the subtle analogy that sometimes subsists in the relation between things, that are not generally reckoned to have any connection one with the other. Now, the Vulgar Advent, of course, is signalized by the usurpation of government by the people; but is it not highly significant that, out of the natural fountain of speech, and with no particular or conscious intention accompanying, the low proletarian rabble, that bring it about in blood, are spontaneously designated by themselves and others as the Rouges? The abhorrent many, when they play the despot, don the colour red, and doff for ever, as they hope, the royal purple. They may hope what they please; but, when their vices ripen, they must fall under the empire of one,--

[p. xvii]

who is iron-shod, sword-girt, and rat-eaten as to the heart,--who will trample them into order. Call him Lonole, Olestant, or clement Caesar, which you will; a beast from the abyss must arise to rule the bestial. This is the truly representative man who emerges at the epochs. Rousseau, the red-head, with the curse of Iscariot upon him, may begin the series. A red philosopher first introduces his Pandemonium as order; secondly, Les rouges rouges le rouge assomeront (<page 239>); and thirdly, the destroyer, the Napoleon, or Apollyon, introduces and then crowns himself with his own hand. A red series in a red sequel so scaled, so shuts the same.

As we are upon analogies, another curious one may here be noted. The colours of the tricoloured flag symbolize revolution by the reversal of the order of nature. The primary colours in the solar spectrum are, as well as in the primary arc of the rainbow, red, yellow, blue (p. 289); whilst in the tricolour the succession is blue, white, red. Out of this flag, or bow, in the political heavens there is no hope to come, for it yields no promise but that of a deluge,--rouge.

The sanguinary death of Louis XVI. is foreshown at <page 211>. In the "Luminary Epistle" to Henry II. (<page 62>) the very year is given (1792) to which the quatrain of Louis's death refers. Take next the arrest at Varennes (<page 215>), and then another miracle of precision shines forth; for Saulce, the grocer's name in that little town, is pregiven (<page 217>). The Tuileries are mentioned by name,--a place where burnt a tile-kiln, when Nostradamus was inditing for us the prophecy.

Now refer to the Napoleonic rule (<page 250>). See Napoleon horn in the west of Europe, and the way he could seduce, in a language not his own, is pointed out to you; and, his name is to be a name that the Fates know (<page 251>).

[p. xviii]

Take, again, that strange identification of the Gallic Hercules with his analogue Napoleon. How, as a jay taught by Talma, he at the Tuileries apes the fine birds and court splendour of the old regime (<page 257>). Then read the quatrain at <page 259>, where the simple soldier reaches empire, and so strikes close analogy again with Cromwell. Then read (<page 262>) that awful curse fulminated, when counsel shall die out of the shaven head; see Sclavonia gather (<page 265>), and old Moscow burn, whilst the eagle (<page 266>) is beaten back with a swarm of birds, and hovers to its fall at Leipsic. [*1]

I do not deem it necessary to particularize any further; for if all this gathered into one conspectus is not enough to carry conviction home to the mind of any one; and, make the reader know that at Salon, three hundred and odd years since, there lived a Frenchman, who saw all this in visions of the night, interpretative speech accompanying, and set it down at first in too clear prose, and secondly in rythmic riddles afterwards; why, then, I think that fifty times more evidence, thrown in upon the top, could carry no conviction with it.

I have said many things about science and its modern tendencies that will be deemed foolish by some, and by others undeservedly severe, so that a few words upon it

[p. xix]

seem necessary here. If the word "science" merely means the study of nature, it has my admiration as a pursuit. But if it means knowledge, I say it is an absolute misnomer. There is no true knowledge out of wisdom, and all that is wisdom in man is comprised in his veneration of Deity. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." It is evident, that what we call science in this day, does not tend that way at all.

But, to take it briefly another way, if you do not know the first cause of anything, you can only attain to a knowledge of relativities, but never of anything as it is in itself. Your methods can have neither beginning nor end. Hence a man can only attain to relative knowledge which, in the strict meaning of words, is not knowledge at all. Thus science is impossible.

Those, who pretend to science, talk much now about an Atomic Theory. They speak of their atom, contrary to its etymology, as being a thing infinitely divisible. This they adopt as a subterfuge, that no one may be able to drive them home. But if you leave them to their own devices,--their own chemical analyses, quantitative and qualitative, when they get beyond vapour, leave them in possession of a nothing to divide. It is then they approach Deity in minimis; but for the cloud upon their sight they cannot see Him. Such men apprehend nothing except through the intellect; but the perfect intellect yields only half the man. It can only deal with the subject-matter furnished to it by the senses. There is, high-placed above it, the spirit of life; which possesses a sense of its own, and by this the heart and head are interlinked. When the ideas (for lack of a better word) of these two are thought into harmony,--or, what Coleridge would call "unity,"--then, and then only, is the comment of the whole man perfect. Take this for an axiom: If you

[p. xx]

believe your sense, you may be right; if you believe your senses, you are out of them.

 Cogito ergo sum ("I think therefore I am") has been accredited to Descartes as wisdom for a long time. It is nonsense. It is a proof gathered from the action of the intellect alone, and is a critique physical, rather than metaphysical, and here can afford no proof of anything.

Another word about Atoms, and I must have done, or this will not be a preface, but a metaphysical treatise; and though that may be greatly wanted, this is not the place for it. Yet, as I have arraigned science, it becomes advisable that I should furnish to the competent reader a spot or foothold, where being placed, he may, if he will, command my meaning. In the Chaldaic oracles there occur two curious lines; I quote them below that there may be no equivocation possible. [*1] "Now, these fabricate individual things (ta atoma, atoms), and sensible objects, and corporeal things, and things classed under matter." The Neoplatonists said that ideas were an emanation of the divine fire. Plato said very much the same thing of the human soul itself. An atom thus becomes a fiery individuality (atomic); not, observe, what the nonsensical chemist of to-day calls it,--when by his terrene fire he has reached vapour,--an infinitely divisible atom, but a particle indivisible; that, having traversed all the forms, goes out at the other end of matter; or back again in a chariot of fire to the idea it started from. The world's Opifex made it by fire, and the tradition of Elias is that it will be dissolved by fire at last; but what, friend, should it prove that it is every day doing so always? A fiery idea began it, and in an idea of fire it ends. Also

[p. xxi]

man's life is nothing but a leap through matter from fire to fire. The ordeal by fire was a type of this.

The professional critic and expert must, after this sketch, be left to himself to judge of everything here set down according to the established rules of art, and the interests multifarious of the special literary organ he may write for and derive emolument from. I expect but little recognition from such criticism; yet, as it is often the result of a life devoted to study and of wide learning, its indifference, or even its hostility, is likely to prove useful,--whether by its fault-finding or in its discovery of actual error. Whatever its sagacity may in this way show to be wrong, I hope to receive with equanimity and thankfulness, and to put right should a second edition by asked for. So much for the professional critics.

What remains to be said touching my method of treatment will probably have no interest whatever for such critic, nor yet for the general reader. It purely, and I think solely, concerns the thoughtful and capable reader. The exceptional man, who finally, and all the world over, is the best friend of the true writer; and who, banded with others like himself, determines solidly the value of, and ultimate position to be given to, every new book, that is a book at all, born into the world of letters.

Such a reader I would only forewarn against two preliminary objections, that might at a hasty first glance tend to excite some prejudice in his mind. The episodes indulged in, and the apparent self-sufficiency of utterance exhibited on questions of moment, that seemingly wise men are divided upon still; or that men of supposed authority have in general estimation settled long ago. Many such things will here be found to have been laid bare again to the very roots, and challenged to show a reason. This is absolute arrogance

[p. xxii]

everywhere in the estimation of the multitude, learned and unlearned. Reader, gentle and capable, let me give you my view on these two points: could I make it also your view, how well rewarded should I be.

As to episodes: my own view of a book is this, that it should furnish a stimulus to thought if possible at every page; that nothing should enter into it for the sake of bookmaking; and that, so long as the subject of the book is clearly and consecutively advanced, anything else, that can vitally be thrown in without interruption, is so much the more gained to the world in the study of itself, or, in other words, in the study of man; this Pope has, I incline to think rightly, ruled to be his proper vocation here. Very close and consecutive treatment of a difficult matter must always, when long continued, weigh down the spirits, and somewhat fatigue the attention of the reader. At such a time an interesting episode happily introduced will rally the spirits; and, by a momentary diversion, will renew the attention, enabling the reader to attach himself again with vigour to the main thread. There are episodes of course, as there are other things, good and bad. The episode that is dull in itself and distracts attention is bad; that which is in itself interesting and relieves fatigue, carrying the mind back to the main subject refreshed, is entirely good. The episodes in the following pages the reader will judge to be good or bad as they fall under the rule given above or transgress it.

The charge of arrogancy is a little more difficult to deal with, and also to rebut. But even here I do not despair of being exonerated by the capable reader, whom alone, on this point, it is requisite to address. Many years ago I came upon a passage in Coleridge to the effect that he had always pursued light, believing that it must lead to truth, and truth to happiness; but that, let it consummate in joy or not, follow

[p. xxiii]

it he would, for truth's sake. Truth attracted, and he, in fact, must draw to it. I shut the book up, and said, So will I; and, with certain failures, much interruption by necessary duties, and innumerable personal shortcomings, so I have. The result has been an ever-increasing solitude, [*1] until at last no eremite of the desert is more alone than I for years have been. Thus placed, I have thought on many questions, with books and without them, caring but little what the greatest said, so only I kept moving onward towards that spot where the light of morning dawned, or where the still rathelier twilight promised dawning. My attention always lay between things and thoughts, keeping clean aloof from vain opinion, which leads to nothing, though she be, according to Pascal, Regina del mondo. As no renown of genius could bring me to respect any man's opinion; so I strove that no self-seeking, nor hope out of some novelty or strangeness to win originality, might bring me to adopt any principle soever that fell short of justness in the least, or of sacred truth anyhow attainable by man. As I sank others, so have I sunk myself and all personal belongings, striving, if I might, to make myself a trumpet of smooth passage or clear mouthpiece to the truth that lies behind us all,--behind every man that cometh into the world,--though haply there be but few who can allow it free enough scope and exit through them. As in this way I have grown nearly dead both to myself and others, and want little of emolument and less of glory (accurrent from without), it seemed not unlikely that so epurated a voice-piece might utter more of

[p. xxiv]

less adulterate truth, than it falls in common to the lot of most to do. So much am I a mere person (persona), mask, thing sounded through, as that the voice at last seems scarcely to be mine at all, but something larger, higher, better much, than I pretend to be. I do not even claim a perfect utterance, or out-put, for what remains of me,--call it trumpet, mask, person, or what not,--must remain, I know, always beset with some earth and earthiness that mars a pure transmission. Yet, weak as it may be and is, the weak things of the world are those that most confound the mighty ones established of authority by man. Where is any boasting, I ask, in this; or what of arrogance is here? Will any man spend thirty years thus to become a voice-tube merely? None the less is it at last a voice crying in the wilderness, "Desolate are those who in the earth lack vision of wisdom, or call gold wealth." Capable and gentle reader, test this prologue, and try it, believing, that if there be any good thing in it, solitude and The Alone have wrought it. With them, as by seraphic marshalling,--with tent pitched, or travelling on, under the night-star or by day,--you may safely thread the pages following, assured that nothing but good can issue or accrue therefrom to you. Most excellent reader, let Vale Valete! fall as the benediction of an eremite upon your ear to-day; as also upon your pilgrimage hereafter, till the hour vespertine of sleep drop down, that closes all for each.

      WALTHAMSTOW, E., 1891.

Footnotes

^viii:1 This noble and enlarged thought is worthy of Coleridge, who is the greatest thinker of our century, whether you take him as poet or philosopher. Nobody has yet claimed for him the pre-eminence which, I believe, to be his. The peculiar, nay, unique frailties of the man have blinded the men of his own time to the super-eminent, intellectual, practical, and imaginative endowments with which he was so affluently furnished. By the middle of next century, some hundred or so years from his death, the fact will have dawned upon the world, if not before. It will then be recognized that such a personality as his, was "a great birth of time," and to be registered as such in the deathless calendar of genius. Saint, seer, and sage was that man. Not "spoilt in the making," as the witty Lamb put it, with all the lambent malice of a friend jocose. We must admit, of course, some damage that hindered general currency, as also the attainment of such now worthless cash-results as fell to beings distinctly inferior to himself, such as Byron, Southey, Wordsworth, Moore, great as some estimate them to be; and this failure shut Coleridge out from social success,--that success which most of us so ignorantly and greedily covet here, because it makes the present comfortable. But the chief reason, of any shortcoming hurtful to success, that may be observable in Coleridge, no doubt arose from his being far too great to be adequately measured by any of his fellow-men. Many of them were, it is true, highly capable men as the world goes. Even Carlyle, however, who has disparaged him, when placed beside him, dwarfs to a man of Lilliput. We have to bear in mind always that excellent remark of La Bruyere, "Celui qui ne prevoit rien, est souvent dupe; celui qui prevoit trop, est toujours malheureux." This is true of all prophets, and especially true of Coleridge.

But, another thing there is that helps to diminish Coleridge in the general estimation. He has not completed work enough, in well set and fixed form, for posterity to be quite able to fender him adequate, that is to say, resplendent justice. His unexampled conversational gifts have somewhat barred the way to a due appreciation of his equally unexampled literary potentialities. His conversational aptitudes have perished in the moment of their triumphant display. Being without record in this respect, he suffers precisely as the greatest actor does. Triumphs of the table and the salon [p. ix] are like the triumphs of the stage, we can only revive them in spirit, or the basis of some felicitously appreciative sentence, chance embalmed in print, that some competent contemporary has ejaculated. I, for instance, know the overwhelming power of Kean only through my mother, and the burning phrases left behind by Byron and Coleridge. But the next generation can have no cognizance of him beyond those phrases. It is for this precise reason I indite so long a note as this on Coleridge, out of the pure respect I bear him for his stupendous intelligence and incommensurable soul. I have, indeed, tried to put on record elsewhere my impression of his poetry; but, I have not yet been able to get it printed. Should it ever be so, it would at least acquire some value from the fact of its representing, in a limited and qualified degree, Coleridge's vivid influence upon one who may partially stand on the footing of a contemporary. Coleridge is a spirituality in the world, and his modes of revealing himself are such as lead the run of mankind to esteem him visionary; but it will be found that it is they, not he, that must be reckoned "such stuff as dreams are made of."

^xviii:1 Touching this curse to fall on Napoleon, a somewhat singular analogy arises in comparing with it the axiom laid down by Thomasius, quoted in Bruncker's "Hist. Crit. Philos.," v.488. He says that the spirit is, as it were, resident in the centre of all bodies, and thence emits rays, so extending matter. But where it draws back the rays from the circumference of the material to the centre, it soon dissolves and corrupts the body. Si vero radios ex circumferentia materiae spiritus attrahat ad centrum, resolvitur corpus et corrumpitur. If we suppose this to have taken place at the epileptic seizure of Napoleon, the mental attack becomes an image or antitype of the battle of Leipsic, when the swarm of birds beat back the eagle. An interpreter, such as Joseph, could have told him the meaning of the dream or swoon. The defeat was first of all rehearsed in the soldier's own brain.

^xx:1

	 
		Oi de ta atoma kai aistheta demioyrgousi
		 Kai sumatoeidei kai katatetagmena eis ylen.
		
		 STANLEY'S "Hist. Chald. Phil.," p. 43.

^xxiii:1 To get one thing, one must always forego some other. Jupiter did not give prescience to Tiresias till Juno had struck him blind. And for our own great Milton it was necessary he should have wisdom at one entrance quite shut out, before, in "Paradise Lost," he could make men's memory a prisoner to his name for ever, in a willing though perpetual serfdom.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxv]

 

CONTENTS

  PREFACE  <page vii> 
  LIFE OF NOSTRADAMUS  <page 3> 
  THE PREFACE OF MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS TO HIS PROPHECIES  <page 39> 
  EPISTLE TO HENRY II.  <page 50> 
  MAGIC  <page 67> 
  HISTORICAL FRAGMENTS  <page 79> 
  HENRI QUATRE  <page 113> 
  LOUIS XIII.  <page 125> 
  LOUIS XIV.  <page 132> 
  LOUIS XV.  <page 144> 
  ENGLAND  <page 146> 
  FRENCH REVOLUTION  <page 198> 
  LOUIS XVI.  <page 211> 
  THE NATIONAL CONVENTION  <page 238> 
  PIUS VI.  <page 245> 
  NAPOLEONIC RULE  <page 250> 
  LOUIS XVIII. AND LOUIS PHILIPPE  <page 283> 
  REPUBLIC, 1848, AND NAPOLEON III.  <page 294> 
  APPENDIX  <page 305> 
  

 

"Quelle physique corpusculaire, quels atomes determinent ainsi leur nature? vous n'en savez rien; la cause sera eternellement occulte pour vous. Tout ce qui vous entoure, tout ce qui est dans vous, est une enigme dont il n'est pas donne a l'homme de deviner le mot."--VOLTAIRE, Dict. Phil., s.v. Occultes.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

 

Oracles of Nostradamus

 

Life of Nostradamus

"In Nature's infinite book of secrecy
 A little I can read."

 Antony and Cleopatra, i. 2.

"I am Isaiah,--be it spoken with all humility,--to the advancement of God's glory."--Luther's Table Talk, Bohn, p. 12.

Yes, indeed, Luther, with quite Lutheran humility!

"Canys gwn a fydd rhag llaw."
 "For I know what has been, and will be hereafter."

TALIESSIN.

"Prophetia est solum futurorum contingentium, quia longe distant ab humana cognitione; sed secundario ad eam pertinent praeterita et praesentia."--ST. THO. AQUINATIS, Summa, p. 409.

MICHEL DE NOSTREDAME was born in Provence, in the town of St. Remy, in the year 1503, upon a Thursday, the 14th of December, about noon. Tycho Brahe (1546), D'Herbelot (1625) the great Orientalist, and Bruce (1730) the Abyssinian traveller, were all born on the same day of the month. Coincidences such as these are, perhaps, not worth much; yet, do they interest us less than the rainfall of a month, or the precise pressure of the wind on Cleopatra's needle?--which goes by the name of Cleopatra because Cleopatra had nothing whatever to do with it. Robert Etienne, the great printer, was also born in 1503. What would, however, more have affected the family of Nostradamus is the expulsion of the French from Naples on October 31, 1503, after the famous battles in April, fought on two consecutive Fridays with disaster to the French; the battles namely, of Seminara and Cerignola. Many have said that the evil omen attaching to Friday dates from that period. If we had never heard of Good Friday we also might have been of their opinion.

His father, like Milton's, a notary, was James Nostradamus, a name which is equivalent to de Notre Dame. [*1]

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Moreri calls his family "une famille noble;" [*1] others say that he was of Jewish descent, but of a family that had been converted to Christianity, and that he claimed to be of the tribe of Issachar, deriving thence his gift of prophecy, for they were "men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do" (I Chron. xii. 32); or, as in Esther i. 13, "the seven wise men that knew the times." It is true that but few of the orthodox commentators interpret these passages as signifying astrological or prophetic forecast; but that may be, nevertheless, the real meaning (vid. Poole's "Synopsis").

How could Nostradamus be of Issachar, as that was one of the lost tribes? would be a natural inquiry enough; and one could only answer it, as the wit did, in a case somewhat similar, that He could only resemble Issachar in being a great, "strong ass" (Gen. xlix. 14).

His mother's name was Renee de Saint Remy. Her ancestors by the father's and mother's side were men skilled in mathematics and medicine: one was physician to Rene, or Renatus, titular King of Jerusalem and Sicily, and Count of Provence; whilst the other was physician to John, Duke of Calabria, who was the son of King Rene. Our author, in his Commentaries, says that a knowledge of mathematics had traditionally descended (de main en main) to him from his early progenitors; and, in the Preface to his "Centuries," he adds: "Que la parole hereditaire de l'occulte prediction sera dans son estomac intercluse."

It was his great-grandfather [*2] who gave him, almost as in sport, a first taste for the celestial sciences. After the death

[p. 5]

of this relative he was put to school at Avignon, to study his humanity courses, and thence he went to the university at Montpellier, to acquire philosophy and the theory of medicine.

Montpellier, the Mons Pessulanus of antiquity, contains the most famous school of medicine in all France. It is ancient, and is said to have been founded by Arabian physicians when forced to fly from Spain--Moreri says in the year 1196, by the disciples of Averroes and Avicenna. Its inhabitants are reputed to be witty and most polite. It once had numerous noble churches and many religious establishments, but since the Huguenots became masters of it in 1561, they ruined all this, and made the city the headquarters of their party for a time. Louis XIII. besieged it in 1622, and took it. His first act was to rebuild the Cathedral of St. Peter and the other churches; the desecration of all such edifices being the Puritan and Huguenot fashion there and everywhere. The town seems always to have been a fief of the Crown of France. But a number of kinglets, such as the King of Aragon and the King of Majorca, appear at different times to have had seignorial rights in Montpellier; and many church councils have been held there. All these matters are of some slight interest, as furnishing in a filmy fashion a notion of those influences, mental and physical, that would have been floating around Nostradamus when studying there. The seizure of the town by the Huguenots would have occurred some years before his death. As he was a true Churchman, their successes would have embittered his mind, and may have influenced some of the visions contained in the "Sixains" and "Presages."

It may interest us as Englishmen to know that in the extensive botanical garden at Montpellier lie the remains of Miss Temple, the Narcissa, whose death and funeral are so

[p. 6]

vividly recounted by Young in the "Night Thoughts." He appears to have considerably misrepresented the transaction; but George Eliot has made up for it by a criticism upon him and his works, conceived, perhaps in the grossest and worst taste that criticism from a woman's pen has ever fallen into. She grows so angry that she can hardly even see that Young is a poet in any sense of the word. She might easily have found out that he was, by comparing some of her own verses with his.

Another point of interest to us in regard to Montpellier is the reversal of public opinion touching the climate of the place. Brompton, sixty or eighty years ago, was, from the mildness and salubrity of its air, coupled with its then semi-rural aspect, called "the Montpellier of London." The analogy could never have been very remarkable, as Brompton is about on a level with the River Thames, whereas Montpellier's splendid promenade of the Place de Peyron is 168 feet above the sea-level, whilst the whole town runs up the hillside, as its name expresses. Still, the phrase testifies to the opinion then prevalent. Owing to the brightness of its atmosphere and the beauty of its suburbs, the town was long recommended by British physicians as a health-resort to patients suffering from pulmonary complaints; but the weather-vane of science has now reversed that opinion entirely. Its climate is found to be changeable, its sunshine is blazing, its atmosphere is charged with dust that is impalpable, all the while that it seems to be clear; and its cold mistral blasts do but portend a spot most singularly hurtful to the lungs. The fashion varies in localities, drugs, theories, and treatment, and as a health resort for English people the reputation of Montpellier has passed away; but the "Ecole de Medecine" still retains its ancient renown as the central seminary of medical instruction in France.

[p. 7]

Learned and medical as it was in the days of Nostradamus, it could not escape visitation by a great plague, [*1] and Michael Nostradamus had to retreat to Narbonne, Toulouse, and Bordeaux. In these towns he commenced practice, when about twenty-two years of age, and four years later he bethought him of returning to Montpellier for refreshment, and to take his Doctor's degree. This he got through very quickly, and in a manner that won him the admiration and applause of the whole College. In returning to Toulouse he passed through Agen, a town on the Garonne, where he met with no less a person than the learned Jules Cesar Scaliger, [*2] with whom he entered at once into the most intimate familiarity. This induced him to take up his permanent residence in the town. But after a while their cordiality grew less, till rivalry and pique sprang up between them, and they thenceforth stood aloof from one another. Here he married a lady "une fort honorable demoiselle," though history has not divulged her name. By her he had two children, who died young; she also died. Finding himself again companionless, he returned to his natal soil of Provence. When he reached Marseilles, he was invited by the Parliament of Provence to come to Aix, where he stayed three years, receiving a salary from the city from the time the plague broke out, in 1546. It seems to have raged fiercely, and it is said that he furnished to the Seigneur de Launay the reports which he has given in his book, "Le Theatre du Monde."

After the contagion passed away, the town, Moreri records, voted him for several years following a considerable

[p. 8]

pension. His services must consequently have been recognized as valuable. He has left us the formula of his plague powder in Chapter VIII. of his treatise "Des Fards." As a curious instance of the modesty of the women of Aix, he records that they began to sew themselves up in their winding sheets, as soon as they were attacked by the contagion, that their bodies might not be exposed naked after death ("Penny Cyclopaedia"). I suppose we may judge from this that the system of burial during the contagion was as gross and indecent as in the famous plague of London; or is this only a fanciful imitation of the story of the women of Marseilles in classical times?

He went thence to Salon de Craux, which lies midway between Avignon and Marseilles. Here he married for the second time. The lady's name is given by Garencieres as Anna Ponce Genelle; Anne Poussart, says Moreri; others say Pons Jumel. (See the epitaph further on.) There is the same incertitude as to his family. Jean Aimes de Chavigny, whom we are following, makes it to consist of six children, three boys and three girls; while Garencieres says three sons and one daughter.

It was here, relates our memoir, that, foreseeing great mutations were about to affect all Europe, and that civil wars and troubles were so soon to come upon the kingdom of France, he felt an unaccountable and new enthusiasm springing up uncontrollably in his mind, which at last amounted almost to a maddening fever, till he sat down to write his "Centuries" and other "Presages." The first of these "Presages" is dated 1555, and runs as follows:--

	 
		"D'Esprit divin l'ame presage atteinte,
		 Trouble, famine, peste, guerre courir;
		 Eaux, siccitez, terre et mer dc sang teinte,
		 Paix, tresac a naistre, Prelats, Princes mourir!"
		
		 [p. 9]

He kept them by him for a long time, half afraid to risk the publication; he foresaw there was danger, and that it would lead to infinite detraction, calumny, and backbiting, as indeed it finally fell out. A thing like this is like the fox stolen by the Spartan youth, that eats the heart out, and is sure to get vent sooner or later. His memorialist says, that at last, overcome by a desire to be useful to the public, he produced them. No sooner had he done so than the rumour ran from mouth to mouth, at home and abroad, that some thing marvellous and admirable had appeared. One cannot see of what use they could be to the public, as they could not possibly be understood till they were interpreted after the event and by it. In some of the quatrains he says as much himself. He no doubt published them because he felt an intense longing so to do; and, when the mind of a man reaches this stage of desire, it will not take him long to find some excellent reason for carrying out the impulsion. Public good, the advancement of religion, the sustentation of faith, the psychological inference as to the immorality of the human soul, or any other good phrase, will serve a man as a sufficient reason for doing what he wants to do. That man must be a great searcher into his own consciousness, if he cannot readily assume that the motive assigned in such a case is the causa causativa of the act of putting forth.

Moreri's account is not exactly the same as that of our memoir. Moreri describes him as being invited to Lyons in 1547, but as returning very quickly to Salon, only to find that his popularity at the latter place had greatly abated. The disappointment he experienced from this treatment made him withdraw a good deal from society, and commit himself the more to hard study. He tells us that he had for a long time previously practised divination; now he began to think himself to be directly inspired as to the future.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] From this time, as the lights occurred to his mind, he began committing them to writing at the moment. He set them down at first in plain prose, if you can call enigmatical sentences plain prose; at any rate, they were not written in verse.

Garencieres' version varies again. With him it is, that Nostradamus found by experience that the perfect knowledge of medicine is unattainable without the aid of astrology, to which he now addicted himself. It is an alluring science, and one towards the pursuit of which his natural genius strongly disposed him, so that he made very rapid progress in it. His first publications in this line consisted of almanacs, according to the custom of the time, for profit and recreation's sake; and in these he so happily hit off the conjuncture of events that both he and his publications became greatly sought after. It is somewhat curious that so few of these almanacs appear to be now extant. One would have expected that documents of such interest, once in type, would not perish entirely from all households and libraries. It may, however, be taken as a proof of the maelstrom of time that engulfs everything, so that by the period when posterity grows interested in any event, all its belated questionings are presented with a universal blank. The spirit of literary piracy, too, seems to have been rife in those early days. The success of his work soon became a cause of discredit to him, as it led enterprising printers and booksellers to vend, under his name, almanacs destitute of everything that had constituted the merit of his.

When the work made its appearance, it divided the public. Some called the prophet a simple visionary, or, in coarser phrase, a fool; others accused him of magic, and of being in too close treaty with the Devil to be honest. A few held their judgment in suspense, and would pronounce no opinion

[p. 11]

on the subject. A vast number of the grandees and of the learned, both at home and abroad, thought that he was endowed with a gift supernatural; and amongst these were Henri II. and Catherine de Medici. It remained to the esprits forts and the ignorant public, who knew nothing of him but his name, to pronounce him a charlatan and impostor. There is one thing certain, he felt much hesitation as to publishing at all; and, when he took that step at last, he addressed the book to his infant son, and not to any public character, in the year 1555. At this period he would bc fifty-two. This is not a time of life at which men usually commence a course of imposture. When he is summoned to the Court at Paris, loaded with honours and consulted on high matters (de choses importantes), he displays nothing but moderation and good sense, and returns contentedly to his modest home at Salon. Upon all ordinary lines of human judgment, such conduct seems to indicate genuineness; and this is strengthened, if not established, by his genuine gravity of deportment and serious religious sentiments. Nobody has denied the purity of his life. Still, a certain Lord Pavilion, of his own day, wrote against him, or perhaps against this publishers' figment of a name, rather than his. Further, we find the book led to the bitter epigrammatic distich of the poet Jodele, or as others say, of Beza,--

	 
		"Nostradamus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
		 Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi nostra damus."
		
		 This can very easily be turned against the piratical almanac makers, thus:--

	 
		"Vera damus cum verba damus quae Nostradamus dat;
		 Sed cum nostra damus, nil nisi falsa damus."
		
		 In spite of piracy and obloquy, the repute of Nostradamus grew, as we have said, in influential quarters, until it came

[p. 12]

to the ears of Queen Catherine de Medici and Henri II, on the publication, in March, 1555, of the first seven Centuries of his "Prophecies." The remaining Centuries, the Sixains, and Presages, were not published till long after. In the following year, 1556, they sent for him to attend the Court in Paris: though Garencieres says he left Salon on July 14, 1555, and reached Paris on August 15th, a particularity which seems to indicate special knowledge. [*1] The Lord Constable Montmorency attended him at his inn, and presented him to the king in person. The king showed him high favour, and ordered him to be lodged at the palace of the Cardinal de Bourbon, Archbishop of Sens, during his stay in the capital.

When there a severe attack of gout seized him, that lasted ten or twelve days. His majesty sent him two hundred crowns in gold (two hundred ecus d'or; vid. Moreri) in a velvet purse, and the queen one hundred crowns (Le Pelletier, i. 92). They then despatched him to Blois, to visit their children, the royal princes, and give his astrological opinion. He repaired thither, and seems to have acquitted himself to the satisfaction of the king. It is quite certain that he did not tell them precisely what he thought, [*2] for the princes were Francis II., Charles IX., and Henry III., whose tragical fates he has correctly set out, and with unmistakable clearness, as may be seen (at pp. <page 84>, <page 86>, <page 96>) by the forecasts in his strange book. He, however, cast their horoscopes and acquitted himself in this, as in all other transactions, en homme d'esprit. He returned to Salon so much encouraged that he set to work and completed his

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] "Centuries," consisting of three hundred more quatrains. These further quatrains he appears to have printed in 1558, but Garencieres says that he dedicated them to the king in 1557. The only thing that is certain is that the Texte-type dates the epistle June 27, 1558. This "Luminary Epistle" to the king, Garencieres tells us, discovers future events "from the birth of Louis XIV., now reigning, till the coming of antichrist." [*1]

[p. 14]

Henri II. was killed the following year, 1559, at the tournament of St. Quentin, as we shall see- it fully set forth at Quatrain 35 in Century I.

He had now become quite a court favourite, for Emanuel, the Duke of Savoy, visited him at his house at Salon about this period, in the month of October; and, in the December following, the Princesse Marguerite de France, sister of Henry II., who by the treaty of peace at Cambresis was to marry the duke, came also to Nostradamus, entertaining him very familiarly (Garencieres and Moreri).

Charles IX. made a progress through the kingdom in 1564, to quiet the cities that had mutinied; and when he came to Provence, on arriving at Salon, November 17th, he asked first of all for Nostradamus. Nostradamus was in the suite of magistrates around the king, so that he was presented on the instant, upon which the king made him his Physician in Ordinary, and honoured him with the title of Counsellor. He complained rather bitterly of the neglect with which his follow-townsmen treated him. Cesar Nostradamus reports this, saying, "Et de ce, me souviens fort 

[p. 15]

 bien, car je fus de la partie" (Moreri). On the return journey he again inquired for Nostradamus, and gave him two hundred ecus. He was at this time over sixty, and with his health fast breaking under severe attacks of gout. He died within about sixteen months of this period, and the salary and profits of Physician in Ordinary must have greatly comforted the old man in his latter days. He enjoyed now the further satisfaction of being flocked to by learned men, grandees, and others, who resorted to him far and near, as to an oracle. "As St. Jerome remarks of Livy, so may we remark of him," says his biographer, Jean Aimes, "that those who came to France sought Nostradamus as the only thing to be seen there."

The closing scene is now drawing very near, and we find him much afflicted with his maladies, notably arthritic gout, as distinguished from podagra, which Dr. Cullen considers as the seat of idiopathic gout. He awaited with firmness his climacteric, as they used to designate a man's sixty-third year. He died on the 2nd of July, 1566, a little before sun. rise, having all his senses yet about him, for the arthrisis turned to dropsy about eight days previously, and early on the second day of the month suffocated him. Jean Aimes says that Nostradamus was well advised of the time, even of the very day and hour, when his death must take place. The prophet reminded him frequently towards the close of the previous June that he had written with his own hand, in the Ephemerides of Jean Stadius, these words in Latin, Hic prope mors est ("Here is death at hand"). "The day," continues this friend, "before he exchanged this life for a better, after I had spent many hours with him, and late at night was taking leave of him until the following morning, he said, 'You will not see me alive at sunrise.'" M. le Pelletier gives (i. 91) Presage 141 as a stanza pointing to his

[p. 16]

own death; but, as the "Presages" were not printed till 1568, their authenticity may or may not be accepted as the reader feels inclined. The lines run thus, and are remarkable enough, if we admit that they were a genuine forecast; for, although they assign no specific date, yet they sum up the principal facts rather fully:--

	 
		"De retour d'Ambassade, don de Roy mis au lieu;
		 Plus n'en fera; sera alle a Dieu:
		 Parans plus proches, amis, freres du sang,
		 Trouve tout mort pres du lict et du banc."
		
		 The meaning given to this is, that on his return from Arles, whence he was sent for, in 1564, by Charles IX., to see him a second time, after he had safely put away the three hundred crowns given him by the king and queen, his last transaction would be concluded, and he would then under his soul to God. His nearest relatives, brothers, and friends would find him dead near his bed, seated, as was customary with him, on the bench at its foot, as he could there breathe more freely.

This is the interpretation put upon it by M. le Pelletier. As I understand Cesar Nostradamus, the king did not send for him to Arles, but asked again for him on his majesty's return to Salon; and I should think the word "ambassade" must refer to some private mission the king had sent him upon entirely apart from this, and for which he paid him. Be this as it may, the fact that Nostradamus assigns no date for his death, in this presage, goes to establish its authenticity, one would incline to say. For supposing it to have been foisted in, after his death, surely a fabricator of the marvellous would first of all have made it to show trois vingts et trois bis, and twisted that into some colourable shape. He would have been little likely to add as a prophetical

[p. 17]

feature that the king's present had been put away in a safe place, as to do so seems anything rather than a supernatural instinct. It is a touch of prose more than of the Python. On the whole, I should incline to take the verse for a genuine emanation from the pen of Nostradamus. Certainly he would recognize, even medically, that, as he found himself to be growing "fort caduc et debile" towards his climacterical year, he would know that his dissolution was at hand. A man's grand climacteric is generally considered to arrive at 63, though some place it at 81, that number being composed of 9 times 9. In either of these periods, if sickness occur, it is considered as especially likely to prove fatal.

There seems to be a diversity of opinion about this, for some say that the annus climactericus is 84, or 12 times 7. Aulus Gellius thinks the opinion to be of immense antiquity, running back to the Chaldeans; and no doubt Pythagoras derived it from the East. Ficinus explains it by saying that the body of man is ruled over by each planet in turn for the space of one year, and, Saturn being the most maleficent, every seventh year falling to his presidency becomes extremely dangerous. This explanation would shut out the nines, except in the sixty-third and eighty-first year, but it would also vitiate the whole scheme of astrology, for the planet under which a man was born (say he were born under Saturn) would dominate his body at birth, and be, one must suppose, the ruling planet that year, and, if it were Saturn, would recur only on his eighth year. Eighty-four would not be in favour generally, as it consists entirely of even numbers, though divisible by seven. Many held that only a number produced by the multiplication of an odd number could be climacterical. Augustus thought it a subject of great rejoicing when he had passed over his sixty-third

[p. 18]

year. [*1] Moreri will have eighty-one to be properly speaking the climacteric, and he notes that at this age died Plato, Diogenes, Eratosthenes the geometer, and many other illustrious personages. Some went so far as to say that political bodies had their climacterical periods; and they certainly, judging from our own country, have periods of fatal folly, whether or no the nines and sevens collide, or the stars fight against Sisera. But amongst other oddities of history may be chronicled the fact that Henri Quatre was the sixty-third King of France, which made Malherbe talk of--

	 
		"La vaine etude s'applique,
		 A trouver la climaterique,
		 De l'eternelle fleur-de-lis"--
		
		 that fleur-de-lis whose terrible withering up in the fatal year of '93 Nostradamus so powerfully forecasts.

Suffice it to say that in this climacterical crisis Nostradamus succumbed in his sixty-third year to gout, which turned to dropsy. [*2]

Nostradamus was interred at the church of the Franciscan Friars (Les Cordeliers) at Salon, as it is noted, on the left-hand side of the church door (Garencieres). His widow erected to him a marble tablet, "representing his figure to the life, and his arms above it." The epitaph is as follows, made, they say, in imitation of that great Livy aforenamed, the Roman historian:--

[p. 19]

D. M.

CLARISSIMI OSSA

MICHAELIS NOSTRADAMI,

UNIUS OMNIUM MORTALIUM JUDICIO DIGNI,
 CUJUS PENE DIVINO CALAMO TOTIUS ORBIS,
 EX ASTRORUM INFLUXU, FUTURI EVENTUS
 CONSCRIBERENTUR.
 VIXIT ANNOS LXII. MENSES VI. DIES XVII.
 OBIIT SALONE AN. CICICLXVI.
 QUIETEM POSTERI NE INVIDETE. ANNA PONTIA GEMELLA
 CONJUGI OPT. V. FELICIT.

TRANSLATION.

"Here lie the bones of the illustrious Michael Nostradamus, whose almost divine pen alone, in the judgment of all mortals, was worthy to record, under the influx of the stars, the future events of the whole world. He lived 62 years, 6 months, 17 days. He died at Salon in the year 1566. Posterity, disturb not his sweet rest! Anne Ponce Gemelle hopes for her husband true felicity."

The text of this epitaph is that given by Benoist Rigaud in the edition of Nostradamus published by him in 1568.

In stature he was somewhat undersized, of a robust body, sprightly, and vigorous. He had a broad and open forehead, a straight even nose, grey eyes, of kindly expression, but in anger capable of flashing fire. The general expression was severe, though pleasant, so that a grand humanity shone through the seriousness. Even in age his cheeks were rosy. He had a long thick beard, and excellent health till nearly the close of life; he had his senses, being alert and keen, up to the very last moment. He had a good and lively wit, seizing with quick comprehension everything that he wished to

[p. 20]

acquire. His judgment was very penetrating, his memory happy and retentive. He was taciturn by nature, thought much and spoke little; but at the right time and occasion he could discourse extremely well. He was quick, and sudden even to irascibility; but very patient where work had to be done. He slept four or five hours only out of the twenty-four. He practised freedom of speech himself and commended it in others. He was cheerful and facetious in conversation, though in jesting a little given to bitterness. He was attached, so says De Chavigny, to the Roman Church, and held fixedly the Catholic faith; out of its pale there was for him no salvation. Though pursuing a line of thought entirely his own, he had no sympathy with the Lutheran heretics of so-called Freethought. He was given to prayer, fasting, and charity. As far as outward observance was concerned, he might be classed with the highly respectable and decent. Le Pelletier says, "Sa fin fut Chretienne;" but he adds a little further on that his style is very much more like that of the Pagan oracles of Greece and Rome than of the canonical prophets of Hebrew inspiration. He was very generous to the poor, and held it as a sort of maxim that in this sense it was legitimate to make friends with "the mammon of unrighteousness."

Jean Aimes de Chavigny, who seems to have come over from Beaune to play the part of a Boswell to Nostradamus and,--after his friend's death, is said to have devoted twenty-eight years of his life to editing the "Centuries" with notes, [*1] says that he collected twelve books of the "Centuries," of which vols. vii., xi., and xii. are imperfect. These are in quatrains, and are classified as Propheties, and they extend to very remote ages. The Presages, we are told, were written

[p. 21]

between 1550 and 1567, [*1] and. were collected by Aimes and reduced into twelve books in prose, as he thinks them worthy of the attention of posterity. The few Presages thou are in print run to only one hundred and forty-three quatrains in verse; so we must suppose that those written in prose have perished entirely.

Nostradamus left two brothers behind him: one named Bertrand; the other, Jean, who was his junior, and proctor to the Parliament at Aix, composed a History of Provence, and also wrote the lives of the Poets of Provence. [*2]

Moreri states that by his second wife he had six children, three boys and three girls. Of his sons, Cesar, the eldest, was a person of demonstratively gay and kindly spirit. It was to him, when quite a child, that Nostradamus dedicated the first seven of the "Centuries" published by him. These are the most authentic of all, and Moreri remarks that, if you wish the quatrains to be without interpolation, you should secure early editions. The reader will understand that to be now unnecessary, inasmuch as we have all along been dealing with the Texte-type. Cesar was born at Salon, 1555, and died 1629. He, like his uncle Jean, was an author, and wrote upon the same topics, leaving in manuscript a collection of the most remarkable things happening in Provence from the year 1080 to 1494. In this he included the lives of the poets of Provence. Many years after his death, his nephew and namesake, Cesar Nostradamus, who was Governor of Provence and gentleman in waiting upon the Due de Guise;

[p. 22]

found them, and himself worked at them, till, in 1603, the Parliament of the province voted him three thousand livres to encourage him to complete the work, which he did; and they were finally printed in Lyons in 1614, under the title of "Chroniques de l'Histoire de Provence." He commences with the Celtic Gauls at the early date of the Deluge. This is worthy of a true scion of the tribe of Issachar. A very strange story is told of Cesar by La Motte le Vayer in his "Instruction pour Monseigneur le Dauphin." He, like his father, Michel, had a taste for forecasting the future, and had ventured to predict that Pouzin, which was besieged, would perish by fire; but it was taken by coup de main. Whilst the pillage was going forward, the foolish prophet was, it is said, seen, match in hand, endeavouring to set it on fire. He was caught; and Saint-Luc, the commander, asked him if he had prophesied anything for himself that day. He replied, "No!" on which the general rode at him with his lance, and killed him on the spot. Moreri relates this story somewhat differently. If either version were true, it would be clear that Cesar did not understand "la parole hereditaire de l'occulte prediction," and that the lancehead instead was "dans son estomac intercluse." From other authorities, however, it would seem that he was busy about his history long after the date thus assigned for his death. Charles, his brother, was very excellent in Provencal poetry,--and several pieces of his arc still extant. Michel's third son, whose name is not given us by Moreri, became a Capuchin.

An anecdote is related by Garencieres, which he throws out as "a merry passage" to recreate his reader. Nostradamus was with Lord Florinville in Lorraine, at the Castle of Faim. He was attending medically his lordship's mother. In the yard where they strolled there were two little pigs, one white and the other black. His lordship inquired of Nostradamus

[p. 23]

jestingly what would be the fate of those pigs. "We shall eat the black one, and the wolf shall eat the white," said he. Lord Florinville secretly ordered the cook to get ready the white one for supper. When it was spitted ready for roasting, the cook left the kitchen for something, and in his absence a young tame wolf came in and ate a part of it, so that it could not appear at table. The cook immediately killed the black one, and sent it up at the time appointed. His lordship, not knowing what had happened, said to Nostradamus, "Well, Sir, we are now eating the white pig; how shall the wolf get it?" "I do not believe it," rejoined the prophet; "it is the black one that is upon the table." The cook was sent for, and by his confession the truth came out, much to the surprise of everybody present. Another story follows this, that Nostradamus had said that treasure was hidden in a little hill near Faim, that it would not be found if sought for, but that, if the ground was dug for any other reason, it would. Garencieres adds that there is great probability about this as it is the site of an ancient temple, and many times since antiquities have been unearthed here. He completes his cock-and-bull story by saying that many such tales are told of Nostradamus all over France but that he passes them by as being "unwilling to write anything without good warrant."

Amongst other nonsensical reports spread was one that he caused himself to be buried alive, and that he continued to write prophecies. This no doubt was set afloat by those honest publishers who in life had done him the honour to pirate his almanacs; at any rate it made for their interest. It has also been pretended that so many in Salon regarded him as an impostor, that for security's sake he was buried in the Franciscan Church.

Those who desire the Bibliography of the editions of Nostradamus

[p. 24]

up to the year 1840 will consult that which has been admirably drawn up by Eugene Bareste, Paris, 1840, in his work upon "Nostradamus." Or they may find it copied textually, with all due acknowledgment of its excellence, in the first volume of Le Pelletier's edition of the "Oracles."

The works of Nostradamus, besides the "Prophecies," seem. to have been--

	 
		Several Almanacs, two of which were translated at once into English, and are given by Watt, "Bib. Brit."
		
		"Almanacke for 1559." London: 1559. 8vo.
		
		"Almanacke et Prognostications." London: 1559. 8vo.
		
		 Moreri gives further an--

	 
		Almanac for country labourers, to mark the seasons favourable for their work. A true predecessor, this, of Moore's Vox Stellarum.
		
		"Predictions before 1558." London: 1691. 4to. This is named by Watt, and may be a translation of the genuine first edition of the "Seven Centuries," but I have not met with it.
		
		"Prophecies of the Kings and Queens of England." 1715. This is the work by D. D. that we have largely quoted from.
		
		"An excellent Treatise on Contagious Infirmities in 1559-60." Translated into English. London: 1559.
		
		"Traite des Fardements." Lyon: 1552.
		
		"Des Confiteurs," etc. Anvers: 1557.
		
		"Opuscule de plusieurs exquises Receptes, divise en deux parties." Lyon: 1572. 16mo. This contains both the above.
		
		"La Remede tres utile contre la Peste et toutes Fievres pestilentielles.' Paris: 1651. 8vo.
		
		"Paraphrase de Galien sur 'lexhortation de Menodote aux Etudes des Beaux Arts." Lyon: 1558. 8vo.
		
		 Touching the prophecies of Nostradamus, Theophile de Garencieres gives us an interesting fact, that, after the primer, it was the first book at school in which he learnt to read. It was the custom in France then (i.e. 1618) to initiate children by that book. They thought the crabbed and obsolete words, such as long survived in the English law, would give the scholars some idea of the old French language; so

[p. 25]

that the book got republished from year to year like an almanac. He chronicles that many have run mad from over-studying the prophecies. He dissuades readers from doing this, because interpretation must always be a little uncertain where, like an ancient oracle, the author indulges in a double sense, which he thinks Nostradamus often does. Without a peculiar genius, he does not suppose it possible to get at a right understanding of the quatrain. Even when the prophecy is quite plain, as that the Parliament should put King Charles to death, no reader, until it had happened, could tell when, or how, it would be brought about, Even his astrological signs will not fix things, because the planets go and return again to the same bearings. Some of his reasons are very peculiar, one being that it is not profit able for the vulgar to have knowledge of the future, that God reserves the knowledge of the times to Himself, and that it might trespass upon "business of State" to discover and lay open things which the prudent wish to conceal; and he concludes, oddly enough, that "for these reasons (dear Reader) I would not have thee entangle thyself in the pretentions of knowing future things."

He conceives that there are many concurrent causes tending to diminish the prophetic reputation of Nostradamus. The very ordinary manner in which he conformed to the rules and ritual of the Roman Catholic Church, would lead no one to infer that he enjoyed any extraordinary favour from the Almighty; his proficiency in judicial astrology would furnish matter of prejudice against him in the minds of many learned men; the very devout suspected him of necromancy, and familiarity with the Angel of Darkness; finally the inherent obscurity of his style has been rendered still more difficult by the interminable faults introduced by, the copyists and the carelessness of printers.

[p. 26]

Now, it is admitted, he says, and by its ablest defenders, that judicial astrology cannot enable its professor to foretell such particularities as proper names and other circumstances that hang upon the free will of men; and, as our author does foretell such things as these, he must have had recourse to the black art to obtain his results. Accordingly Lord Florimond de Raimond, in his "Birth of Heresies," makes this charge against him; also Lord Spond, in the third volume of his "Annals," in 1566, devised this epitaph for him. "Mortuus est hoc anno nugax ille toto orbe famosus Michel Nostradamus, qui se praescium et presagum eventuum futurorum per astrorum influxum venditavit, sub cujus deinceps nomine quivis homines ingeniosi suas hujus modi cogitationes protendere consueverent, in quem valde apposite lusit qui dixit: Nostra damus cum falsa damus," etc. [*1]

Provoked thus, Garencieres endeavours to prove Nostradamus to have been enlightened by the Holy Spirit. We shall not follow him in this matter any further than to avail ourselves of the facts we may light upon in the course of his arguments, and to record a few of the eulogies upon him that Garencieres gathers from eminent authors in times past. To these we may add some authorities who in modern times have named him; but these mostly sum up his forecastings as springing from venality, vanity, and imposture.

Of proper names, that Nostradamus has anticipated, the list is considerable. He names the Lord of Monluc; Captain Charry; Lord de la Mole, Admiral of the Galleys to Henri

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] II.; Entragues, beheaded by Louis XIII.; Clarepegne, the headsman; Sinan, the Pasha who destroyed Hungary; Clement, who murdered Henri III.; the Attorney David and Captain Ampus; Rousseau, the Mayor of Puy; Louis, Prince of Conde; Sixtus V., calling him son of Hamont; Gabrielle d'Estree; Lord Mutonis; Anthony de Sourdis, Lord Chancellor of France; the Queen Louise; Antony of Portugal. Since Garencieres' time other names have been identified: Narbon, the Minister of War; Saulce; Lethuille, for the Tuileries; Lonole, for Old Noll, or Cromwell; Montmorency; Le Grand Chiren, anagram of Henri le Grand; Mendosus, anagram of Vendosme; Norlaris, anagram for Lorrains; Robin, anagram of Biron; Rapis, anagram for Paris; Esleu Cap, for Capet, or Louis XVI.; Varennes, the place where Louis was arrested; the play upon bour and bon, for Bourbon (Cent. vii. 44); Ergaste, anagram of Estrange for Marie Antoinette the Austrian; Mont Gaulfier, for Montgolfier, the aeronaut; the island of Elba, mentioned as Aethalia, the ancient name of Elba; Sainct Memire, anagram for Sainct Meri; and the play on "dort leans" for Louis Philippe. This is a goodly list of names to guess at haphazard. Such chance as could so result would rival any prophecy in the miraculous nature of its elements.

Again, as regards the curious things he mentions, one might make out a long list. The date of the Fire of London. The five hundred Marseillais that led the attack upon the Tuileries. The naming of the very year 1792 for the French Revolution; the 22nd of September in that year being the date from which the Republicans began to reckon anew their era. Many more might so easily be gathered as to even weary the reader with their enumeration.

He mentions the birth of persons that were born after his death. Now, judicial astrology could give no help in

[p. 28]

such cases, since to commence casting a nativity presupposes birth. In his epistle to his son Cesar we shall see what he says of himself and the gifts he possessed; but even there he was obliged to be somewhat obscure, to protect himself from the ridicule of the world on the one side, and from the severities of the Church on the other. He tells his son to eschew the study of the future astrologically, to avoid magic, as prohibited by the Church and Scripture, and that he himself had burnt some books that taught the art of prophesying, although it is pretty evident that he had first read them through very carefully himself. He relates that a mighty flame burst forth from them to the danger of his house, and this he interpreted to be the consequence of their falsity. But yet he seems to have gone through a good many of the magical forms when he was about to devote the night to prophetical studies. He holds that inspired Revelation is "a participation of the Eternal Divinity," though he scarcely lays claim to being a prophet in this sense of the word; in fact, he denies himself to be such a prophet. But, failing to claim inspiration, and denouncing the practice of astrology and the pursuit of magic, one is left somewhat in the dark as to what he really did profess to be the source of fatidical utterance possessed by him. That he had the gift in a marvellous potency this book will show; and that he openly claimed to possess it his whole life proves. It is, in fact, from this I should desire to establish that at least he was no impostor, for he only told others what he began by implicitly believing himself.

As to his obscurity, he himself admits it as a thing to be cultivated both in the times he lived in and in those that were to follow. No one can truthfully deny that obscurity and prophecy seem to be almost interchangeable and convertible terms. The prophecies in Scripture are of

[p. 29]

such ambiguity that Whitby was commended by many for concluding his Commentary on the Bible with the General Epistle of Jude, without a word bestowed upon the Revelations of St. John. There are those who will hold that prophecies are useless, as they cannot generally be understood until they have been fulfilled. It is obvious that many prophecies are of such a nature as that, if they were clearly understood previous to the event, they would prevent their own fulfilment, and so cease to have been prophecies. What they foretold would never have occurred. The philosophy of history is supposed to show that Providence shapes the course of human events how much soever humanity may seem at every instant to be following out its own collective will. This theory is most in favour amongst erudite modern thinkers, who incline very little towards acquiescence in the old Church doctrine of Predestination. Yet inspired prophecy is a collateral proof of the same principle as that which underlies the philosophy of history. Both of them depend on the finger of God shaping--first shaping chaos into things, and then things into their continuous courses. The shaping is not needed more at the first creation than it is at every successive stage, whether for preservation or for progression. Again, the interest of uninspired prophecy is for mortal man not much less vivid; for, if we have interpreted Nostradamus rightly, we find in him a man living three hundred years ago talking intelligibly, if not clearly, of things that are happening to-day. If there be a power in human nature,--latent in the generality, but in a few alert and quick,--to link far centuries together in anticipatory thought, I take it to be quite clear, that that one fact must revolutionize the whole scheme of human philosophy as accepted now, whether it relates to life, to death, or to futurity. The fatidical capacity implies a spirit

[p. 30]

of immortality in man. With that once established, we re-enter upon the domain of faith; we recognize that the earth is drossy and the body sin; we re-create the soul, and laugh at the fool (or the philosopher) who doubts, denies, and ridicules it. It gives new ground to teach the immortality of man; it lifts us above the dirt-doctrine of gold; it renders poetry once again possible to lips hallowed with Apollo's fire; it brings back a possibility of worship upon earth, and, with that, prayer, praise, and peace. Bates, the silver-tongued, says well, that for man "it is as natural to pray as to breathe."

Garencieres is of opinion that the writings of our prophet were for a century allowed to "be in darkness," but we have seen that in his own day Nostradamus attracted the notice of the learned, of the nobility, and of the king himself. Garencieres says that the first book they gave him at school after the primer was "The Centuries," so it was not neglected then; and M. le Pelletier remarks that Nostradamus's fame has now been before the world for three hundred years, with an always growing reception. Of course, as time wanes, and as fresh quatrains become interpreted after accomplishment, the series must shine with an ever augmenting brilliancy and splendour. The kings of France have never been quite indifferent to the Oracles, or at least to such of them as could be shown to refer to them individually. It is reported of Charles Edward Stuart, the Pretender, that he to the last conned [*1] over the volume, anxiously hoping to find in it some stanza promising to his royal line restoration to the throne of England, but in vain (Chambers' "Book of Days," ii. 13).

In modern times prophecy is derided, and our seer, obscurely hinting his strange forecasts, is voted incoherent,

[p. 31]

rhapsodial, or an impostor. Almost every one has heard his name mentioned, but that is all. Few who come across his work accidentally on a bookshelf can make head or tail of his Provencal and half obsolete terms. Without special study you cannot understand him; and to study a work that lies under a general ban of imposture, in a time when only lucrative study is pursued, is a thing not to be thought of by a litterateur of any intelligence. Consequently in England it is a name, floating far and wide it may be, that nevertheless remains but a name and nothing more. I hope, however, when this book comes to be read by the competent few, it will be seen that there exists far more than a mere name to be dealt with here; that in Nostradamus we have the greatest fatidical seer, not divinely accredited, that the world has ever beheld; that if accepted as being endowed with a rare and curious foresight,--after the severest inquiry into what he has done has been instituted by grammarians, historians, and philosophic critics,--it will next become necessary to try to look into the causes, and so ascertain how he operated. If we cannot succeed in that, and yet cannot deny his work, we must add the faculty, so remarkably developed in him, to the perceptive powers of the human race, as a sixth sense,--generally latent but sometimes developed,--the faculty of anticipating the future. Science, so called, must enlarge its narrow categories, and admit, though never so grudgingly, that a new faculty of vast import must henceforth be accredited to humanity; a faculty which the superstitious and the profoundly religious alike have immemorially admitted, but which philosophers, as such, have as persistently ignored, denied, or even ridiculed. It has often been said by troubled thinkers, with a pretentious flourish of baffled profundity, that "true philosophy begins in doubt." I would whisper it down the

[p. 32]

wind, but not in Gath, that for the most part there it also ends. Anatomy cuts up a dead man to find life. Analysis reduces final Investigation to a caput mortuum. Philosophy begins in doubt, and travels a wide circle to close in doubt again. Perhaps, after all, the best basis might be faith. Beginning with faith, haply a man might find God accompanying investigation with him step by step through life, even in this world and its miraculous garden, till the hour tome for him to step, through the six-foot wicket, into the Paradise of that glorious world that is adjacent to us but not seen, where sighs are not heaved, and whose glories are incorruptible.

When we come to enumerate some few of the opinions that have been expressed on the writings and character of Nostradamus, it will be seen that a vast number of them condemn him for charlatanry and imposture, especially as we approach our own day. For now what is denominated science accepts nothing for true but what is deducible from the reason; it takes for granted that nothing can be known respecting the future, beyond what cultivated prudence can gather from a politic acquaintance with the past, coupled perhaps with a sagacious estimate of the principles now at work, and the fruit they are likely to engender. In fact, what the knowledge of a wise man can enable him to foresee, covers for such theorists the whole extent and province of all prophecy possible to man,--the sagacity of Mazarin, which detected the revolutionary element in the Cardinal de Retz whilst still a youth; or the prediction of Bishop Butler, in 1741, that the levelling spirit then visible, under the direction of principles that were atheistic, threatened dangers that might menace Europe. But to call this prophecy is to be ignorant of what the word prophecy means. To state it thus, or so to limit it, is to deny the existence

[p. 33]

of the prophetic faculty altogether. A direct denial of the thing is better than a sceptical definition of it. Scepticism, then, in our day, not believing there can be such a thing as a true presage, concludes that Mother Shipton and Nostradamus stand on precisely the same footing. They read a quatrain of Nostradamus, only understand one line out of four, and say that, although that one may be intelligible, the Sphinx itself could make nothing of the others, and that out of a number of such verses it would be marvellous if something curious were not occasionally let fall. The next inference is that the author set up for a gift that he did not possess, and soon found the imposture was far more lucrative than the dull routine of medical practice, as in those times the superstition of the public was unlimited. The ignorance of the Middle Ages is pointedly contrasted for us now with the wisdom and knowledge of our own day. What, prejudice apart, does this mean, if briefly summed up in an aphorism? Only this: that the wisdom of to-day gives us the Nihilist of no faith, in place of the Astrologer of too much.

We ought to remember in all this that our author had reached the mature age of fifty-two before he printed one word of the work that we are spending time over. He tells us that for generations the family of Nostradamus had inherited and transmitted some share of the prophetic gift (Garenciere's Preface, p. 16), that it came to him as a natural genius; in which it seems that his sons partially shared. He had cultivated it long for his private pleasure, and the request in which his almanacs stood seems to have first led him to think he Might more largely utilize the faculty. He never appears to have made any large sum of money through it. He supported himself and brought up his family by steady work in his professional calling. On

[p. 34]

the very brink of publicity, anticipating malign influences, he still hesitated to take the final plunge; and, when he did take it, he was in his fifty-third year. Men seldom pass through life performing all its duties with credit and decorum, earn a competency, and at fifty-two enter upon a career of contemptible imposture. No; this is not according to human nature. We must acquit him of imposture.

Michel Nostradamus was one of the most learned men of his day, the friend of Jules Cesar Scaliger. He knew many modern languages, and the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. He had followed medicine from the age of twenty-two, took his Doctor's degree at twenty-six, filled a professional chair at Montpellier, and late in life devoted himself to judicial astrology; in which, and in an intuitive forecast beyond what that can bestow, he has distanced by far all other competitors in the same line. Let a reader thoroughly acquaint himself with all that is here set before him as to Charles I. in England, and its bloody re-enactment in the French Revolution, letting all the rest stand aside; and, if he can rise from the perusal, feeling that there is any kind of imposture discoverable throughout those strange and wonderful revelations then he himself possesses so miraculous a form of judgment, as to leave me without a word further to advance upon the subject.

M. le Pelletier conceives that the Commun Advenement, or l'avenement au regne des gens du commun, which I have rendered "The Vulgar Advent," extending from the death of Louis XVI. to the reign of Antichrist, is the grand object of Nostradamus. It is to paint this lurid epopee that he devotes three-quarters at least of his quatrains, according to le Pelletier. Myself, I think this proportion to be overstated. But our prophet returns to it again and again, elaborates the most minute details, and concentres upon it as

[p. 35]

in a focus the brightest rays of his mystical genius. Some think that Catharine de Medici was largely influenced in her firm and far-seeing policy by the counsels of Nostradamus, whom she visited expressly at Salon de Craux, in 1564, with her son, Charles IX. This may have been so, but it is a great question whether Nostradamus, for all his visions, curiously as they realize themselves in time, could advise the queen or anybody else at all better than any other wise man of elaborate culture could. His visions would come to him as verses to a great poet, and when written down and the afflatus fled, he would drop back to the ordinary condition of humanity. He would drop back to the level of reason and the discourse of science, with nothing to specially distinguish him from other men well placed to learn such wisdom and knowledge as this world has to bestow upon them. To expect more of him is to expect with the commonalty that if you met Milton in Bread Street he would address you in blank verse, and strain "Good morning" into metre. Great men cut very plain figures in common broadcloth. It is the impostor who is magisterial, and puts on the airs of a Cagliostro.

Nostradamus is sometimes a pillar of fire, but oftener he is a pillar of cloud. He is a past master in words, and depicts events with a terseness that almost baffles parallel; but still his employment of these same words is more practical than artistic, for he never rises to poetry. As an accepted visionary he is perhaps less swayed by the imagination than any man of at all kindred type that one can mention. With him words are as often used to veil as to unfold his meaning. His contempt for simple persons, the ignorant, is very broadly marked. Men of knowledge are to constitute his audience; the heaven of prophecy is in his opinion a region unfit for children. He, clean contrary to the example set

[p. 36]

forth in St. Mark (x. 14), will suffer none such to approach him. [*1] He chiefly predicts the evil to come; what is good only figures in his pages incidentally, and at long intervals. But here it is to be observed that the staple of true prophecy must always run parallel with that of history; whilst, as to the latter, it has grown into an axiom, "Happy is the country that has no history." He fatigues while he fascinates us amid the variety of his combinations; yet a deeper examination will often end in clothing these riddling and vext allusions in a magical and floating investment that lifts them up into a calm sublimity.

Still he is clearly no prophet in the old and Hebrew sense of the word--like Isaiah, Daniel, David, John,--a man who neither respects his own person as regards its safety, nor the person of other men as regards their position. You cannot say of him: "Scimus quia verax es, non enim respicis personam hominum" (St. Matt. xxii. 16), which is the test-touch all the world over of a true prophet. Le Pelletier's summing-up is: c'est un artiste en pronostics. There is a Pythic ring in all he writes and says; a sub-flavour, too, of cabalistic lore far gathered from those ancient compromising books which he saw fit to burn. The outward signs of his procedure and methods are palpably magical, as set forth in the stanzas that open his first Century to the reader. If we know that he professed Christian orthodoxy, equally we know that he practiced judicial astrology, and made unquestionable use of the Pagan ritual of incantation. These rites, uncomprehended by all the erudite in books who wrote about them, were by the divines and fathers of the early Church ignorantly attributed to prestidigitation, Toledan

[p. 37]

art, and fraudulent compact with the sable fiend. Perhaps they may turn out to have been merely natural excitations, empirically discovered, tending to enable the subject of them more fully to reach a state of semi-conscious ecstasy; to place the cerebral light in the current of latent light that pervades all space (if such an expression be permissible), and so elicit results that are ordinarily unattainable by man. Bouys, who wrote in 1806, plainly considers him to have been a clairvoyant. The animal magnetizers call him a crisiaque. Possibly all these processes only served to place him in a position favourable to clairvoyance; but on all this, respected and gentle reader, construct your own opinion. Let the man be to you prophet, sorcerer, or clairvoyant. Call him what you will, so you free him from the stigma of impostor. M. le Pelletier's judgment as to that ought to be regarded as final: "L'ampleur de son genie, et la surete inimaginable de son coup d'aeil, ne permettent guere de la croire."

It has been well said that the man and his works are an enigma. Everything in our author is ambiguous. the man, the thought, the style. We stumble at every step in the rough paths of his labyrinth. Once we enter, jeering voices seem to deride us from behind each stanza, strophe, word. We try to interrogate, but grow silent before a man of emotionless nerve and of impenetrable mask. What are these "Centuries?" What is Nostradamus? In them and him all may find something; but no man born of woman can find all. The Sphinx of France is here before us; a riddler, riddling of the fate of men: a man at once bold and timid; simple, yet who can plumb his depth? A superficial Christian, a Pagan perhaps at heart; a man rewarded of kings: and yet, so far as we can see, furnishing no one profitable hint to them that could make their life run smoother, or remove a single peril from their path. His

[p. 38]

leaves a book of things malign, written by one who, albeit, never spoke a word that a tous ne seroit agreable. Behold this Janus of a double face; his very breath is double; the essence of ambiguity lies wrapped incarnate in him, and it moulds the man, the thought, the style.

Footnotes

^3:1 The facts for this life are taken, where no other reference is given, from a scarce work, entitled, "La premiere face du Janus Francois, par Jean Aimes de Chavigny Beaunois, 1594." It is found in the Library at Paris; but not in the British Museum. Fortunately M. le Pelletier gives an almost literal transcript of this "Brief discours sur la vie de M. Michel de Nostredame."

^4:1 "Archives du Magnetisme Animal," vol. viii. "Tous deux" (i.e. father and mother) "appartenaient a une famille Juive," converted in the sixteenth century, and of the tribe of Issachar ("Nouvelle Biog. Generale" [Le Pelletier, i. 16 n.]).

^4:2 His grandfather, Moreri tells us.

^7:1 Moreri assigns this to the year 1525.

^7:2 He calls Scaliger in the heyday of friendship "a Virgil in poetry, a Cicero in eloquence, a Galen in medicine," and declares that to him he is indebted for his scientific attainments ("Penny Cyclopaedia," s.v. Nostradamus).

^12:1 "That the great bulk of French society of his day was impressed by his effusions there can be no doubt" (Chambers' "Book of Days," vol. ii., p. 13).

^12:2 Moreri says that nobody knows what his report was.

^13:1 Garencieres, as we have shown, says Nostradamus dedicated the "Luminary Epistle" to Henri II. in 1557. M. le Pelletier holds (i. 10) that Henri II. never knew of the dedicatory epistle written to him by name, and that, as the events referred to do not concern the House of Valois, they could have had no interest for him had he known of the epistle. M. le Pelletier adds a most singular note to this remark, that the epistle is dedicated "A l'invictissime, tres puissant, et tres chrestien Henry Roy de France Second." This epigraph he maintains not to be addressed to Henri II., for he remarks that he was no longer alive when it made its appearance. Now, this is not so; for the dedicatory letter was dated in print June 27, 1558, and the king's death only took place in 1559, so that the document was even in print before his death. But, had it not been so, there is no reason whatever why Nostradamus should not have supplied the king with a copy of the letter and quatrains in manuscript long before either of them had been committed to type. Jean de Roux, Cure de Louvicamp, wrongly suggests that it was intended as a prophetical dedication to Louis le Grand or XIV. M. le Pelletier thinks it was not even dedicated to the great Henri Quatre, but to a "Henry, Roy de France Second"--second being the Latin secundus, or prosperous, i.e. some king not less illustrious than Henri Quatre, whose reign is to arise in the future. This it is which furnishes to the reader the secret purpose of Le Pelletier's book, which is to set forth the claims of the Due de Bordeaux, who would have ascended the French throne as Henri Cinq. Accordingly, in the body of the book, he has interpreted five quatrains and one sixain of the prophecies of Nostradamus as referring to this glorious King Henri Second, who has never arrived, and who, being now some years dead, never can. We have seen that the Cure de Louvicamp could even suppose that Louis XIV. could stand for "Henry, Roy de France Second." M. F. Buget, in his "Etude sur Nostradamus," has the same idea, that be does riot address Henri II., because he was not of a character sufficiently great to merit the attribution of such spiritual authority to him by our prophet, as if the flattery of a dedication was to be interpreted au pied de la lettre. It could only be addressed, he thinks to a really great man,--, a saint. M. Buget, in his book of 1862, evidently was another of those who made the fatal error of interpreting Nostradamus out of the future, instead of carefully following the enigmas thrown out [p. 14] by him to find their fulfilment in the past. These gentlemen, if they had assiduously read the Epistle itself, instead of consulting their imaginative faculties, would have perceived plainly enough that Nostradamus was writing to the only king he knew, before whom he had personally presented himself, and whom, as he says, he had highly reverenced from "iceluy jour que premierement devant icelle je me presentay." The concluding words of the Dedication are equally plain, and show that he is addressing a king whom he has individually seen with his own eyes: "depuis que mes yeux jurent si proches de vostre splendeur solaire." All the rest is to be set down to the strain of courtly flattery that was customarily addressed to kings, then and down to a period full two hundred years later, especially on occasion of penning royal dedications. The purpose of this long note is to establish, once and for all, I trust, that "Henry, Roy de France Second," stands, without any subtlety at all, simply for King Henry II., and nothing more. It is vain to endeavour to make millstones transparent that we may shoot unexpected rays of light through them. They will answer their purpose by being left in the dark, and will grind grain the better for it. Transparency will in such cases represent frangibility.

^18:1 Aulus Gellius, "Noctes Atticae," xv. 7.

^18:2 It was really in the sixth month of his sixty-third year that he died.

^20:1 Temple Bar, xli. p. 87, authority for the term of years.

^21:1 How any could have been written in 1567, I know not, as Nostradamus died in 1566. But, however this may be, there are twelve Presages, or one for each month throughout the year 1567. The last one is that which we have already given, as relating to his own death.

^21:2 The book was entitled, "Les vies des plus celebres et anciens poetes provensaux, qui ont floury du tems des comtes de Provence" (Lyon, 1575); a book still sought for, and rather rare.

^26:1 "In 1566 died that trifler, so famous throughout the world, Michael Nostradamus, who boasted while he lived that he knew and could foretell future events by the influence of the stars, in whose name afterwards many ingenious men have put forth their imaginings, justifying him who said so aptly, 'Nostra damus,' etc."

^30:1 Bouys does the same for Napoleon I.

^36:1 See the ban he utters in Century VI., at the close--"Barbari procul sunto." He shows a quite Horatian and heathen antipathy to the profanam vulgus.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

 

Preface A Mon Fils

 

THE PREFACE OF MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS TO HIS PROPHECIES

To Cesar Nostradamus his son, life and felicity. Thy late arrival, [*1] Cesar Nostradamus my son, has made me bestow much time, through nightly vigils, to leave you in writing a memorial to refer to, after the corporal extinction of your progenitor, that might serve for the common profit of mankind, out of what the Divine Being has permitted me to learn from the revolution of the stars. And since it has pleased the immortal God that thou shouldst come into the natural light of this terrene abode, and shouldst say that thy years are not yet calculated astronomically, and thy March months are incapable to receive in their weak understanding what I must necessarily record [as to happen] after my time:--seeing also that it is not possible to leave thee in writing what might suffer injury and be obliterated by time; for the inherited gift of occult prediction will remain confined to my own bowels:--considering that events of human proposal are uncertain, whilst all is governed and directed by the incalculable power of Heaven, guiding us, not by

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Bacchic fury, nor yet by Lymphatic [*1] motion, but by astronomical assertion--"Soli numine divino afflati praesagiunt et spirito prophetico particularia." [*2]

Although for years past I have predicted, a long time in advance, what has afterwards come to pass, and in particular regions attributing the whole accomplishment to divine power and inspiration, also other unfortunate and fortunate occurrences have been pronounced with accelerated promptitude which have since happened in other parts of the world,--for I was willing to maintain silence and to pass over matters that might prove injurious [if published] not only as relates to the present time, but also for the most part of future time, if committed to writing, since kingdoms, sects, and religions will pass through stages so very contrary, and, as regards the present time, diametrically opposed,--that if I were to relate what will happen in the future, governors, sectaries, and ecclesiastics would find it so ill-accordant with [si] their auricular fancy, that they would go near to condemn what future ages will know and perceive to be true. Considering also the sentence of the true

[p. 41]

[paragraph continues] Saviour, "Nolite sanctum dare canibus neque mittatis rnargaritas vestras ante porcos, ne forte conculcent eas pedibus suis, et conversi dirumpant vos" [Matt. vii. 6].

This it is which has led me to withhold my tongue from the vulgar, and my pen from paper. But, later on, I thought I would enlarge a little, and declare in dark and abstruse sayings in consideration of [pour] the vulgar advent [vid, Le Pelletier, i. 163] the most urgent of its future causes, as perceived by me, be the revolutionary changes what they may, so only as not to scandalize the auricular frigidity (of my hearers), and write all down under a cloudy figure that shall essentially and above all things be prophetical. Although "Abscondidisti haec a sapientibus, et prudentibus, id est, potentibus et regibus, et enucleasti ea exiguis et tenuibus." [*1] By the grace of God and the good angels, the Prophets have had committed to them the spirit of vaticination, by which they see things at a distance, and are enabled to forecast future events. For there is nothing that can be accomplished without Him, whose power and goodness are so great to all His creatures as long as they put their trust in Him, much as they may be [exposed] or subject to other influences, [yet] on account of their likeness to the nature of their good guardian angel [or genius] that heat and prophetic power draweth nigh to us, as do the rays of the sun which cast their influence alike upon bodies that are elementary and non-elementary. As for ourselves personally who are but human, we can attain to nothing by our own unaided natural knowledge, nor the bent of our intelligence, in the way of deciphering the recondite secrets of God the Creator. "Quia non est nostrum noscere tempora,

[p. 42]

 nec momenta," [*1] etc. Although, indeed, now or hereafter some persons may arrive to whom God Almighty may be pleased to reveal by imaginative impression some secrets of the future, as accorded in time past to judicial astrology, when [que for quand] a certain power and volitional faculty came upon them, as a flame of fire appears. [*2] They grew inspired, and were able to judge of all inspiration, human and divine, alike. For the divine works, which are absolutely universal, God will complete; those which are contingent, or medial, the good angels direct; and the third sort come under the evil angels. [*3]

Perhaps, my son, I speak to thee here a little too occultly. But as to the hidden vaticinations which come to one by the subtle spirit of fire, or sometimes by the understanding disturbed, [it may even be, by] contemplating the remotest stars, as being intelligences on the watch, even to giving utterance to declarations [that] being taken down in writing declare, without favour, and without any taint of improper

[p. 43]

loquacity, that all things whatsoever proceed from the divine power of the great eternal Deity from whom all goodness emanates. Further, my son, although I have inserted the name of prophet, I do not desire to assume a title of so high sublimity at the present moment. For he who "Propheta dicitur hodie, olim vocabatur videns;" [*1] for, strictly speaking, my son, a prophet is one who sees things remote from the knowledge of all mankind. Or, to put the case; to the prophet, by means of the perfect light of prophecy, there he opened up very manifestly divine things as well as human; which cannot come about, seeing that the effects of future prediction extend to such remote periods. Now, the secrets of God are incomprehensible, and their efficient virtue belongs to a sphere far remote from natural knowledge; for, deriving their immediate origin from the free will, things set in motion causes that of themselves could never attract such attention as could make them recognized, either by human augury, or by any other knowledge of occult power; it is a thing comprised only within the concavity of heaven itself, from the present fact of all eternity, which comes in itself to embrace all time.

Still, by the means of some eternal power, by an epileptic Herculean agitation, the causes by the celestial movement become known. I do not say, my son, in order that you may fully understand me, that the knowledge of this matter cannot yet impress itself upon thy feeble brain, that very remote future causes may not come within the cognizance of a reasonable being; if they are, notwithstanding, purely the creation of the intellectual soul of things present, future things are not by any means too hidden or concealed. But the perfect knowledge of causes cannot be acquired without divine inspiration; since all prophetic inspiration derives its

[p. 44]

first motive principle from God the Creator, next from good fortune, and then from nature. Wherefore the independent causes being independently produced, or not produced, the presage partially happens, where it was predicted. For the human understanding, being intellectually create', cannot a penetrate occult causes, otherwise than by the voice of a genius by means of the thin flame (vid. page <page 68>) [showing] to what direction future causes incline to develop themselves. And further, my son, I implore you never to apply your understanding on such reveries and vanities as dry up the body and bring perdition to the soul and disturb all the senses. In like manner, I caution you against the seduction of a more than execrable magic, that has been denounced already by the sacred Scriptures, by the divine canons of the Church--although we have to exempt from this judgment Judicial Astrology. By the aid of this it is, and by divine revelation and inspiration, united with deep calculations, we have reduced our prophecies to writing. And, notwithstanding that this occult philosophy was not reproved by the Church, I have felt no desire to divulge their unbridled promptings. Although many volumes have come before me, which had laid hidden for many ages. But dreading what might happen in the future, after reading them, I presented them to Vulcan, and as the fire kindled them, the flame, licking the air, shot forth an unaccustomed brightness, clearer than the light is of natural flame, resembling more the explosion of powder, casting a subtle illumination over the house as if the whole were wrapped in sudden conflagration.--So that at last you might not in the future be abused by searching for the perfect transformation, lunar or solar, or incorruptible metals hidden under the earth, or the sea, I reduced them to ashes.--But as to the judgment

[p. 45]

which perfects itself by means of the celestial judgment, that I am desirous to manifest to you: by that method you may have cognizance of things future, avoiding all fantastic imaginations that may arise, and limiting the particularity of the topics by divine and supernatural inspiration; harmonizing with the celestial figures these topics, and that part of time, which the occult property has relation to, by the potential virtue and faculty divine, in whose presence the three aspects of time are clasped in one by eternity--an evolution that connects in one causes past, present, and future--"quia omnia sunt nuda et aperta, etc." [*1]--

From all which, my son, you can easily comprehend, notwithstanding your tender brain, the things that are to happen can be foretold by nocturnal and celestial lights, which are natural, coupled to a spirit of prophecy,--not that I would assume the name or efficacy of a prophet, but, by revealed inspiration, as a mortal man the senses place me no farther from heaven than the feet are from the earth. "Possum non errare, falli, decipi," [*2] (albeit) I am the greatest sinner in this world, and heir to every human affliction. But being surprised sometimes in the ecstatic work, amid prolonged calculation, and engaged in nocturnal studies of sweet odour, I have composed books of prophecies, containing each one hundred astronomic quatrains of forecasts, which I have tried to polish through obscurely, and which are perpetual vaticinations, from now to the year 3797. It is possible that this figure will make some lift up their forehead, at such a vast extent of time, and variety of things to take place under the concave journey of the moon; and this universal treatment of causes, my son,

[p. 46]

throughout the earth, which, if you reach the natural age, of man, you will see in your climate, under the heaven of your proper nativity, as things that have been foreseen.

Although the everlasting God alone knows the eternity of the light proceeding from Himself, I say frankly to all to whom He has decreed in long and melancholy inspiration to reveal His limitless magnitude, which is beyond both mensuration and comprehension, that by means of this occult cause divinely manifested, principally by two chief causes, comprised in the understanding of the inspired one who prophesies. One is that which comes by infusion, which clarifies the supernatural light, in him who predicts by astral process, or forecasts by inspired revelation, which is practically a participation in the divine eternity, by which means the prophet comes to judge of that which his share of divine spirit has given him, by means of communication with God the Creator, and the natural endowment accorded him. It is to know that what is predicted is true, and has had a heavenly origin; that such light and the thin flame is altogether efficacious; that it descends from above, no less than does natural clearness; and natural light renders philosophers quite sure of their principles, so that by means of the principles of a first cause they have penetrated the profoundest abysses and attained the loftiest doctrines.

But to this end, my son, that I may not wander too profoundly for the future capacity of thy senses, and also because I find that letters shall suffer great and incomparable loss, and that I find the world before the universal conflagration, such deluges and deep submersion, that there will remain scarcely any land not covered with water, and that for so long a period, that everything will perish except Ethnographies and Topographies. Further, after and before these inundations, in many districts the rains will have been

[p. 47]

so slight, and there will fall from heaven such an abundance of fire and incandescent stones, that scarcely anything will remain unconsumed, and this will occur a short time before the last conflagration. Further, when the planet Mars completes its cycle, at the end of his second period, he will recommence his course. But some will gather in Aquarius through several years, and others in Cancer, which will be of still longer duration. Now that we are conducted by the moon, under the direction of the Creator, and before she has finished her entire circuit the sun will come, and then Saturn. Now, according to the celestial signs, the reign of Saturn shall come back again, so that, all calculated, the world is drawing on towards its anaragonic revolution.

From the time I am writing this, before 177 years 3 months and 11 days, by pestilence, long famine, and wars, and more still by inundations, the world between this day and that, before and after, shall be diminished, and its population so reduced that there will hardly be hands enough to attend to agriculture, and the lands will be left as long without culture as they have been under tillage. This, so far as celestial judgment manifests, that we are now in the seventh millenary, which completes all and introduces us to the eighth, where is the upper firmament of the eighth sphere, which, in a latitudinary dimension, is where the Almighty will come to complete the revolution, where the celestial figures will return to their courses, and the upper motion which renders the earth stable for us and fixed, "non inclinabitur in seculum seculorum," [*1] unless His will be accomplished, and no otherwise.

Although by ambiguous opinions exceeding all natural reason by Mahometical dreams, also sometimes God the Creator by the ministry of angels of fire, and missive flame,

[p. 48]

presents to the external senses, even of our eyes, the causes of future predictions, that indicate the future event which must manifest itself to him who presages anything. For the presage which is made by the exterior light comes infallibly to judge partly with and by means of the exterior flame; although truly the part which seems to come by the eye of the understanding springs only from the lesion of the imaginative sense. The reason is too evident, the whole is predicted by the afflatus of divinity, and by means of the angelic spirit inspired to the man prophesying, rendering him [as it were] anointed with vaticinations, visiting him to illuminate him, and, stirring the forefront of his phantasy by divers nightly apparitions no less than daily certitude, he prophesies by astronomic administration conjoined with the holiest future prediction, taking nothing into his consideration but the hardihood of his free courage.

Come at this hour to understand, my son, that I find by my revelations [astral], and which are in accordance with revealed inspiration, that the sword of death is on its way to us now, in the shape of pestilence, war (more horrible than has been known for three generations of men), and famine, that shall fall upon the earth, and return upon it at frequent intervals. For the stars accord with such a revolution, and with the written word, "Visitabo in virga ferrea iniquitates eorum, et in verberibus percutiam eos." [*1] For the mercy of God, my son, will not be spread abroad for a time, till the major part of my prophesies shall have been accomplished, and have become by accomplishment resolved. Thus oftentimes in the course of these sinister storms the Lord will say, "Conteram ego, et confringam, et 

[p. 49]

 non miserebor." [*1] And a thousand other accidents will come by waters and continual rain, as I have more fully and at large set forth in my other Prophecies, which are drawn out at length, in soluta oratione; [*2] (in these I) designate the localities, times, and terms prefixed, that all men who come after may see, recognizing the circumstances that come about by infallible indications. As we have marked by the others where we speak more clearly, for although they are covered with a veil of cloud, they are clear enough to be comprehended by men of good intelligence: "Sed quando submoventa erit ignorantia," [*3] the total will stand out with greater clearance still. Making an end here, my son, take now this gift of thy father, Michael Nostradamus, hoping to expound to thee each several prophecy of these quatrains here given, beseeching the immortal Father that He will endue thee with a long life of happy and prospering felicity.

From Salon, this 1st of March, 1555.

 

Footnotes

^39:1 Cesar Nostradamus was born at the beginning of 1555, so he was but a few weeks old when his father dedicated to him the first four "Centuries," published for the first time in 1555, by Mace Bonhonune, the printer at Lyons. In the name of this son the epistle is really a dedication to his spiritual sons; that is, to his interpreters and students in all future ages.

^40:1 Lymphatics, Garencieres (p. 16) tells, were anciently those who were mad for love; and he absurdly adds that the sign of it was, that such persons threw themselves into the water,--lympha meaning water. Varro says that in Greece those who were mad were called nymfoleptoys, which means caught by nymphs. Festus, to fit this, thinks that men went mad by seeing the image of nymphs in the water fountains. Others have it that they were afraid of water, as if it were hydrophobia that possessed them. But nympha and lympha approach each other so nearly, that when a man is once caught by a nymph he is, for the time being, mad to all intents and purposes,--"it is not given to a man to love and to be wise." Leaving all this to be settled as it may, there is no question but in the medical technology of Nostradamus a deep melancholy is what was understood by the Lymphatic motion,--melancholy being the temperament most apt for study, poetry, and vaticination. Garencieres invents a word for the occasion, or uses one that has since grown obsolete. He employs the verb lymphatize.

^40:2 "Such alone as are inspired by the divine power can predict particular events in a spirit of prophecy"

^41:1 "Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and prudent, i.e. from the powerful and from kings, and hast revealed them to the small and weak." This is Nostradamus's gloss upon Matt. xi. 25.

^42:1 Acts i. 7.

^42:2 Nostradamus seems, whenever he alludes to this appearance of flame as preceding vaticination, to have in his mind the descent of tongues of fire at Pentecost (Acts ii. 3), diamerizomenai glussai usei pyros. A flame of fire, be it observed, conveys a double symbol: it resembles a tongue in form. Its luminousness and its purifying tendency express the celestial nature of spirit, as contrasted with matter, and also inspiration. So that intrinsically and extrinsically it represents prophetic utterance. Grotius contributes an unusually good note upon this passage, pointing out that as in Genesis (xi. g), confusion of tongues scattered mankind, so hero (Acts ii. 3) the gift of tongues was to bring men again into one brotherhood.

^42:3 This passage is very difficult to bring to a clear sense in translation, Garencieres has simply evaded it. It seems to mean that God operates all the great effects in the universe; that, as He is the Maker, so is He the perpetual operator in the world,--its cause and life; but that the guardian angels are good and bad, and are charged with some sort of duty and office, not as affecting the mechanic frame of the world, but in respect of mankind. This is in conformity with the Cabala and Hermetical teaching; but what he precisely means cannot, I think, be quite absolutely stated.

^43:1 "He who is called prophet now, once was called seer."

^45:1 "For all things are naked and open."

^45:2 "I am able not to err, fail, or be deceived."

^47:1 "Whence it shall not deviate from age to age."

^48:1 "I will visit their iniquities with a rod of iron, and with blows will strike them." This somewhat resembles a passage in the Psalms (ii. 7), but it is not a quotation.

^49:1 "I will trample them and break them, and not show pity." This resembles Isai. lxiii. 3.

^49:2 In prose, and not in verse, as the quatrains are. These prose forcastings have, I am afraid, been altogether lost.

^49:3 "When the time arrives for the removal of ignorance."

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

 

Epistle to Henry II

To the most invincible, very puissant, and most Christian Henry King of France the Second: Michael Nostradamus, his most humble, most obedient servant and subject, wishes victory and happiness.

For that sovereign observation that I had, O most Christian and very victorious King, since that my face, long obscured with cloud, presented itself before the deity of your measureless Majesty, since that in that I have been perpetually dazzled, never failing to honour and worthily revere that day, when first before it, as before a singularly humane majesty, I presented myself. I searched for some occasion by which to manifest good heart and frank courage, by the means of which I might grow into greater knowledge of your serene Majesty. I soon found in effect it was impossible for me to declare it, considering the contrast of the solitariness of my long obnubilation and obscurity, and my being suddenly thrust into brilliancy, and transported into the presence of the sovereign eye of the first monarch of the universe. Likewise I have long hung in doubt as to whom I ought to dedicate these three Centuries to, the remainder of my Prophecies amounting now to a thousand. I have long meditated on an act of such audacity. I have at last ventured to address your Majesty, and was not daunted from it as Plutarch, that grave author, relates in the life of Lycurgus, that, seeing the gifts and presents that were made in the way of sacrifice at the temples of the immortal gods so

[p. 51]

in that age, many were staggered at the expense, and dared not approach the temple to present anything.

Notwithstanding this, I saw your royal splendour to be accompanied with an incomparable humanity, and paid my addresses to it, not as to those Kings of Persia whom it was not permissible to approach. But to a very prudent and very wise Prince I have dedicated my nocturnal and prophetic calculations, composed out of a natural instinct, and accompanied by a poetic fervour, rather than according to the strict rules of poetry. Most part, indeed, has been composed and adjusted by astronomical calculation corresponding to the years, months, and weeks, of the regions, countries, and for the most part towns and cities, throughout Europe, Africa, and a part of Asia, which nearest approach [or resemble] each other in all these climates, and this is composed in a natural manner. Possibly some may answer--who, if so, had better blow his nose [that he may see the clearer by it]--that the rhythm is as easy to be understood, as the sense is hard to get at. Therefore, O most gracious King, the bulk of the prophetic quatrains are so rude, that there is no making way through them, nor is there any interpreter of them. Nevertheless, being always anxious to set down the years, towns, and regions cited, where the events are to occur, even from the year 1585, and the year 1606, dating from the present time, which is the 14th of March, 1557.

Then passing far beyond to things which shall happen at the commencement of the seventh millenary, deeply calculated, so far as my astronomic calculus, and other knowledge, has been able to reach, to the time when the adversaries of Jesus Christ and of His Church shall begin to multiply in great force. The whole has been composed and calculated on days and hours of best election and disposition,

[p. 52]

and with all the accuracy I could attain to at a moment [blessed] "Minerva libera et non invita," [*1] my calculations looking forward to events through a space of time to come that nearly equals that of the past even up to the present, and by this they will know in the lapse of time and in all regions what is to happen, all written down thus particularly, immingled with nothing superfluous.

Notwithstanding that some say, "Quod de futuris non est determinata omnino veritas," [*2] I will confess, Sire, that I believed myself capable of presage from the natural instinct I inherit of my ancestors, adjusted and regulated by elaborate calculation, and the endeavour to free the soul, mind, and heart from all care, solicitude, and anxiety, by resting and tranquilizing the spirit, which finally has all to be completed and perfected in one respect tripode aeneo [by the brazen tripod]. With all this there will be many to attribute to me as mine, things no more mine than nothing. The Almighty alone, who strictly searches the human heart, pious, just, and pitiful, is the true Judge; to Him I pray to defend me from the calumny of wicked men. Such persons, with equal calumny, will bring into question how all your ancient progenitors the Kings of France have cured the evil; how those of other nations have cured the bite of serpents; others have had a certain instinct in the art of divination, and other faculties that would be too long to recount here. Notwithstanding such as cannot be restrained from the exercise of the malignancy of the evil spirit, [there is hope that] by the lapse of time, and after my extinction here on earth, my writings will be more valued than during my lifetime.

However, if I err in calculation of ages, or find myself

[p. 53]

unable to please all the world, may it please your Imperial Majesty to forgive me, for I protest before God and His saints, that I purpose to insert nothing whatever in writing this present Epistle that shall militate against the true Catholic Faith, whilst consulting the astronomical calculations to the very best of my knowledge. For the stretch of time of our forefathers [i.e. the age of the world] which has gone before is such, submitting myself to the direction of the soundest chronologists, that the first man, Adam, was about one thousand two hundred and forty years before Noah, not computing time by Gentile records, such as Varro has committed to writing, but taking simply the Sacred Scriptures for the guide in my astronomic reckonings, to the best of my feeble understanding. After Noah, from him and the universal deluge, about one thousand and fourscore years, came Abraham, who was a sovereign astrologer according to some; he first invented the Chaldaean alphabet. Then came Moses, about five hundred and fifteen or sixteen years later. Between the time of David and Moses five hundred and seventy years elapsed. Then after the time of David and the time of our Saviour and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, born of a pure Virgin, there elapsed (according to some chronographers) one thousand three hundred and fifty years.

Some, indeed, may object to this supputation as not true, because it varies from that of Eusebius. Since the time of the human redemption to the hateful apostacy of the Saracens, there have been six hundred and twenty-one years, or thereabouts. Now, from this it is easy to gather what time has elapsed if my supputation be not good and available for all nations, for that all is calculated by the celestial courses, associated in my case with an emotion that steals over me at certain subsecival hours from an emotional tendency handed down to me from a line of ancestors. But the injuriousness

[p. 54]

of our time, O most serene Sovereign, requires that such secret events should not transpire, except in enigmatic sentences, having but one sense and one only meaning, and quite unmingled with calculation that is of ambiguity or amphibology. Say, rather, under a veiled obscurity from some natural emotional effusion, that resembles the sentential delivery of the thousand and two Prophets, that have been from the Creation of the world, according to the calculation and Punic Chronicle of Joel: "Effundum spiritum meum super omnem carnem, et prophetabunt filii vestri, et filiae vestrae." [*1] But this prophecy proceeded from the mouth of the Holy Spirit, which was the sovereign power eternal, in conjunction with the celestial bodies, has caused some of the number to predict great and marvellous events.

As to myself in this place, I set up no claim to such a title--never, please God. I fully confess that all proceeds from God, and for that I return Him thanks, honour, and immortal praise, and have mingled nothing with it of the divination which proceeds a fato, but a Deo a natura, [*2] and for the most part accompanied with the movement of the celestial courses. Much as, if looking into a burning mirror [we see], as with darkened vision, the great events, sad or portentous, and calamitous occurrences that are about to fall upon the principal worshippers. First upon the temples of God, secondly upon such as have their support from the earth [i.e. by the kings], this decadence draweth nigh, with a thousand other calamitous incidents that in the course of time will be known to happen.

For God will take notice of the long barrenness of the great Dame, who afterwards will conceive two principal children. But, she being in great danger, the girl she will

[p. 55]

give birth to with risk at her age of death in the eighteenth year, and not possible to outlive the thirty-sixth, will leave three males and one female, and he will have two who never had any of the same father. The three brothers will be so different, though united and agreed, that the three and four parts of Europe will tremble. By the youngest in years will the Christian monarchy be sustained and augmented; heresies spring up and suddenly cast down, the Arabs driven back, kingdoms united, and new laws promulgated. Of the other children the first shall possess the furious crowned Lions, holding their paws upon the bold escutcheon. The second, accompanied by the Latins, shall penetrate so far that a second trembling and furious descent shall he made, descending Mons Jovis [at Barcelona] to mount the Pyrenees, shall not he translated to the antique monarchy, and a third inundation of human blood shall arise, and March for a long while will not be found in Lent. The daughter shall be given for the preservation of the Christian Church, the dominator falling into the Pagan sect of new infidels, and she will have two children, the one fidelity, the other infidelity, by the confirmation of the Catholic Church. The other, who to his great confusion and tardy repentance wished to ruin her, will have three regions over a wide extent of leagues, that is to say, Roumania, Germany, and Spain, which will entail great intricacy of military handling, stretching from the 50th to the 52nd degree of latitude. And they will have to respect the more distant religions of Europe and the north above the 48th degree of latitude, which at first in a vain timidity will tremble, and then the more western, southern, and eastern will tremble. Their power will become such, that what is brought about by union and concord will prove insuperable by warlike conquest. By nature they will be equal, but exceedingly different in faith.

[p. 56]

After this the sterile Dame, of greater power than the second, shall be received by two nations, by the first made obstinate by him who had power over all, by the second, and third, that shall extend his forces towards; the circuit of the east of Europe; [arrived] there his standards will stop and succumb, but by sea he will run on to Trinacria and the Adriatic with his mirmidons. The Germans will succumb wholly and the Barbaric sect will be disquieted and driven back by the whole of the Latin race. Then shall begin the grand Empire of Antichrist in the Atila and Xerxes, [who is] to descend with innumerable multitudes, so that the coming of the Holy Spirit, issuing from the 48th degree, shall make a transmigration, chasing away the abomination of Antichrist, that made war upon the royal person of the great vicar of Jesus Christ, and against His Church, and reign per tempus, et in occasione temporis [for a time, and to the end of time]. This will be preceded by an eclipse of the sun, more obscure and tenebrose than has ever been since the creation of the world, up to the death and passion of Jesus Christ, and from thence till now. There will be in the month of October a grand revolution [translation] made, such that one would think that the librating body of the earth had lost its natural movement in the abyss of perpetual darkness. There will be seen precursive signs in the spring-time, and after extreme changes ensuing, reversal of kingdoms, and great earthquakes [i.e. wars]. All this accompanied with the procreations of the New Babylon [Paris], a miserable prostitute big with the abomination of the first holocaust [death of Louis XVI.]. It will only continue for seventy-three years seven months.

Then there will issue from the stock so long time barren, proceeding from the 50th degree, [one] who will renovate the whole Christian Church. A great peace, union, and concord

[p. 57]

will then spring up between some of the children of races [long] opposed to each other and separated by diverse kingdoms. Such a peace shall be set up, that the Instigator and promoter of military faction by means of the diversity of religions, shall dwell attached to the bottom of the abyss, and united to the kingdom of the furious, who shall counterfeit the wise. The countries, towns, cities, and provinces that had forsaken their old customs to free themselves, enthralling themselves more deeply, shall become secretly weary of their liberty, and, true religion lost, shall commence by striking off to the left, to return more than ever to the right.

Then replacing holiness, so long desecrated by their former writings [circulating slanders], afterwards the result will be that the great dog will issue as an irresistible mastiff [Napoleon?] who will destroy everything, even to all that may have been prepared in time past, till the churches will be restored as at first, and the clergy reinstated in their pristine condition; till it lapses again into whoredom and luxury, to commit and perpetrate a thousand crimes. And, drawing near to another desolation, then, when she shall be at her highest and sublimest point of dignity, the kings and generals [mains militaires] will come up [against her], and her two swords will be taken from her, and nothing will be left her but the semblance of them. [The following paragraph I can make nothing of, so I give it in the words of Garencieres and in inverted commas.] "From which by the means of the crookedness that draweth them, the people causing it to go straight, and not willing to submit unto them by the end opposite to the sharp hand that toucheth the ground they shall provoke." Until there shall be born unto the branch a long time sterile, one who shall deliver the French people from the benign slavery that they voluntarily

[p. 58]

submitted to, putting himself under the protection of Mars, and stripping Jupiter [Napoleon I.] of all his honours and dignities, for the city constituted free and seated in another narrow Mesopotamia. The chief and governor shall be cast from the midst, and set in a place of the air, ignorant of the conspiracy of the conspirators [Fouche, Duc d'Otranto, etc.] with the second Thrasibulus, who for a long time had prepared all this. Then shall the impurities and abominations be with great shame set forth and manifested to the darkness of the veiled light, shall cease towards the end of his reign, and the chiefs of the Church shall evince but little of the love of God, whilst many of them shall apostatize from the true faith.

Of the three sects [Lutheran, Catholic, and Mahometan], that which is in the middle, by the action of its own worshippers, will be thrown a little into decadence. The first totally throughout Europe, and the chief part of Africa exterminated by the third, by means of the poor in spirit, who by the madness engendered of libidinous luxury, will commit adultery [i.e. apostatize]. The people will pull down the pillar, and chase away the adherents of the legislators, and it shall seem, from the kingdoms weakened by the Orientals, that God the Creator has loosed Satan from the infernal prisons, to make room for the great Dog and Dohan [Gog and Magog], which will make so great and injurious a breach in the Churches, that neither the reds nor the whites, who are without eyes and without hands [meaning the latter Bourbons, "who learn nothing and forget nothing", cannot judge of the situation, and their power will be taken from them. Then shall commence a persecution of the Church such as never was before. Whilst this is enacting, such a pestilence shall spring up that out of three parts of mankind two shall be removed. To such a length will this

[p. 59]

proceed that one will neither know nor recognize the fields or houses, and grass will grow in the streets of the cities as high as a man's knees. To the clergy there shall be a total desolation, and the martial men shall usurp what shall come back from the City of the Sun [Rome], and from Malta and the Islands of Hieres [off Marseilles], and the great chain of the port shall be opened that takes its name from the marine ox [Bosphorus].

A new incursion shall be made from the maritime shores, eager to give the leap of liberty since the first taking by the Mahometans. Their assaults shall not be at all in vain, and in the place where the habitation of Abraham was, it shall be assailed by those who hold the Jovialists [followers of Jupiter (Napoleon I.?)] in reverence. The city of Achem [in the  of Sumatra] shall be encompassed and assaulted on all sides by a great force of armed men. Their maritime forces shall be weakened by the Westerns. Upon this kingdom a great desolation shall come, and the great cities shall be depopulated, and such as enter in shall come under the vengeance of the wrath of God. The Holy Sepulchre, for so long a period an object of great veneration, shall remain exposed to the blighting dew of evening under the stars of heaven, and of the sun and moon. The holy place shall be converted into a stable for cattle small and large, and applied to other base purposes. Oh, what a calamitous time will that be for women with child! for then the Sultan of the East will be vanquished, driven for the most part by the Northern and Western men, who will kill him, overthrow him, and put the rest to flight, and his children, the offspring of many women, imprisoned. Then will come to its fulfilment the prophecy of the Royal Prophet, "Ut audiret gemitus compeditorum, et solveret filios interemptorum." [*1]

[p. 60]

What great oppression shall then fall upon the princes and rulers of kingdoms, even on those who are maritime and Oriental, their tongues intermingled from all nations of the earth! Tongues of the Latin nations, mingled with Arabic and North-African communication. All the Eastern kings will be driven away, overthrown, and exterminated, not at all by means of the kings of the North and the drawing near of our age, but by means of the three secretly united who seek out death and snares by ambush sprung upon one another. The renewal of this Triumvirate shall endure for seven years, while its renown shall spread all over the world, and the sacrifice of the holy and immaculate wafer shall be upheld. Then shall two lords of the North conquer the Orientals, and so great report and tumultuary warfare shall issue from these that all the East shall tremble at the noise of these two brothers of the North, who are yet not brothers. And because, Sire, by this discourse I almost introduce confusion into these predictions as to the time when the event of each shall fall out; for the detailed account of the time that follows is very little conformable, if at all, to what I gave above, that indeed could not err, being by astronomic rule and consonant with the Holy Scriptures themselves.

Had I wished to give to every quatrain its detailed date, it could easily have been done, but it would not have been agreeable to all, and still less to interpret them, Sire, until your Majesty should have fully sanctioned me to do this, in order not to furnish calumniators with an opportunity to injure me. Always reckoning the years since the creation of the world to the birth of Noah as being 1506 years, and from that to the completion of the building of the ark at the period of the universal deluge 600 years elapsed (let them be solar years, or lunar, or mixed), I hold that the Scripture

[p. 61]

takes them to be solar. At the conclusion of this 600 years, Noah entered the ark to escape the deluge. The deluge was universal over the earth, and lasted one year and two months, From the conclusion of the deluge to the birth of Abraham there elapsed 295 years, and 100 years from that to the birth of Isaac. From Isaac to Jacob 60 years. From the time he went into Egypt until his coming out of it was 130 years, and from the entry of Jacob into Egypt to his exit was 436 years; and from that to the building of the Temple by Solomon in the fortieth year of his reign, makes 480 years. From the building of the Temple to Jesus Christ, according to the supputation of the Hierographs, there passed 490 years. Thus by this calculation that I have made, collecting it out of the sacred writings, there are about 4173 years and eight months less or more. Now, from Jesus Christ, in that there is such a diversity of opinion, I pass it by, and having calculated the present prophecies in accordance with the order of the chain which contains the revolution, and the whole by astronomical rule, together with my own hereditary instinct. After some time, and including in it the period Saturn takes to turn between the 7th of April up to the 25th of August; Jupiter from the 14th of June to the 7th of October; Mars from the 17th of April to the 22nd of June; Venus from the 9th of April to the 22nd of May; Mercury from the 3rd of February to the 24th of the same; afterwards from the 1st of June to the 24th of the same; and from the 25th of September to the 16th of October, Saturn in Capricorn, Jupiter in Aquarius, Mars in Scorpio, Venus in Pisces, Mercury within a month in Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces; the moon in Aquarius, the Dragon's head in Libra, the tail in her sign opposite. Following the conjunction of Jupiter to Mercury, with a quadrin aspect of Mars

[p. 62]

to Mercury, and the head of the Dragon shall be with a conjunction of Sol with Jupiter, the year shall be peaceful without eclipse.

Then will be the commencement [of a period] that will comprehend in itself what will long endure [i.e. the vulgar advent of the French Revolution], and in its first year there shall be a great persecution of the Christian Church, fiercer than that in Africa [by the Vandals from 1439 to 15341, and this will burst out [durera] the year one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two; they will think it to be a renovation of time. After this the people of Rome will begin to reconstitute themselves [in 1804, when Napoleon is emperor], and to chase away the obscurity of darkness, recovering some share of their ancient brightness, but not without much division and continual changes. Venice after that, in great force and power, shall raise her wings very high, not much short of the force of ancient Rome. At that time great Bysantine sails, associated with the Piedmontese by the help and power of the North, will so restrain them that the two Cretans will not be able to maintain their faith. The arks built by the ancient warriors will accompany them to the waves of Neptune. In the Adriatic there will be such permutations, that what was united will be separated, and that will be reduced to a house which before was a great city, including the Pampotan and Mesopotamia of Europe, to 45, and others to 41, 42, and 47. And in that time and those countries the infernal power will set the power of the adversaries of its law against the Church of Jesus Christ. This will constitute the second Antichrist, which will persecute that Church and its true vicar, by means of the power of the temporal kings, who in their ignorance will be reduced by tongues that will cut more than any sword in the hands of a madman.

[p. 63]

The said reign of Antichrist will only last to the death of him who was born near the [commencement] of the century, and of the other in the city of Plancus [Lyons], accompanied by him the elect of Modena, Fulcy by Ferara, upheld by the Adriatic Piedmontese, and the proximity of the great Trinacria [Sicily]. Afterwards the Gallic Ogmion shall pass the Mount Jovis [Barcelona], accompanied by so great a number that from afar the Empire shall be presented with its grand law, and then and for some time after shall be profusely shed the blood of the innocent by the guilty recently elevated to power. Then by great deluges the memory of things contained in such instruments shall suffer incalculable loss, even to the Alphabet itself. This will happen among the Northerns. By the Divine Will once again Satan will be bound, and universal peace established amongst mankind, and the Church of Jesus Christ delivered from all tribulation, although the Azostains [debauched voluptuaries] would desire to mix with the honey the gall of their pestilent seduction. This will be near the seventh millenary, when the sanctuary of Jesus Christ will no longer be trodden down by the infidels who come from the North; the world [will be then] approaching its great conflagration, although by my supputation in my prophecies, the course of time runs much farther on.

In the epistle that some years since I dedicated to my son Cesar Nostradamus, I have openly enough declared some points without presage. But here, Sire, are comprised many great and marvellous events to come, which those who follow after us shall see. And during the said astrological supputation, harmonized with the sacred Scriptures, the persecution of the Ecclesiastics shall take its rise in the power of the kings of the North, united with the Easterns. And this persecution shall last eleven years, or somewhat less, by

[p. 64]

which time the chief Northern king shall pass away, which years being run, a united Southern king shall succeed, which shall still more fiercely persecute the clergy of the Church for the space of three years by the Apostolical seduction of one who will take away all the absolute power from the Church Militant, and holy people of God who observe its ritual, and the whole order of religion shall be greatly persecuted and so afflicted that the blood of true ecclesiastics shall float everywhere. To one of those horrible temporal kings such praise shall be given by his adherents that he will have shed more human blood of innocent ecclesiastics, than any could do of wine. This king will commit crimes against the Church that are incredible. Human blood will flow in the public streets and churches, like water after impetuous rain, and will crimson with blood the neighbouring rivers, and by another naval war redden the sea to such a degree that one king shall say to another, "Bellis rubuit navalibus aequor." [*1] Then in the same year and those following there will ensue the most horrible pestilence and the most astonishing on account of the famine that will precede, and such tribulation that nothing approaching it ever happened since the first foundation of the Christian Church; this also throughout all the Latin regions, leaving traces in all the countries under the rule of Spain.

Then the third King of the North [Russia?], hearing the complaint of the people from [whom he derives] his principal title, will raise up a mighty army, and pass through the limits [destroits] of his last progenitors and great-grandfathers, to him who will [qui for lui qui] replace almost everything in its old condition. The great Vicar of the Cope shall be put back to his pristine state; but, desolated and abandoned by all, will return to the sanctuary [that was]

[p. 65]

destroyed by paganism, when the Old and New Testament will be thrust out and burnt. After that Antichrist will be the infernal prince. Then at this last epoch, all the kingdoms of Christianity, as well as of the infidel world, will be shaken during the space of twenty-five years, and the wars and battles will be more grievous, and the towns, cities, castles, and all other edifices will be burnt, desolated, and destroyed with much effusion of vestal blood, married women and widows violated, sucking children dashed and broken against the walls of town; and so many evils will be committed by means of Satan, the prince infernal, that nearly all the world will become undone and desolated. Before the events occur certain strange birds [imperial eagles] will cry in the air, "To-day! to-day!" and after a given time will disappear [June, 1815]. After this has endured for a certain length of time [twenty-five years he has said before, 1790 to 1815], there will be almost renewed another reign of Saturn, the age of gold [this might be the discovery of California, but for what follows]. God the Creator shall say, hearing the affliction of His people, Satan shall be precipitated and bound in the bottomless abyss, and then shall commence between God and men a universal peace. There he shall abide for the space of a thousand years, and shall turn his greatest force against the power of the Church, and shall then be bound again.

How justly are all these figures adapted by the divine letters to visible celestial things, that is to say, by Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and others in conjunction with them, as may be seen more at large by some of the quatrains! I would have calculated it more deeply, and adapted the one to the other; but, seeing, O most serene King, that some who are given to censure will raise a difficulty, I shall take the opportunity to retire my pen and seek my nocturnal repose.

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] "Multa etiam, O Rex potentissime praeclara, et sane in brevi ventura, sed omnia in hac tua Epistola, innectere non possumus, nec volumus, sed ad intellegenda quaedam facta, horrida fata pauca libanda sunt, quamvis tanta sit in omnes tua amplitudo et humanitas homines, deosque pietas, ut solos amplissimo et Christianissimo Regis nomine, et ad quem summa totius religionis auctoritas deferatur dignus esse videare." [*1] But I shall only beseech you, O most clement King, by this your singular and most prudent goodness, to understand rather the desire of my heart, and the sovereign wish I have to obey your most excellent Majesty, ever since my eyes approached so nearly to your solar splendour, than the grandeur of my work can attain to or acquire.

 Faciebat MICHAEL NOSTRADAMUS.

 Solonae Petrae Provincae.

From Salon this 27th June, 1558.

Footnotes

^52:1 "When Minerva was free and favourable."

^52:2 "There can be no truth entirely determined for certain which concerns the future."

^54:1 See Joel ii. 28.

^54:2 Which proceeds from fate, but from God, and nature.

^59:1 "Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee. to release the children of death" (Ps. lxxviii. 11).

^64:1 "The sea blushed red with the blood of naval fights."

^66:1 "Many things, O most potent king of all, of the most remarkable kind are shortly to happen, that I neither could nor would interweave them all into this epistle; but in order to comprehend certain facts, a few horrible destinies must be set down in extract, although your amplitude and humanity towards all men is so great, and your piety to the gods, and that you alone seem worthy of the grand title of the most Christian King, and to whom the highest authority in all religion should be deferred."

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 67]

 

Magic

BEFORE we enter upon the historical application of the quatrains which admit of interpretation, it will be well to devote a little attention to the views of magic entertained by Nostradamus, to learn from his own mouth what class of readers he proposed to address, and to gather, as far as we may be able, in what manner he proceeded to cultivate the spirit of prophecy and the divine gift with which he thought himself to be endowed. Were he even as certainly an impostor as Cagliostro, this inquiry would have an interest of its own attaching to it; but if we can for a moment suppose that he genuinely believed himself to be endowed with a faculty of divination, the investigation of that assumption on his part would present a considerable psychological interest merely as a human phenomenon. On the other hand, if he were a man truly gifted with forecast, I do not know that, in this age of scepticism as to things spiritual, anything more wholesome could be proposed to our contemplation than a prophetic record fulfilling itself before the eyes of disbelievers and gainsayers; who, wishing to scoff and desiring to suppress such things, find themselves utterly powerless to annul the harmony between the vision recorded three hundred years ago and the event of yesterday. Whether such things are or not, it will be for the reader, when he has gone through the book, to say. At present we will only busy ourselves with what Nostradamus

[p. 68]

says of himself. He is a notability and worthy of criticism be the final verdict for or against him.

At the end of Century VI. occur four Latin lines headed--

LEGIS CANTIO CONTRA INEPTOS CRITICOS. [I. 51.]

	 
		Qui legent hosce versus mature censunto,
		 Profanum vulgus et inscium ne attrectato,
		 Omnesque Astrologi, Blenni, Barbari procul sunto.
		 Qui aliter facit, is rite sacer esto.
		
		 The sense of these lines is much clearer than the prosody, but that matters little.

 Translation.

AN INCANTATION IN ARREST OF INEPT CRITICS.

	 
		Let those who read these verses meditate them seriously! Let the profane and ignorant vulgar not handle them! Let astrologers, fools, and savages stand off! Who acts contrary to this, let him he cursed according to the rites of magic.
		
		 We now come to the magic formula.

 Century I.--Quatrain I. [I. 52.]

	 
		Estant assis de nuict secret estude,
		 Seul, repose sur la sele [*1] d'airain,
		 Flambe exigue sortant de solitude,
		 Fait prosperer [*2] qui [*3] n'est a croire vain.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Gathered at night in study deep I sate,
		 Alone, upon the tripod stool of brass,
		 Exiguous flame came out of solitude,
		 Promise of magic that may be believed.
		
		 Being seated at night and wrapt in secret study, entirely alone, I placed myself on the brazen tripod of prophecy. A still small flame came forth of solitude, helping me to realize successfully what it will not prove vain to have believed.

[p. 69]

The reader will here refer to the "Preface a mon fils," <page 44>.

"L'entendement cree intellectuellement ne peut voir occultement, sinon par la voix faicte au lymbe moyennant la exigue flame, en laquelle partie les causes futures se viendront a incliner."

This passage conveys in prose what the last and the following quatrain conveys in verse.

THE MAGICAL CALL BY WATER. [I. 53.]

 Century I.--Quatrain 1.

	 
		La verge [*1] en main mise au milieu de BRANCHES,
		 De l'Onde il mouille et le limbe, [*2] et le pied:
		 Un peur et voix fremissent par [*3] les manches,
		 Splendeur divine, Le Divin pres s' assied.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The rod in hand set in the midst of the Branches,
		 He moistens with water both the fringe and foot;
		 Fear and a voice make me quake in my sleeves;
		 Splendour divine, the God is seated near.
		
		 To make this entirely clear is almost impossible. But what we can get at is very curious, showing as it does, if nothing else, that the borderland of the unseen world was actually contiguous with that of the world of Nostradamus. They even overlapped, in his estimation, so as to form an intermediate neutral territory like the marches in the North, where the inhabitants of each district could meet and communicate. We are positive that this is all illusive, superstitious, demoniacal. It may be so. But one effect it undeniably produces. It unites man more to the universe, and less to the world; it makes death less strange and less cold, and

[p. 70]

furnishes to the soul, and the things of the soul, more nutriment than it can extract from modern life and culture.

The general meaning seems to be that he sat with a wand, branch, or divining-rod of laurel, probably forked like the winchel rod of the water-finders, one fork being held in each hand. This in some way had power to evoke his Genius (or genie familier, as Le Pelletier styles it). When he appeared, he moistened in the brazier that held water, himself, the fringe of his robe (limbe), and his foot. The rod, held as I have suggested, then becoming electrical, caused fear with the sound of a voice and a shuddering up to the elbows. Then shone forth the fatidical splendour of a divine light, and the Deity is present, seated near to him.

M. le Pelletier tells us that there was a pagan rite of the god Branchus that corresponded with this fatidical ceremony practised by Nostradamus. He even suggests that this very Branchus might have been the familiar spirit of our prophet. It must be admitted that in the texte-type, in the words "au milieu de BRANCHES," Branches is printed in capital letters, so that the probable reason for that peculiarity is that the God Branchus, as well as the branches d'un laurier, is shadowed forth. But to suppose that a pagan deity could ever be either the familiar or the guardian angel of a son of the Church of Rome makes such a Renaissance-jumble of the two religions that I think we had better not meddle with it.

As to the assertion that there was a pagan rite of Branchus, I doubt it much; and, if there were, certain it is that Nostradamus speaks here far too covertly for us to assume from his writing that he was discharging any rite special to Branchus. He seems to be following out the usual magical forms employed for establishing vaticinatory connection with the other world, or setting up the counter analogy between

[p. 71]

mind and spirit, according to that beautiful esoteric verse in Ecclesiasticus (xlvii. 24), "All things are double, one against another; He hath made nothing imperfect." Were such things never to interlink, men might well say, as they do now in the wisdom of science, that spirit and intellect are not doubles, and that no knowledge can be reached save by physical experiment. In this case there will be a particular link missing if science be right. The sage, Estant assis de nuict secret estude, will earnestly desire such assumption may prove to be erroneous. He will readily formulate with St. Paul that the invisible things from creation may be known from the visible; but also that the visible things can never be understood but by the invisible. Recollect that the visible is not visible to the visible, but to the invisible alone. The eye is the machine of sight, but not sight; and who has seen the eye of the eye?

The Greek myth about Branchus, so far as I can see, is this, with sundry forms and variations. He was a youth of Miletus. The reputed son of Smicrus (Lempriere), or Macarcus Varro says, but begotten by Apollo. The mother dreamed that the sun entered her mouth, and, passing through her, the child at birth was named Branchus, brogxos, the throat. Afterwards he kissed Apollo in the woods, and became endowed with the gift of prophecy. He had a temple at Didyma, which Pausanias calls the Temple of Apollo; but Varro goes on to say that after the kiss of the god he prophesied, but quickly after disappeared, when a grand temple was jointly dedicated to him and to Apollo,--Philesius, from filein, to kiss. His oracles at Didyma were inferior to none but Delphi. The name Didymean, double or twain, was from the double light of the sun and its reflection in the moonlight. Sun-touched and moon-struck madness and inspiration may in Branchus be said to meet,

[p. 72]

as out of one throat come things good and evil. The name Didymean was changed to Branchidae. Strabo (Book xlv.) relates that the priests of this grand temple betrayed its treasures to Xerxes, and accompanied him in his retreat to escape the punishment of their sacrilege. They had settled near to Sogdiana, when Alexander arrived there (Strabo, Book xi.); he destroyed them and their city. This Byronical madman, who could see no iniquity in the slaughter of thousands to gratify the lust of a crack-brained ambition, thought to promote morals by slaughtering the descendants of traitors, they, the descendants, being innocent of everything except being born. The Milesians had long ago rebuilt the temple of Branchus on such a scale that in magnitude it surpassed all others in Greece. It was, in fact, too big to be roofed in, being four or five stadia in compass. Those who wish to see more can consult Suidas, s. v., bragxidai.

The gloss of M. le Pelletier on the quatrain is as follows: that Nostradamus, wand in hand, touches the branches of the tripod, like the priests of Branchus (this I have tried to expunge), and invokes his familiar spirit, which appears to him in the vapour floating above a basin of water, which he had consecrated beforehand according to prescribed magical rites, and in which he dips the fringe of his garment, and his feet. An involuntary shivering (peur) agitates his hand when about to write from the dictation (voix) of the spirit. The fatidical light shines, and the angel is seated at his side. Le Pelletier takes occasion here to remark that mediums at this day write under a spirit of dictation, to which they simply lend their arm as an instrument.

Garencieres' interpretation is that of most of the old commentators, even down to the time of M. Bareste, 1840. The rod is a pen, in the middle of the branches means his fingers, the water is the ink, and wetting limb and foot is

[p. 73]

covering the paper all but the four margins. It is hardly unfair to say that this is both nonsensical and ignorant, although not devoid of ingenuity. I think it will fit the circumstances far better to take it, as I have done, that the wand was a forked laurel branch that dipped forcibly, like the winchel rod, when Nostradamus held it over the water, that it strained, as the hazel-rod does, almost to breaking, and that at this invitation it is to be supposed that the spirit appears. The incantation being completed and successful, the operator must be supposed to set aside the winchel, and assume the pen, quaking with a solemn sense of the spiritual presence. This fear was, Garencieres says, to prevent the puffing up of pride, as we read in Daniel, John, and the 4th of Esdras.

Readers who take no interest in this, and are consequently weary by this time of the length we have run into in the investigation, will leap over what follows to get to the next quatrain.

M. le Pelletier refers to Ficinus' translation of Jamblicus' "De Mysteriis Aegyptiorum," 1607. He gives the Latin and French. I will merely introduce here the English translation, as the book is of easy reference to those who wish to examine further for themselves the sources which Nostra, damus had consulted, and from which he drew his summary exposition.

"The sibyl at Delphi received the god in two forms,--either by a subtle and fiery spirit, which burst forth upon any one through the crevice of some cavern, or else sitting on a brazen seat of four or three feet in the inner shrine, dedicated to the god, and where she was exposed on two sides to the divine influx, whence she was irradiate with a divine light" (p. 66).

"Now, the prophetess of Branchus either sits upon a pillar, (r holds in her hand a rod bestowed by some deity, or moistens her feet or the hem of her garment with water, or inhales the vapour of water, and by these means is filled with divine illumination, and. having obtained the

[p. 74]

deity, she prophesies. By these practices she adapts herself to the god, whom she receives from without" (p. 67).

"Porphyrius says that the art [or magic] is not to be despised which, out of certain vapours due to fire under favourable stellar influences, forms the images of gods spontaneously appearing in the air, in a certain degree like the gods themselves, and possessing a very similar efficacy" (p. 90.

"For amongst the demons there is one who is chief, and who exercises influence at the moment of birth, and apportions to each his demon (or familiar). After this there is present to each one his own guardian, that develops a cultus congruous to his nature, and teaches him both his name and the most suitable form of invocation (to bring him when required), and this method is most congenial to the demons" (p. 171).

These forms of Jamblicus are analogous to those employed by Nostradamus; but there the person prophesying wets the feet and fingers, whilst according to our version Of the quatrains it is the demon or spirit applies them to himself: Le Divin pres s'assied. In Jamblicus the one who prophesies becomes possessed by entry of the spirit. Nostradamus describes an external and visible presence which corresponds to Porphyrius' account of deorum idola in aere.

CORPOREAL DEMONS. [I. 59.]

 Century I.--Quatrain 42.

	 
		La dix Calendes d'Avril de faict gotique
		 Resuscite encor par gens malins:
		 Le feu estainct, assemblee diabolique
		 Cherchant les os du Damant et Pselin. [*1]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The 10th of the Calends of April Gothic computation have been again put in practice by sorcerers (gens malins). The lights put out, the diabolic assembly searching for the Demon [Damant for Demon] treated of by Michael Psellus.
		
		 The texte-type is most corrupt in this quatrain; for 

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] Damant et Pselin read Demon e (or ex) Pselin, the demon as treated of by Psellus.

The scholium of M. le Pelletier on this is--The magical incantations, which were successful formerly when wrought on the night of Good Friday, were reintroduced into practice by sorcerers of skill on the 10th Calend of April according to the ancient computation (de faict gotique). In a note added he professes that the 10th Calend Old Style would be the last day of March by the Gregorian, and he thinks it probable, that Nostradamus here designates some particular year, when Good Friday fell on the 31st or' March. Garencieres upon this notes that it falls on the 23rd of March, called Gothic, because adhered to by the northern nations long after the Gregorian had been adopted at Rome. I do not see how the 10th Calend could ever fall on the 31st, nor indeed what the 31st has to do with the matter. Those who arc more familiar with such calculations may perhaps explain. Like the witches' Sabbath, these diabolic meetings were accompanied by the lewdest rites, as will at once be seen by the following passage from Psellus, which I leave untranslated. It is from the Latin translation of Psellus by Marsilius Ficinus, and will be found in his collected works (ii. 884) in folio ed. 1641.

"'Euchetae et gnosci, ut daemonia toto concipiant pectore, nefanda sacrificia perpetrant Conveniunt die quo passus est Salvator, [*1] vespere, statutur in locum, una cum puellis sibi notis, et post quaedam sacra extinctis luminibus, [*2] mistim coeunt, sive cum sorore, sive cum filia, sive cum qualibet" (Psellus as above, p. 894).

"There is a further kind of vaticination by a basin, by means of which rustics frequently predict. just as there is a mode of predicting by means

[p. 76]

of the air and the leaves of trees, so there is a kind of predictive power in the basin, known and practised by the Assyrians, which has a great similarity to this incarnation or coupling of demons with matter. Thus those about to prophesy take a basin full of water, which attracts the spirits moving stealthily in the depths (daemonibus congruentem in profunda repentibus.) Le Pelletier translates this, (appropie a l'usage des demons caches au fond des eaux). The basin then, full of water, seems in sort to breathe (or move) as with sounds (s'il allait emettre des sons); it seems to me that the water was agitated with circular ripples, as from some sound emitted below. Now, this water diffused through the basin differs but little in kind from water out of the basin, but yet it much excels it from a virtue imparted to it by the charms [that have been droned over it], and which have rendered it more apt to receive the spirit of prophecy. For this description of spirit is tetchy and terrene, and much under the influence of composite spells. When the water begins to lend itself as the vehicle of sound, he [the spirit] also presently gives out a thin reedy note [of satisfaction], but devoid of meaning; and close upon that, whilst the water is undulating, certain weak and peeping sounds whisper forth predictions of the future. A spirit of this kind is vagrant everywhere, for he is endowed with the solar pass [so that our terrestrial atmosphere lies everywhere open to him], and that order of spirits, in the work appointed to it, speaks at all times with a subdued voice, that by its indistinct obscurity it may be less easy to seize the falsehoods that it utters" (Psellus as above, p. 885).

From the mode in which Psellus describes the matter in hand, it is very perceptible that he was no great conjuror, and was merely speaking upon hearsay and report. If lies were the business of the spirit, he would be no prophet. Again, if he wished to circulate lies, he must still make things clear enough to his votaries for them to circulate them and work mischief thereby. Are we to suppose that, like an abandoned human being, he had some sense of shame left still, and, like Lord John Russell, would only tell as few lies as possible? Psellus's demon is so foolish that he would soon have been without any one to consult his shrine. He could not have given a reason for his own conduct, in the past or present, and was the last being that any one would resort to to anticipate intelligence of the future. Still

[p. 77]

the procedure might have been somewhat as Psellus describes it, although the reasons could not.

An historian of the fourth century, and a man of veracity, Marcellinus has given us curious details of how prophetical tripods were considered by the Romans in his day. It comes out quite naturally in the judicial proofs investigating a conspiracy against the life of Valens the Emperor; what we should call a state trial. The conspirators were put to the torture, and as an item in the indictment the figure of j little table becomes prominent, as to which the accused were questioned by the judges. At last one of them, Hillarius, broken by pain, revealed the secret in these words:

"Honoured judges, we constructed this unfortunate little table that you see here after the fashion of the tripod [or, more strictly, the cauldron [*1]] at Delphi, with dark incantations, out of branches of laurel; and with imprecations of secret song, and numerous ceremonies repeated over daily, we consecrated it by magic rites, till at last we put it in motion. When it reached this capacity of movement, as often as we wished to interrogate it by secret inquiry, we proceeded thus.

It was placed in the middle of a room (in medio domus) purified throughout by Arabian perfumes; a round dish was simply laid upon it, formed of a composite material of many metals. On the phlange of its outer round were skilfully engraved the scriptile forms of the alphabet separated into as many exactly measured spaces. Over this basin (or dish) a man stood clothed in linen garments and shod with linen socks, his head bound round with a turban-like tuft of hair, and bearing a rod of vervain, the prospering plant. After we had favourably conciliated the deity, who is the giver of all presage, with duly formulated charms and ceremonial knowledge, he communicated a gentle movement to a ring that hung suspended over the basin. . . . This was tied up by an exceedingly fine Carpathian thread, which had been initiated with mystical observances. This ring, moving by little leaps or jumps, so as to alight upon the distinct intervals with the separate letters inscribed, each in its compartment to itself, gives out in heroic verse answers suitable to the inquiries made, comprehended perfectly in number and measure; such as are called Pythic, or those delivered by the oracles of the Branchidae.

"To us inquiring who should succeed to the present empire, because

[p. 78]

it had been already mentioned that it would be one entirely suitable [to our aim and purpose], the leaping ring had glanced upon the two syllables THEO. With the last addition of a letter [that is, D], a man present exclaimed, 'THEODORUM,' the fatal necessity of the portent indicating as much. Nothing further was sought upon this head; for it was agreed amongst us that this was the individual we wanted" (Ammianus Marcellinus, Return Gestarum, xxix. 1).

In this case the ambiguity of the oracle is due to the precipitance of the inquirers. The oracle was true as far as they allowed it to proceed, but had they waited to spell it out they would have learned that the name was not THEODorus, but THEODosius the Great, who was to be the successor to Valens.

This is an authentic passage of high interest. It shows considerable analogy with the table-turning of the moderns; it also gives insight into singular and elaborate processes of divination by magic as being frequently practised at Rome in the fourth century. Clearly the Pagans had no notion in that century that oracles had at all finally ceased on a Good Friday in the first century, or that Pan, the god of rumour, was dead. The sun still shone to them as the Apollo of prophecy, and they still sought presage of a spirit who was made free of the solar order (qui solarem ordinem est sortitus).

Footnotes

^68:1 Romance tongue, sele for selle, tripod seat, tripode aeneo, such as the priestess of Apollo or Pythia sat on to deliver oracles.

^68:2 Latin, prosperare, to succeed, or realize an experience.

^68:3 Qui for ce qui.

^69:1 Latin, virga, branch or wand.

^69:2 Latin, limbus, hem, border, fringe.

^69:3 Latin, per, in, or through.

^74:1 Ex Michaele Psello, de Daemonibus. Works of Marsilius Ficinus, ii. 884, ed. 1641, folio.

^75:1 This refers to some Good Friday evening on the 10th Calend of April Old Style, as set forth in the first line of this quatrain.

^75:2 This is exhibited in the third line of the quatrain: Le feu estainct, assemblee diabolique.

^77:1 Aeneid, iii. 92 and vi. 347.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

 

Historical Fragments

I SHALL now give a few detached historical fragments that relate to France, commencing with the Peace of Cateau-Cambresis, 1559, and running down to the death of Louis XV., 1774, in chronological order, just as M. le Pelletier has found the counterpart to lie embedded in the quatrains of Nostradamus, in a fashion seemingly interpretable to him. This, for any but French readers, will probably be sufficient to indicate the style and value of the presages enveloped in the strange and fatidical diction of the quatrains. I doubt not but that, by original research instituted and by careful re-reading of the text throughout, a good many more of the mysterious stanzas might be unravelled and elucidated; also by collation of all that has been written by commentators on our author, a good deal of light might be thrown upon what they have done, even where their own interpretation has fallen short of clearness. All that my book purposes to accomplish is,--at least for England,--to establish, without doubt, and at once, for all future time, that Nostradamus is no impostor, but, when rightly understood and unlocked, a very wonderful anticipator of events to happen hereafter; and, farther than this, that his works are, to all intents and purposes, the most startling oracles ever put on paper by mortal man not professing divine inspiration. From immemorial time instances of human prescience have occasionally been manifested. The whole human race has an ardent and ingrain desire to search into and anticipate futurity.

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Very few individuals, however, have from time to time been able to gratify and keep alive their passion in this respect. But no one has done so in a degree that at all sets him on a par with Nostradamus in the felicitous and reiterated coruscations whereby he has anticipated the more prominent points and epochs of time Future; and sometimes in minuteness he even mentions by name some individual who emerges though it be but for an instant from the general obscurity of his life.

THE PEACE OF CATEAU-CAMBRESIS (APRIL 3, 1559). [I. 71.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 52.

	 
		La paix s'approche d'un coste, et la guerre
		 Oncques [*1] ne fut la poursuitte si grande:
		 Plaindre homes, femmes, sang innocent par terre,
		 Et ce sera de France a [*2] toute bande.
		
		   Translation

	 
		  Peace approaches on one side, and [as to] war
		 Never was the pursuit of it so great:
		 Men and women [have cause] to weep innocent blood on earth;
		 All through France it shall be from end to end.
		
		 

The peace was that concluded with Spain at Cateau-Cambresis, whilst the war, carried on with such hot pursuit, was the civil conflict that raged between Romanist and Calvinist. This it was made men and women lament the blood spilt upon the earth in all parts of France, from north to south.

DEATH OF HENRI 11. (JULY 10, 1559). [I. 72.]

 Century I.--Quatrain 35.

	 
		Le lyon jeune le vieux surmontera
		 En champ bellique par singulier duelle:[p. 81]
		 Dans cage d'or [*1] les yeux lui crevera,
		 Deux classes [*2] une, [*3] puis mourir, mort cruelle.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The young lion shall overcome the old
		 On the field of war in single combat [duelle];
		 He will pierce his eyes in a cage of gold.
		 This is the first of two loppings, then he dies a cruel death.
		
		 Montgomery, who at the moment of the narrative bore the name of Captain Coryes (Garencieres, p. 25), afterwards became Earl of Montgomery, overthrew Henri II. (le vieux lion) in the tournay-lists or duel, and pierced him above the eye through the gilt visor of his helmet. This is the first of the two blows that will destroy the dynastic tree of the house of Valois. Henri II., wounded mortally, shall be the first to die a violent death; whilst his son, Henri III., will be the second, who fell by the hand of Jacques Clement.

August 1. 1589.

This is a very celebrated quatrain. It is found in the earliest edition of the quatrains published at Lyons in 1555, containing merely 300 quatrains. It lifted Nostradamus into celebrity at once. He had applied it to Henri II. several years before it happened, and had even announced it as a prediction to the King himself. He was well known to Henri II., to whom he dedicated the last three Centuries, in a long and curious epistle, which we have already given in full. The, King seems to have had infinite confidence in Nostradamus, for he let him draw the royal horoscope, as well as that of his two children, in 1556.

[p. 82]

The story of this is curious, as given by Guynaud in his "Concordance des Propheties de Nostradamus," 1712, [*1] pp. 86-91. Henri II., it would seem, proclaimed a tournament in the Rue St. Antoine, the site of the Bastille, then in the country, for July 1, 1559, in honour of the marriage of his daughter Elizabeth of France with Philip II. of Spain. He listed himself as one against all comers. The joust being nearly over and the sun setting, the Duc de Savoie begged him to quit the running, as his side was already victorious; but the King wanted to break another lance over it, and commanded the young Comte de Montgommeri, captain of his Scotch Guard, to run a tilt in conclusion. He excused himself, but the King insisted and grew angry. Of course the young man then obeyed, put spurs to his horse, and struck the King upon the throat, below the vizor. His lance shivered, and the butt raising the vizor, a splinter wounded the King above the right eye, cutting several of the veins of the pia mater. The King swooned. He lived on, however, for ten days in terrible agony, as foretold in the prophecy, Deux classes une, puis mourir, mort cruelle. Nostradamus styles both of them lions, as they both fought under that device. The King wore a gilt helmet, so that the cage d'or was literally fulfilled.

The strange part is that another astrologer, named Luc Gauric, had once been visited by the King in company with two other gentlemen, to whom he feigned to give precedence; but the astrologer, perhaps knowing him, insisted on addressing him first, and told him he would die in a duel. He also prophesied a violent death to the King's companions, and managed to displease the whole trio. The King said of this, "We are making peace now with the King of Spain, so it is not very likely that I shall challenge him, and

[p. 83]

as a king I could in no other way be challenged, whatever may be the fate of the other gentlemen." Guynaud quotes this story from the Princesse de Cleves, who, in the second volume of her writings, represents the Court as discussing the credibility of astrologers, the prevalent opinion apparently being rather strong against them. Still, we know that Henri II. greatly honoured Nostradamus. Prophetic warning is evidently futile, for the King had two separate warnings and heeded neither.

PRINCESSE DE CLEVES. [II. 145.]

Quelques jours apres, le Roy etoit chez la Reine a l'heur du Cercle; l'on parla des Horoscopes et des predictions. Les opinions etaient partagees sur la croyance que l'on y devoit dormer. La Reine y ajoutait beaucoup de foi; elle soutint qu'apres tant de choses qui avaient ete predites, et que l'on avait vu arriver, on ne pouvait douter qu'il n'eut quelque certitude dans cette science. D'autres soutenaient, que parmi ce nombre infini de predictions, le pea qui se trouvaient veritables, faisait bien voir que se n'etait qu'un effet du hazard.

"J'ai eu autrefois beaucoup de curiosite pour l'avenir," dit le Roy; "mais on m'a dit tant de choses fausses et si peu vraissemblables que je suis demure convaincu que l'on ne peut rien savoir de veritable. Il y a quelques annees qu'il devint ici un homme d'une grande reputation dans l'Astrologie. Tout le monde l'alla voir, j'y allai comme les autres, mais sans lui dire qui j'etais, et je menai Monsieur de Guise et Descars, je les fit passer le premier. L'Astrologue neanmoins s'addressa d'abord a moi, comme s'il m'eut juge le maitre des autres: Peut-etre qu'il me connaissait; cependant il me dit une chose qui ne me convenait pas, s'il m'eut connu. Il me predit que je serai tue en duel. Il dit ensuite a Monsieur de Guise, qu'il serait tue par derriere, et a Descars, qu'il aurait la tete cassee d'un coup de pied de cheval. Monsieur de Guise s'offensa quasi de cette prediction, comme si l'on eut accuse de devoir fuir. Descars ne fut guerre satisfait de trouver qu'il devait finir par un accident si malheureux. Enfin nous sortimes tous tres malcontents de l'astrologue. Je ne scais cc qui arrivera a Monsieur de Guise et a Descars, mais il n'y a guerre d'apparence que je sois tue en duel. Nous venons de faire la paix le Roy d'Espagne et moi; quand nous ne l'aurions pas faite, je doute que nous nous battions, et que je le fisse appeller comme le Roy men pere fit rappeller Charles Quint."

The story, as told by the Princesse de Cleves, is fuller than I have given it, but does not correspond at all with the version

[p. 84]

given to Lord Bacon when in France, as told to him by Dr. Penn, who said (Bacon's "Essay on Prophecies") that the queen-mother, Catherine de Medici, was given to curious arts, and caused the King's nativity to be cast under a false name. The astrologer adjudged that he should be killed in a duel. The queen laughed, supposing her husband to be above challenges to duel; "but he was slain upon a course at tilt, the splinters of the staff of Montgomery going in at his beaver." History, in events large or small, hath so many variants that any man, whose view of things is a little sinister, may well be allowed to say all history is a variant of truth, and all that is sure in it is that it cannot be relied upon at all. In this case the astrologers were right, spite of the odds against them.

ARREST OF MONTGOMERY (May 27, 1574). [I. 73.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 30.

	 
		Celuy qu'en [*1] luitte [*2] et fer au faict bellique
		 Aura porte [*3] plus grand qui luy le prix,
		 De nuict au lict six luy feront la pique,
		 Nud, sans harnois, subit [*4] sera surprins. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		To him who in strife and armour in the warlike field
		 Shall have carried away the prize from one greater than himself,
		 By night in bed six men will stab him;
		 Unprotected he will be surprised naked and unarmed.
		
		 This means that Montgomery, who in joust (au faict bellique,--bellique, we are told, means an engagement on horseback) with lance in hand will have carried away the prize from Henri II. (plus grand que luy) will be suddenly

[p. 85]

surprised in bed at night, naked and unarmed, by six men, who will deliver him into the vengeful hands of Catherine de Medici.

Some say the dying King gave him free pardon; others report that he fled to England to save himself: but at any rate he came to England, and there embraced Protestantism. When he returned to France, he placed himself at the head of the revolted Huguenots in Normandy, and was besieged in Domfront by the Marshal de Matignon and a large force, to which he was obliged to surrender. The terms of the sur, render guaranteed his life, but by express command of Catherine he was arrested in his own castle of Domfront on the night of May 27, 1574, by six gentlemen of the royal army, and carried to the Chateau of Caen, thence to the Conciergerie at Paris, and there immured, where the great tower still goes by his name.

THE REGENCY OF CATHERINE DE MEDICI (1559-1574). [I. 74.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 63.

	 
		La Dame seule au regne demeuree,
		 D'unic esteint premier au lict d'honneur;
		 Sept ans sera de douleur esploree,
		 Puis longue vie au regne par grand heur.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The lady shall remain to rule alone,
		 Her unique spouse dead, who was first in the field of honour.
		 She will weep for grief through seven long years,
		 And gifted with long life will reign long.
		
		 Catherine de Medici did not put off her weeds till. August 1, 1566, seven years and a few days from the death of the King in July, 1559. on her return from a progress with her son Charles IX., in the course of which she had visited all the mutinous cities throughout the kingdom, with a view to satisfy them. She survived till the year 1589, and practically retained the whole power during the reigns of her

[p. 86]

two eldest sons, Francois II. and Charles IX., but she entirely lost it on the succession of Henri III.

The quatrain applies to no one so well as to Catherine de Medici; and, if it be allowed to be realized as to her person, there is no denying the singular exactitude of the prophecy. We have no evidence that the Queen applied the quatrain to herself, or that her contemporaries bore it in mind; but the second line is remarkable as assuming with reposeful confidence the previous death of the King as predicted. The third line is a startling example of the precision with which our prophet can mark out the duration of a period: seven years the Queen is to wear mourning, and she does so all the time she is travelling. The sceptical will say she did it to fulfil the prophecy; but it looks rather as if that had fallen quite out of remembrance, and as if it was due much more to policy, and for the purpose of creating sympathy, during her state tour, than to motives either of superstition or any singular attachment to her deceased husband. The quatrain is most unobtrusively worded, and yet so confidently assured and searching, that it seems to me, as if perfectly unbiassed and disinterested observers might take it as a kind of moral voucher for the simple integrity of its author. I merely draw attention to it so far, and every reader will form his own judgment upon the point. I hold myself aloof from theory; but this is how the particular fact we are upon impresses my mind, and probably it may affect many others in the same way.

EXTINCTION DES VALOIS (1559-1589). [I. 77]

 Presage 40.

	 
		De maison Sept par mort mortelle suite;
		 Gresle, tempeste, pestilent mal, fureurs:
		 Roi d'Orient, d'Occident tous en fuite,
		 Subjuguera ses jadis conquereurs.
		
		 [p. 87]

 Translation.

	 
		The death of the house of seven by a suite of deaths.
		 Hail, tempest, pestilence evil, fury.
		 A king of the East will put all the West to flight,
		 And will subdue his at-one-time conquerors.
		
		 The house of Valois consisted of the seven children of Henri II. By the death of the fourth son, Henri III., in 1589, the whole of the seven were dead except Marguerite, who married Henri IV., so that the family may well be said to have died out by a suite of deaths (mortelle suite). Heresy was rampant (pestilent mal) and civil war. Soliman II., called the Magnificent, threatened all Christendom, and recovered all the Holy Places that the Crusaders had wrested from his predecessors.

CIVIL WAR (1575, 1576). [I. 78.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 11.

	 
		Des septs rameaux a trois seront reduicts,
		 Les plus aisnes seront surprins [*1] par mort,
		 Fratricider les deux seront seduicts
		 Les conjures en dormans seront morts.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The seven branches when they shall be reduced to three,
		 And the four eldest shall have been surprised by death,
		 The two (males) shall entertain fratricidal aims,
		 And the conspirators sleeping shall be reduced to death.
		
		 This means that, when the seven are become but three (i.e. the three youngest), Henri III. and the Due d'Alencon will enter upon a fratricidal war. In 1575 Alencon escaped from the Court, where he was under surveillance, and put himself at the head of the Malcontents, who were in alliance with the Huguenots. He was successful, and forced the edict of pacification, May 14, 1576, upon his brother the King.

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] Daniel, in his "History of France" under Henri III., shows that they mutually sought each other's death by dagger and poison. The Guise (les conjures) and the Leaguers will come by their deaths from indulging in a false security.

THE MURDER OF HENRI III. (1589). [I. 79.]

 Century V.--Quatrain 67.

	 
		Quand chef Perouse n'osera sa tunique,
		 Sans au couvert tout nud s'expolier. [*1]
		 Seront prins [*2] sept, faict aristocratique!
		 Le pere et fils morts par poincte au colier.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When the chief of Perouse dare not risk casting off his tunic
		 Without stripping himself entirely naked,
		 The last of the seven taken, what an event in the upper circles!
		 Father and son killed by a stab in the throat.
		
		 When Sixtus V. (chef de Perouse) will not dare to excommunicate Henri III., having already lost England in 1534, and feeling he must not be entirely stripped by a further Gallican schism, will be rid of the posterity of Henri II. (seront Prins sept) by a tremendous event in aristocratic circles. Father and son will both perish by a thrust in the throat.

DEATH OF THE GUISE (DECEMBER 23, 24, 1588). [I. 80.]

 Century IV.--Quatrain 60.

	 
		Les sept enfans en hostaine [*3] laisses;
		 Le tiers [*4] viendra son enfant trucider [*5];
		 Deux par son fils seront d'estoc perces;
		 Gennes Florence les viendra enconder. [*6]
		
		 

[p. 89]

 Translation.

	 
		Seven children will be left in his house;
		 The tiers etat will come to murder his child;
		 Two will have been pierced by the sword of his son;
		 Genoa and Florence will come to disorder them.
		
		 This is, Henri II. at his death will leave seven children in his house. The Conseil des Seize (le tiers) will incite Jacques Clement to go to St. Cloud to assassinate Henri III., because he has caused Henri de Guise and the Cardinal to be slain by sword thrusts. Then Charles Emmanuel I., Duke of Savoy (le Genois), and Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma (le Florentin), General of Philip II., will come to make war on Henri IV., who will be compelled by Farnese to raise the siege of Paris (1590) and Rouen (1592) with precipitation.

Parma was, originally, of Etruscan foundation (Bouillet, "Dictionnaire d'Histoire" s.v. Parme), and in this respect rises above Florence, the capital of Modern Tuscany. This justifies Nostradamus in designating the Duke of Parma as Florence. Genoa, by synecdoche, may stand for Savoy, as being its more commercial emporium.

BURIAL AT ST. DENIS OF THE LAST OF THE VALOIS (1589-1610). [I. 82.]

 Century I.--Quatrain 10.

	 
		Serpens [*1] transmis en la cage de fer
		 Ou les enfans septains du Roy sont pris,
		 Les vieux et peres sortiront bas [*2] de l'enfer, [*3]
		 Ains mourir voir de fruict mort et cris.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The coffin being lowered behind the grille of iron,
		 Where the seven children of the King are buried,
		 The ancestors of the Valois will rise from the depths of the tomb,
		 And cry out to see their withered fruit thus die.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 90]

Henri III. was deposited, provisionally, in 1589, at Compiegne, in the Abbey of St. Corneille; and it was only in 1610 that his body was conveyed to the vaults of St. Denis, at the same time with the bodies of Henry IV. and Catherine de Medici. This quatrain is not very remarkable, but the interpretation hangs pretty well together. It has perhaps this value, that it shows us one incident in a vast procession of historical dissolving views that seem to have passed before the eye of Nostradamus, and one would say in chronological sequence, which he must himself have broken up purposely afterwards, fearing that the chronological clue would often render the prophecy too open to interpretation to be good for either his own safety or the public advantage.

MARRIAGE OF FRANCOIS II. AND MARY STUART (APRIL 24, 1558). [I. 84.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 39.

	 
		Premier fils vefve [*1] malheureux marriage,
		 Sans nuts enfants, deux Isles en discord,
		 Avant dix-huict incompetant age. [*2]
		 De l'autre pres [*3] plus bas sera l'accord.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The eldest son leaves, with his wretched marriage,
		 Widow, no children, and two isles in strife,
		 And dies before eighteen, incompetent of age.
		 The younger son will marry earlier still. [*4]
		
		 The matter seems to stand thus. Francois II., eldest son of Henri II., shall die and leave his wife, Mary Stuart, a widow without children, after an unhappy marriage that extends

[p. 91]

over less than two years, before he is eighteen, or of competent age. The particularity of this detail is wonderful, and far more like history than prophecy, except as to the brevity with which it is expressed. His enunciations amount to hints only, but they are so pregnant that, when you fill in the indispensably connected particulars, the statement reads like history. So here the instant you recognize that Francois II. is the subject of the lines, you refer to history for his birth and death, January 19, 1543, December 15, 1560--that is, 17 years, 10 months, and 15 days, or a month and 15 days short of 18 years. Avant dix-huict is Nostradamus's phrase. Again, his death establishes discord between Elizabeth of England and Mary of Scotland (deux Isles en discord). Charles IX., his younger brother, was affianced to Elizabeth of Austria when still younger, at eleven years of age, though he did not marry till twenty. This is how M. le Pelletier harmonizes the line. But, as affiancing is not marriage, this cannot have any affinity at all with marrying at an incompetent age. I should propose to read the line thus. Of the younger one afterwards, and lower down, will the concordance, account, or accord be given; and accordingly we shall have now to enter upon several stanzas that relate to Charles IX.

CHARLES IX. (Le roi farouche). (1560-1574). [I. 86.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 66.

	 
		Le grand Baillif d'Orleans mis a mort
		 Sera par un de sang vindicatif:
		 De mort merite ne mourra ni par sort;
		 Des pieds et mains mal le faisoit captif.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great Bailiff of Orleans shall be put to death
		 By one of vindictive blood:
		 Not undeserved death shall he die, nor by fate;
		 For they will insecurely make him captive by feet and hands.
		
		 [p. 92]

Jerome Groslot shall be arrested November 9, 1561, and condemned by the Inquisition to beheadal for delivering the city to the Calvinists. But he will not suffer the death merited, nor undergo his fate; his keepers being bribed, he shall escape.

DEFECTION OF ADMIRAL COLIGNY (1559-1567). [I. 87.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 75.

	 
		Le grand pillot [*1] par Roy sera mande [*2]
		 Laisser la classe [*3] pour plus haut lieu atteindre:
		 Sept ans apres sera contrebande, [*4]
		 Barbare armee viendra. Venise craindre. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		He who shall have been appointed admiral by the king,
		 Shall leave the fleet to take a higher post;
		 Seven years later, shall take the opposite side to the king;
		 Venice shall dread an army of barbarians coming.
		
		 Gaspard de Coligny, made grand-admiral by Henri II., in 1552, shall quit the fleet in 1559, on the death of the King, and place himself at the head of the Calvinist party. In 1562 he will be general of their forces, and in 1567--that is, seven years after withdrawal from the fleet, he will head the rebellion in the civil war. At the same moment Venice will dread the armies of Selim Il., that will wrest Cyprus from her in 1570. The peace between the Catholics and Protestants was signed at St. Germain in this very year. The Venetians, however, in this year gained the naval victory of Lepanto over the Turks in 1570.

[p. 93]

MURDER OF LOUIS DE BOURBON, PRINCE OF CONDE
 (MARCH 13, 1569). [I. 88.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 41.

	 
		Bossu sera esleu par le conseil:
		 Plus hideux monstre en terre n'apperceu.
		 Le coup voulant crevera l'oeil [*1]
		 Le traistre au Roy pour fidelle receu.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Crookback shall be elected by the council:
		 A more hideous monster never seen on earth.
		 An intentional shot pierces the eve of the traitor
		 Who had sworn to be faithful to the king.
		
		 Prince Louis of Conde, the Humpback, shall be elected general-in-chief by the council of notables of the Calvinists. Such a monster of wickedness was never seen on earth. Montesquiou killed him with a pistol-shot in the eye, who had twice escaped from his treasonous practices against the King. Here Nostradamus' forecast is miraculously clear, although it has baffled Guynaud to find its concordance with events. He here also exhibits his religious partisanship, A hunchback is always considered to be morally as well as physically deformed; and, as Louis de Bourbon took the side of the Calvinists, he became at once to our prophet le plus hideux monstre en terre. Evidently, however, he was a grand fighting fellow, and spent his life in camps, if we go no further than Moreri for his history. He was condemned for a conspirator in 1560 to lose his head. But the sentence was never carried out, as King Francois II. died at the moment, and none was bold enough to see to it. When Charles IX. set him at liberty, the Cour des Pairs found out that he was innocent, and declared him so. He perished at the battle of Jarnac. He had his leg broken by

[p. 94]

the kick of a horse, and was seated at the foot of a bush when Montesquiou, captain of the Duke of Anjou's guards, saw him, and, for some old pique, coolly, but like the veriest coward, shot the wounded Conde in the eye with his pistol. The body was conveyed for burial to St. George of Vendome, either by chance or insult, on the back of a she ass, at Jarnac; which led to one of those impromptu epitaphial epigrams that the French turn so prettily:

	 
		L'an mil cinq cens soixante neuf,
		 Entre Jarnac et Chateauneuf,
		 Fut porte mort sur une anesse
		 Le grand ennemi de la Messe.
		          (V. MORERI, s.v. Louis de Bourbon.)
		
		 ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY (AUGUST 24, 1572). [I. 89.]

 Century IV.--Quatrain 47.

	 
		Le Noir [*1] farouche, quand aura essaye
		 Sa main sanguine par feu, fer, arcs tendus, [*2]
		 Trestous le peuple sera tant [*3] effraye
		 Voir les plus grans par col et pieds pendus.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The savage king, when he shall have tried
		 His blood-stained hand with fire, sword, and bows,
		 All the people shall be terrified
		 To see the great hung by the neck and feet.
		
		 When Charles IX. shall exercise his sanguinary hand with fire, the sword, and the arquebus, the people will be horrified to see the great Calvinist lords strung up by the neck and feet. One of the savage amusements of Charles, in hunting, was to cut off at a single blow the heads of any asses or pigs he came across on the way. During the very massacre he placed himself at a window of the Louvre and took several shots with a long arquebus at the Huguenots

[p. 95]

who fled from the other side of the Seine in the Faubourg St. Germain. The body of Coligny was dragged by the populace, at the end of a rope, through all the mud of the kennels, and then hung up by one foot to the gibbet at Montfaucon. This 24th of August fell on a Sunday. The King himself died two years after, with some suspicion of poisoning. He is said to have been a man of high courage and of a lively, quick wit, possessing a good share of eloquence; was given much to dissimulation; and full of oaths, unreasonably violent, and without self-control. He turned a verse well, and loved hunting. His poems still remain, but I do not know they can ever command a single reader. In speaking of poets, he used to say they ought to be well fed, like good horses, but not satisfied, or they become lazy. The world in general prefers to starve them if they are first-rate, and enrich them if they are second-rate. We cannot expect people to reward what they cannot understand: though inevitable, we cannot but deplore the arrangement. With good abilities, Charles had so little judgment that his actions would always have been mischievous; the best thing that could have happened was his death at twenty-four. He is said to have remarked, when dying, that he was glad to die young and have no children, for he had sadly learnt, in his own case, how miserable is the conduct of a prince who mounts the throne a child, and so governs through the ministry of others. This only shows a little recovery to sober reason, but none of the remorse that is attributed to him on his death-bed, as being the ostensible author of the blackest act that has ever disfigured Christianity or stained Europe. In perfidy and crime it cannot be surpassed, nor as the outcome of religious perversion. The crimes of an atheistic democracy, perpetrated two hundred years later on the same theatre precisely, have only been able to surpass

[p. 96]

it, in the carnal lusts exhibited, in the inhuman degradation of the body of man, and in the ubiquity of iniquity, when the whole people are thirsting to satiate their debased passions in sin. Nostradamus has elsewhere called Paris the City of the Sword. It is the wine-press of the earth, fat with the blood of man: Lutetia of mud and blood. Haussmann rebuilt it, but nothing can cleanse it. Their very guillotine is an instrument contrived to publicly gratify the populace in its tiger-taste for the reek of blood in the streets of the City of Blood. If you wish to see the disgrace of religion, read Sully's description of the endeavour of the ferocious priests on that day to have his blood. Look also on the medal of Gregory XIII., [*1] struck rejoicingly to commemorate that awful crime. Bonanni shows it; and, as a work of medallic art, the head of the Pope is of the very highest order of beauty and Italian grace. But, then, it commemorates the blood of sixty thousand victims, he says. Ranke (ii. 69) puts

[p. 97]

it at fifty thousand. Take this number, if you like; it is, enough to satisfy the successor to St. Peter, to whom the special mandate was addressed, "Feed my sheep,"--as other shepherds do for the butcher, is the Gregorian gloss. Trades. men, however, have the decency to shut the shambles on the Sunday morning; but the servus servorum is at home in his ministrations on the Dominical day. That Sunday in August is indeed a Saints' rubric! For that day there is no need of a calendar. Time, till the world ruptures, can never forget it,--nor forgive.

 Le noir farouche of this quatrain is, by Guynaud, p. 113, said to stand for Admiral Coligny, who is designated, according to him, very variously in the quatrains. The noir farouche alludes to his rough and forbidding exterior. Le grand Pillot (VI. 75) is another epithet; le tiran (Presage III.) another. The conclusion of the quatrain is admitted, both by Le Pelletier and Guynaud, to stand for Coligny. In the earlier portion, most will, I think, prefer to take noir as the anagram of Roi.

Guynaud gives a surprising account from the historians of Provence and France, of what happened to Coligny when he was at Angouleme in 1568. He set up a gibbet there, and on his own authority hanged upon it Michel Grelet, Guardian of the Cordeliers, and a most zealous preacher against the heretics. In his dying speech on the scaffold, the latter said, "Admiral, you put me to death very unjustly. I am going to God now to give account to Him of my actions; but remember, you and all the people present here to-day, I predict that in a short time you will yourself be thrown from an upper window, and your body will be cut to pieces." The histories go on to say that an Italian cut off Coligny's head to send it to Cardinal de Lorraine at Rome, whilst other men cut off his hands and other parts of his body;

[p. 98]

also that at about six in the morning the mob found his body on a dunghill in a stable, dragged it to the Seine, and threw it in. It was again fished out, and hung by the foot to the gibbet of Montfaucon, where it became blackened in the smoke of the fires that were lighted below it. (Guynaud, "Concord. Nostra.," p. 113.)

 Sixain 52. [I. 90.]

	 
		La grand' Cite qui n'a pain a demy
		 Encor un coup la Sainct Barthelemy
		 Engravera au profond de son ame:
		 Nismes, Rochelle, Geneve et Montpellier,
		 Castres, Lyon, Mars entrant au Belier,
		 S'entrebattront; le tout pour une Dame.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great city that has bread at only half rations
		 Will have the further blow of Saint Bartholomew
		 Cut deep into its soul:
		 Nismes, Rochelle, Geneva, and Montpellier,
		 Castres, Lyons, with Mars entering the Ram,
		 Will fight one another; and all for the Queen mother.
		
		 The great city is, of course, Paris, and une Dame is the Queen, Catherine de Medici. It has to be borne in mind that these sixains were not published till thirty-three years after the massacre of St. Bartholomew's. Naturally, the prediction loses all special authority in this case. It raises, however, a singular question: Why, if it was written after the event, it was not rendered more explicit, if those who published it had an interest in augmenting the fame of the prophet? It looks very much as if the testamentary duties were performed in perfect good faith, mechanically, and without even understanding the purport or meaning of the words.

Another passage relating to St. Bartholomew's massacre occurs in the text of 1605, and its authority is no greater than

[p. 99]

that of the sixain just quoted, as it was not published till after the event. It goes, however, to strengthen the remark I above made. Those who caused the work to be printed seem to have been perfectly unconscious of the meaning of the stanzas; they regarded the whole procedure as a mere form of respect to the memory of a celebrated relative. Their duty was clear to them, and they performed it; but the writings were to them perfectly unintelligible.

Presage III. (ii. 252) is dated as if written January, 1555 and for anything that I can see there is nothing whatever to make one doubt but that it was so. Having made this point as clear as I can, the reader will take it or reject it as he pleases.

	 
		Le gros airain qui les heures ordonne,
		 Sur le trespas du Tyran cassera: [*1]
		 Pleurs, plaintes et cris, eaux, glace pain ne donc
		 V. S. C. [*2] paix l'arme passera.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The brazen bell that rings the daily hours
		 Will play full volley at the tyrant's death:
		 Tears, cries, and groans; the waters freeze up bread,
		 With son of Charles the Fifth a peace is made.
		
		 The tyrant here is interpreted by Guynaud (p. 107) a. Coligny, and he appends some interesting remarks from Favin's "Histoire de Navarre," touching St. Bartholomew's Day In Paris. He says they marked the lodgings of the Huguenots that they might know where to find them in the hurry, and it was arranged that at the tocsin of the great bell at the palace, as well as that of the church of St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, they were to lay violent hands (mainbaisse)

[p. 100]

on all the heretics. Two p.m. was the hour appointed. The Catholics who went into the street were to distinguish themselves by a white cross upon their hats. The bodies of the slain were for the most part thrown into the river. Mezerai records that the queen-mother hastened the signal by a full hour, and that it was, contrary to arrangement, started by the bell of St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, although that was immediately followed up by the big bell of the palace.

Coligny was slain in bed, and flung out of window in his shirt only. His face, being covered with blood, the Duc de Guise coolly wiped it with his handkerchief, to assure himself that it actually was Coligny. We shall shortly see this bloodthirsty villain himself murdered at Blois.

The massacre continued the whole week through, for seven days that is, but the chief fury had spent itself by Tuesday night. The Janus Gallicus professes, though how Aime could have any certainty of it I cannot tell, that Nostradamus, by tyran, alludes to Coligny, and says that the bell tolled so long that it broke. The quatrain does not necessitate the supposal of any such thing, and I believe the fact is not elsewhere recorded. Of course, if it be, it would be so literal a fulfilment that all the sceptical world would immediately take advantage of what I have pointed out, that this is a prophecy apres coup. If so doing should rejoice anybody, I can only say that he has my consent. My business is to put the facts, without a shred of disguise, before the reader; he can weave them into theories for himself. If I at any time manifest what I think, he will be pleased to accept it merely as a contribution towards the same end.

In January, 1572, the river Seine was frozen over for a long time, and the roads became almost impassable. This may perhaps be thought to interpret eaux glace pain ne 

[p. 101]

 done, with such hieroglyphic symbolism of scarcity as oracular utterance delights in. It is pretty certain that provisions did not enter Paris that winter with their usual flow. In allusion to the army mentioned, Guynaud says that the Duc d'Anjou marched with fifty thousand men to the siege of Rochelle, where, after firing thirteen thousand shots, they at last effected a breach. What they battered down, oddly enough, was the Boulevard of the Gospel (Boulevard de l'Evangile), but they could not storm it, and lost twenty thousand men without taking the place.

In that eulogium on Catherine de Medici which de Brantome ("Pantheon Litteraire," ii. 116) calls her Life, he relates that she died of a broken heart, from grief at having consented to the massacre on this ill-starred day, and that without intending it she (p. 133) had invited the nobles and lords of the land to gather to it. The Cardinal de Bourbon said to her, "Madam, you have brought us all to the butchery without intending it." This touched her to the quick; she took to her bed and never left it again. One can only say this does not quite accord with Mezerai and her sounding the tocsin an hour earlier by anticipation. Further, as the massacre took place in 1572, and the queen-mother did not die at Blois till 1589, seventeen years after, her heart resisted grief much as granite does vinegar. The lady must originally have possessed a very good heart. De Brantome says poison was talked of; but he considers the broken heart more likely.

CIVIL WAR UNDER HENRI III. (1559-1589). [I. 93.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 55.

	 
		En l'an qu'un oeil en France regnera
		 La Cour sera en un bien fascheux trouble:
		 Le Grand de Blois son amy tuera;
		 Le regne mis en mal et doute double.
		
		 [p. 102]

 Translation.

	 
		In the year when a one-eyed man shall reign in France
		 The Court shall be in very vexatious trouble:
		 The great one of Blois shall kill his friend;
		 The Kingdom, plunged into evil and doubt, shall divide in two.
		
		 M. le Pelletier's version here seems to be a little forced. The one-eyed man he makes to be Henri II., whose eye was destroyed by Montgomery's lance. The Court is to be in great embarrassment. Henri III. (le Grand de Blois) will convoke at that place the States-General, and will there assassinate the Duc de Guise, first taking with him, in Italian fashion, the Holy Communion, as a sign of entire reconciliation, Then the desolated kingdom will divide into two camps--the Royalists on one side, and the Leaguers On the other.

REGENCY OF CATHERINE DE MEDICI (1537-,574). [I. 94.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 29.

	 
		La vefve [*1] saincte entendent les nouvelles
		 De ses rameaux mis en perplex et trouble:
		 Qui [*2] sera duict [*3] appaiser [*4] les querelles
		 Par son pourchas [*5] des razes [*6] fera comble.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The holy widow shall receive news
		 Of the difficulties that perplex and trouble her children;
		 He whom she calls home to quiet disturbances
		 Shall bring them to a crisis by his pursuit of shaven heads.
		
		 There is a little difficulty in applying the epithet saincte to the queen-mother, and Garencieres supposes it to signify

[p. 103]

 Roma la Santa; but, if so, the rest will have no meaning, Nostradamus is so entirely for Henri II., his wife, and the Romish Church, that in spite of his designating her son le roi farouche, he might think the term saincte not inappropriate to her. She sent a private despatch to her son, Henri III., to hurry back from Poland, as we shall see him doing in the next quatrain cited, that he may take the direction of the French Government. He enters into an alliance with Henri IV. and the Huguenots to counterbalance the Catholic League. Thence follows the murder of the Cardinal, brother of the Duc de Guise, who was murdered by the King's order on December 24,1588, one day after his brother. This is the prosecution of the Church (pourchas des razes), coupled with the repression of the League, which culminates the crisis. The only jarring word in this concordance, when once it is comprehended, lies in the word saincte, to which I have already drawn attention, and which may be explained by the devotion felt by Nostradamus to the crown of France and to Rome. It is evident that Brantome was able to regard her as a most admirable and lovable lady. The tocsin and the blood spoil our appreciation.

HENRI III. RENOUNCES POLAND (JUNE 26, 1574). [I. 96.]

 Century VII.--Quatrain 35.

	 
		Le grande Pesche [*1]viendra plaindre, [*2] plorer
		 D'avoir esleu: trompes seront en l'age:[p. 104]
		 Guiere [*1] avec eux ne voudra demourer:
		 Deceu [*2] sera par ceux de son langage.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great gambler [*3] shall complain and weep
		 To have elected him: deceived in his age:
		 The duke had no desire to stay with them:
		 He will be slain by men of his own tongue.
		
		 Poland, then, will deplore having elected the Duc d'Anjou n 1573, for he stayed only one year with them, and absconded on the 26th of June at night, at his mother's summons, to France. The Comte de Fanchin, the Grand Chamberlain, was sent after him, and overtook him at Piesna, a frontier town in Austria, but the duke was deaf to all intercession (Guynaud, p. 119). He never took the Polish throne because he wished it, but because he was pressed by the Court of France; and now French affairs called him back. Guynaud thinks that the last line means that his friends deceived him into taking it; but this is because he did not discover the Latin meaning in deceu. For certainly Nostradamus meant that he would go home to die by Clement's hand, as he shows in as many words a little later on. Guynaud says that Poland had been deceived as to the prince's age, and that he was represented to be much older than he really was.

[p. 105]

EDICT OF POITIERS (OCTOBER 3, 1577). [I. 97.]

 Century V.--Quatrain 72.

	 
		Pour le plaisir d'edict voluptueux,
		 On mestera le poison dans la foy:
		 Venus sera en cours si vertueux, [*1]
		 Qu'obfusquera du soleil tout aloy. [*2]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		To pass an edict of a sugared sort,
		 They'll mingle poison with our holy faith:
		 And Venus darken, in her course robust,
		 All law and light from out the sacred Sun.
		
		 The Sun, in Nostradamus, often stands for the Church or Christianity, by him believed to be within the palisade of Popery. It might also mean France, whose King's name was Rex Christianissimus. Louis XIV. assumed the device of the sun, with the motto nec pluribus impar. Venus stands for sensual pleasure--the world triumphant over the Church. The edict of Poitiers, October 8, 1577, So far favoured the Protestants that they were authorized to hold public services on the reformed footing. Calvinist ministers might marry, and auricular confession was suppressed. Thus did Henri III. mingle the poison of unchastity, etc., with the Catholic faith. The licence of morals (Venus)

[p. 106]

became unbridled and tarnished the law of Christendom (Soleil).

Guynaud interprets with Le Pelletier in this, and considers the poison to consist particularly in freeing the Huguenots from the Sacrifice of Penance; in condemning the monastic orders; in encouraging unchastity, by allowing the Calvinist ministers to marry; in abandoning confession. Venus sera is a line showing that many monks will quit the cloisters to indulge in marriage and other debauchery. The last line may be understood, that the glory of the King will be tarnished, and make him to be ill thought of by the Catholics; or that it will obscure faith in the Church (p. 122).

JOURNEE DES BARRICADES (MAY 12, 1588). [I. 98.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 50.

	 
		La republique de la grande cite
		 A grand rigueur ne voudra consentir:
		 Roy sortir hors par trompette cite,
		 L'eschelle an mur la cite repentir.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Republic of the great city (Paris)
		 Would not submit itself to the very rigorous treatment;
		 The King summoned by trumpet to quit the city,
		 Which is called to repent by the ladder at the wall.
		
		 This quatrain and the event it prefigures are alike wonderful. Garencieres is much puzzled over it. What city has a commonwealth? Is it Venice, Genoa, Geneva, Luca? He cannot tell. However, the "great city" in Nostradamus almost always stands for Paris. The League, mistress in Paris, would not submit to the coercive measures of Henri III., and by a call to arms--perhaps the old tocsin of St. Germain de l'Auxerrois sounding the while--told him, as par trompette, he had better quit the city with all speed. Trial and

[p. 107]

sentence in one word, "Take yourself off,"--for the first time uttered to a king of the race Capetian, in some eight hundred years of history. Later on, the drumming and trumpeting crack-brained citizens, with nothing about them to be called sane but their river, will feel themselves called to repentance when the escalading ladders are laid by Henri III. to the wall.

 

Let it be noted now that this Day of the Barricades is very remarkable, and, as such, is not to be found at all in Bohn's "Index of Dates." It was, however, repeated in the civil war of the Fronde, August 26, 1648; in the three days' war, July 27, 28, 29, 1830, that set Philippe Citoyen on his rickety perch; and again in June 23, 1848. But close on two hundred years after, in 1789, when the philosophic Republic was at hand and the Bastille was taken; when another Capet was to be handled by the mob; offering cul pour tete to the admiration of a wise world, then was to be best discerned the result of this first reaction from St. Bartholomew's Day; pretty well that tocsin of treason has rung alarum to a world on fire. A further curious analogy demands attention here. The Popes of Rome were the earliest patrons of the principle of regicide, and Clement the monk, whom we shall soon introduce, was the first to practise it; here we see the Catholic League to be the first organized body to repudiate kingship, to set up a republican form, and consecrate a day to revolt and insurrection, which has become memorable in history for ever, though forgotten by Bohn, as la Journee des Barricades. But what shall we say of this forecast by Nostradamus, fifty-three years before the event happened? He is, I think, the first who ever put in type the word Republic as representative of rebellion and revolt, throughout the modern world. But here we have it,--the dough of

[p. 108]

prophecy made out of the ground wheat-seed of time, and baked by the oven of events into the bread of history; not Walpole's lies, nor the principles, mostly false, that philosopher Hume finds so cleverly for us, but the facts divested of motive.--like a petrified coral. reef of insect humanities concreted into permanence and solidity by the death of myriads. For those who can see, it lies all contained in that linear rune, La republique de la grande cite.

MURDER OF THE DUC DE GUISE (DECEMBER 23, 1588). [I. 99.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 51.

	 
		Paris conjure un grand meutre commetre,
		 Blois le fera sortir en plein effect:
		 Ceux d'Orleans voudront leur chef remettre;
		 Angers, Troye, Langres leur feront un meffait.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Paris conspires to commit a great murder;
		 Blois will carry it into full effect:
		 The Orleanois will try to place a Leaguer at their head;
		 Angers, Troye, Langres will try and undo this.
		
		 Henri III. at Paris contrived the murder of the Duc de Guise, who had incited and led the Parisians on the day of the Barricades, when Henri was compelled to fly to Chartres. Henri de Lorraine, Duc de Guise, was murdered the day after the Cardinal, his brother, had been, at the Convention of the Estates at Blois. The murder took place at the Chateau de Blois. The Orleanois, on learning this, rose against Balzac d'Entragues, the governor of the town, and set Charles de Lorraine, Chevalier d'Aumale, at their head,--he was one of the chiefs of the League,--whilst Angers, Troyes, and Langres took the side of Henri III. It is not very easy, says Le Pelletier, to distinctly prove the exact position taken up by these three towns, but Nostradamus habitually puts a part to stand for the whole. In

[p. 109]

the divided interests various cities took differing sides. At the time he wrote there was nothing to show that such internecine separations would take place. He clearly anticipated them, and, so far, is absolutely right. We cannot, it seems, prove him to be right in all the details; but equally, there is nothing to show him wrong.

LE DUC DE MAYENNE (1589-1593). [I. 100.]

 Century I.--Quatrain 85.

	 
		Par la response dc dame Roy trouble,
		 Ambassadeurs mespriseront leur vie:
		 Le Grand ses freres contrefera double
		 Par deux mourront ire, [*1] haine, et envie. [*2]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The King shall be troubled by the Queen-mother,
		 The deputies at risk of life remonstrate:
		 The Guise will act for both his brothers dead,
		 The two whom envy, hatred, malice slew.
		
		 Henri III. will be troubled by the response of Catherine de Medici, who disapproves of the murder of the Guise; the deputies (ambassadeurs) from both Paris and Blois, make lively remonstrance at the peril of their lives. The Duc de Mayenne (le Grand), when proclaimed chief of' the League, will take the title of Lieutenant-General of the Kingdom, and, as if doubled in authority, will represent his two brothers, Henri de Guise and the Cardinal de Lorraine, whom the envy, hatred, and malice of Henri III. and his Court had assassinated. We seem to have here a republic tempered by daggers, in place of what followed, a tyranny tempered with epigrams. This active forging of daggers, knives, and sword-cutlery in France, to carve out an idol of a republic, with its bloodstained heathen Phrygian cap;

[p. 110]

taken together with its repetition sixty years later, in the Barricades of the Fronde, August, 1648, was clearly generating the poison and concentrating its venom for the most startling act of death known to mankind, but one, in all history,--at Whitehall, on that wintry 30th of January, 1649,--the venom, that by the subtle inoculation of a Raleigh could, for a time, strike silly such a soul as Milton's--"Psalmist of Paradise,"--who, but for this damned virus in the world, might have taught men how to realize a paradise on earth.

CRIME OF JACQUES CLEMENT (AUGUST 1, 1589). [I. 102.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 36.

	 
		Un grand Roy prins [*1] entre les mains d'un Joyne [*2]
		 Non loin de Pasque, confusion, coup cultre. [*3]
		 Perpet, [*4] captifs temps que foudre en la husne, [*5]
		 Lors que trois freres se blesseront et murtre. [*6]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A great King taken by a young man's hand
		 Close upon Easter, confusion, and a knife:
		 There's powder on the tower for captives then,
		 Three brothers perish; this death takes the last.
		
		 Henri III., in his camp at St. Cloud, will be struck by the hand of a young monk,--Joyne might easily be a misprint for Moyne. Jacques Clement was twenty-five. He came straight from receiving the Communion (non loin de Pasque). He thought he did God service (confusion); he struck him in the lower bowel with a knife. The crime will be committed when the Parisians are cut off (captifs) by the King beleaguering, and his vengeance is ready to fall upon

[p. 111]

their ramparts. This murder completes the violent deaths of the three sons, the issue of Henri II. and Catherine de Medici.

There is no occasion to call attention to the remarkable lucidity of this forecast, when once the linguistic difficulties of its conveyance have been studiously solved. The demilune towers projecting at intervals from the wall, as at the Haute Ville, Boulogne, well enough represent the husne, or tower of vantage, in the quatrain, they need but a shield or belvidere added.

DEATH OF HENRI III. (AUGUST 2, 1589). [I. 103.]

 Presage 58.

	 
		Le Roy-Roy n'estre, du Doux la pernicie, [*1]
		 L'an pestilent, les esmues [*2] nubileux.
		 Tien [*3] qui tiendra, les grands non letitie, [*4]
		 Et passera terme de cavilleux. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The twice King dies, by Clement hand is slain;
		 War and revolt make the year pestilent.
		 Hold who hold can, the great oppose not well,
		 Live laughter down and teach the cavillers.
		
		 This is a most singular prophecy. Henri III., King, first of Poland then of France is quaintly called Roy-Roy. Le Doux is an excellent synonym for Clement, all must admit. The year was harassed by civil and religious war, and the Leaguers (les esmues) begin to grow anxious about the consequences. Let Henri IV. hold hard his own, the lilied sceptre: "Let Curzon holde what Curzon helde" be his motto. The time is passed for the Catholic grandees (les 

[p. 112]

 grands) to woo Laetitia. The King can laugh now at the laughers of the Guise; he laughs best who laughs last.

The murder by Clement of the anti-papal king, Henri III., followed very close upon the setting up of Jesuit Clubs in Paris under papal sanction (Elliot's Horae Apoc, iii. 321). The pulpits also had been filled by clerical preachers of sedition and bloodshed. Precisely two hundred years later the Bastille was taken, and in the Jacobin Clubs of that day were hung, says Alison, the pictures of Clement and Ravaillac, in the gloomy rooms of the old convent, in which they met like night-birds of ill-omen, and within little wreaths beneath each picture might be seen inscribed the words, "He was fortunate; he killed a king." This is so sentimental, petty, and petulant, that it would move to laughter any large good-natured mind, were it mot for the slaver of malignity that accompanies everything that drops from the tongues of that sack of reptiles gathered out of the Jacobin dunghill, as they crawled forth one by one poisoning and to poison.

Footnotes

^80:1 Old word for jamais, never.

^80:2 Latin, a. by.

^81:1 Bouys [Oracles, p. 103] says that the King alone had the right to a visor of pure gold. I believe this to be pure nonsense. It would be little stronger than lead. It merely means a gilt casque, and I think some of the accounts say so in as many words. If Bouys were right, the King courted death.

^81:2 Greek, klasis, breaking or lopping.

^81:3 Latin, una, the one or first.

^82:1 See also Brantome, Vie des hommes illustres de son temps.

^84:1 Qu'en, for qui en.

^84:2 Romance, for lutte.

^84:3 Porte, pour remporte.

^84:4 Latin, subito, suddenly.

^84:5 Romance, surprins for surpris.

^87:1 Romance, surprins = surpris.

^88:1 Latin, exspoliare, totally despoiled.

^88:2 Romance, for pris.

^88:3 Romance, hostaige, maison, house, palace.

^88:4 Romance, tiers, third.

^88:5 Latin, trucidare, cut the throat.

^88:6 Latin, inconditus, dispersed.

^89:1 Greek, sarpos, wooden case, coffin,

^89:2 Sortiront bas, for d'en bas.

^89:3 Latin, infernus, subterranean.

^90:1 Romance, vefve, veuve. The word is made here to apply to the wife, Mary Stuart, whom he leaves a widow without children. The grammatical effort is somewhat violent; but vef or veuf is the masculine form, so there is very little choice given.

^90:2 In the quatrain this ought to be written eage, as it stands in the texte-type, or the line will not scan.

^90:3 Pres, for apres.

^90:4 This is how M. le Pelletier renders the last line.

^92:1 Italian, piloto, pilot.

^92:2 Latin, mandatus, appointed to a charge.

^92:3 Latin, classis, fleet.

^92:4 Romance, contrebande, marching in a contrary band.

^92:5 Ordo is, Venise craindra une armie de barbares qui viendra.

^93:1 This line is a foot short. Garencieres reads:

	 
		Le coup volant luy crevera un oeil.
		
		 

^94:1 Noir, anagram of roi, cutting off n.

^94:2 Arcs tendus, arquebus.

^94:3 Latin, tantum, much.

^96:1 The family name of Pope Gregory XIII. was Hugo Buon-Compagni. On May 13, 572, he was made Pope. He assumed the name of Gregory out of respect to St. Gregory Nazianzen. He caused the Church to encourage the murder of refractory kings; he promoted the massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day, which Sir Paul Rycaut, the historian of the Popes, does not so much as mention in the life of Gregory. He only says towards the end that "he may be numbered amongst the good Popes." As Buon-Compagni was a good lawyer before he became a good Pope, he was prequalified for a virtuous career in any line of life. He re-confirmed the excommunication of Queen Elizabeth; he rectified the Calendar which goes by his name,--the Gregorian. The Jesuits' College was finished by him at Rome, dedicated so oddly--

Religioni et bonis Artibus.

In his day Japan was, by Jesuit missionary effort, brought within the pale of the Church: on which a wit remarked that Japan varnish was introduced into Europe, and Christian varnish into Japan. He died at eighty-three, and to the last could almost mount on horseback without the help of his servants. His place of retirement, Rycaut says, was Frescati, about ten miles distant from Rome, where the Borghes Palace now is, and was then called Monte Dragone--a most fit name for the residence of the Old Worm of St. Bartholomew's massacre.--V. Paul Rycaut, "Lives of the Popes," ed. 1689, vol. ii. p. 163.

^99:1 Will sound in full volley.

^99:2 These letters are interpreted by the old commentators and Guynaud (p. 107) as meaning the peace concluded with Philip II. of Spain: V., cinq, S., successeur, C., Charles--i.e., Successor to Charles Quint.

^102:1 Romance, vefve = veuve, widow.

^102:2 Latin, qui, celui qui.

^102:3 Latin, ductus, led.

^102:4 Appaiser, for pour apaiser.

^102:5 Pourchas, old word, pursuit, active intrigue (proquassatio).

^102:6 Razes, tonsured priests and monks (tetes rasees).

^103:1 Greek, pessikos, draught-playing, or gambling. The word was applied to gaming by the Greeks, as we find a story in Plutarch [Liddell and Scott, Lex.], exhibiting Hermes as playing draughts (on the pesseyterion) with Selene, and winning five days, which he adds to the year. Guynaud (p. 119) reads poche, which I take to be an abscess, wolf, or devouring ulcer; both he and Le Pelletier interpret it as meaning Poland.

^103:2 Plaindre, for se plaindre.

^104:1 Guiere. Nobody explains this word, and yet it seems to stand much in need of it. It is given by Roquefort, as from gubernator, a general. Leader, Or we may say dux, for the Duc d'Alencon. It is really guides or guide. Guber, govern, guide, being all three cognate.

^104:2 Latin, decisus, cut off, severed.

^104:3 This term is applied to Poland by Nostradamus n allusion to its elective throne, which became purely venal--a thing at last coming to be played for as a hazard at dice. But, curiously enough, the less authentic reading poche is almost equally descriptive--a burning ulcer eating into the body politic till it destroys it.

^105:1 Latin, virtuosus; according to M. le Pelletier "vigorous." Classical Latin has no such word, and the lower Latin means probus, bonis moribus et virtute praeditus. Nostradamus probably meant vertueux, in old French, to be equivalent to robuste.

^105:2 Aloi, the quality of the substance of a metal. The battle of French etymologists is very instructive over this word, as may be seen in Littre. Of course, however, it comes from a loi, conformable to law. But I think there is a misprint, and that we ought to read toute loi = toute la loi. Guynaud (p. 122) reads loi in the second line for foy. We might suppose that that variant had been introduced to correct the fourth line, and was only by a "devil" carried to the second instead, by which that imp of mischief contrived to leave two errors in place of one. In confirmation somewhat of this, the texte-type reads tout a loy.

^109:1 Latin, ira, anger.

^109:2 Ordo, deux mourront par ire, etc.

^110:1 Romance, prins, pris.

^110:2 Romance, joyne, jeune homme.

^110:3 Romance, cultre, couteau.

^110:4 Latin, perpetratio.

^110:5 Husne, a small tower, or belvidere.

^110:6 Romance, murtre, meurtre.

^111:1 Latin, pernicies, destruction.

^111:2 Romance, esmues, emus, seditious.

^111:3 Tien, for tienne.

^111:4 Latin, Laetitia, joy, pleasure, and play on Lutetia, Paris.

^111:5 Romance, cavilleux, cavillers.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

 

Henri Quatre

THE COMING OF HENRI IV. (AUGUST 2, 1589). [I. 105.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 50.

	 
		Mendosus [*1] tost viendra a son haut regne,
		 Mettant arriere un peu les Norlaris: [*2]
		 Le rouge blesme, la masle a l'interregne,
		 Le jeune crainte, et frayeur Barbaris.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Mendosus shall soon come to his high dominion,
		 Setting back those of Lorraine a little.
		 The old cardinal pale, the male of the interregnum,
		 The young man timid, and the barbarian alarmed.
		
		 HENRI IV. the heretic Vendome, changed his religion thrice, Jeanne d'Albert, his mother, brought him up a Protestant. To escape St. Bartholomew's Day, he professed Catholicism, in 1572. In 1576, he turned to Protestantism, to head the Calvinist party. He declared himself Catholic to take the throne of France. Through the Salic law he ascended, to the exclusion of the Lorraine princes (Nolaris). In this way, he shut out the old Cardinal de Bourbon, pale (blesme) with age, the Duc de Mayenne, Lieutenant General of the kingdom during the interregnum, the young Duc de Guise, and the barbarously savage Philip Il. of Spain, who had pretensions

[p. 114]

to the crown through Elizabeth his wife, the daughter of Henri II.

The Cardinal is rouge because of the dress of all cardinals. Philip allied himself with the Guises. and supported the Catholic League.

THE DEPRESSION OF THE DE GUISE FAMILY (1589-1593). [I. 107.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 18.

	 
		Le rang Lorrain fera place a Vendosme,
		 Le haut mis bas, et le bas mis en haut,
		 Le fils de Mamon sera esleu [*1] en Rome,
		 Et les deux Grands seront mis en defant.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The house of Lorraine yields to the Vendome,
		 The high put low, the low put high instead,
		 The son of Mamon they elect at Rome,
		 And the Pretenders both are in default.
		
		 

The house of Lorraine is now eclipsed by that of Vendome. Mayenne, the chief, is put down, and le petit Bearnais, Henri IV., rises to respect and power. This heretic son of mammon is accepted by choice at Rome for King of France, and neither of the Pretenders will ever be king.

The Cardinal de Bourbon had been actually proclaimed King by the League, as Charles X., but he was dead in 1590. Isabella, the daughter of Philip II., was incapable by the Salic law. So that the only two remaining were the Duc de Mayenne and the young Duc de Guise. They were shut out by Henri IV. and never reached the throne.

HENRI IV. ABJURES PROTESTANTISM (JULY 21, 1593). [I. 108.]

 Presage 76.

	 
		Par le legat du terrestre et marin,
		 Le Grande Cape [*2] a tout s'accommoder;[p. 115]
		 Estre a l'escoute tacite [*1] Norlarin, [*2]
		 Qu'a [*3] son advis ne voudra accorder.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Before the legate of the earth and sea,
		 Henry the Great will yield to all required:
		 Mayenne to all will listen and not speak a word,
		 And will grant nothing of his own free will.
		
		 Sixtus V. had boldly fulminated an excommunication against Henri Quatre, the great Capet, but the latter subscribes to all required by the legate of him who can bind and loose all on the earth and sea. He abjures Protestantism at St. Denis, on July 25, 1593, the Archbishop of Bourges officiating. The Duc de Mayenne (the Lorraine), Lieutenant-General of France and Master of Paris for the League, will look on in silence, and as far as he can will prevent Paris from receiving the King. The city did not open its gates to him till March 22, 1594, eight months after the abjuration.

MARSEILLES TAKEN BY THE SPANIARDS (FEBRUARY 17, 1596). [I. 109.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 88.

	 
		De Barselonne par mer si [*4] grand' armee,
		 Toute Marseille de frayeur tremblera:
		 Isles saisies, de mer ayde fermee,
		 Ton traditeur [*5] en terre nagera. [*6]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		From Barcelona a great fleet shall come,
		 And terror strike into the town Marseilles:
		 The isles are seized, and help by sea cut off,
		 But the betrayer is made swim on land.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 116]

A Spanish fleet of a dozen galleys, commanded by Charles Doria, was sent by Philip II. to help the Leaguers. He took possession of the islands Chateau d'If and Ratonneau, and thus cut off all help to seaward. Charles de Casau (le traditeur) was consul, and proposed to place the city in the hands of the Spaniards; Pierre Libertat, however, ran him through with a sword, and the populace dragged the dead body through the muddy channels of the streets.

Guynaud refers to the same event as fulfilling this quatrain in the time of Henri IV., but by a misprint gives 1536 instead of 1596. The islands he mentions are those of St. Honnorat and of St. Marguerite. Black's pretentious Imperial Gazetteer professes to give a plan of the town, and you see a number of nameless vermicelli streets running all about, but not a single island off the coast is visible. One may suppose, however, that the islands are there, and that all the four were occupied by the Spaniards.

BIRON'S PUNISHMENT (DECEMBER 2, 1602). [I. 110.]

 Sixain 6.

	 
		Quand de Robin [*1] la traisteruse enterprise,
		 Mettra Seigneurs et en peine un grand Prince,
		 Sceu [*2] par la Fin [*3] chef on lui tranchera.
		 La plume au vent, amye clans Espagne, [*4]
		 Poste [*5] attrappe estant clans la campagne,
		 Et l'escrivain clans l'eaue se jettera.
		
		 

 Translation.

	 
		When Biron's treason and disastrous act,
		 Shall put King Henry and his Lords in fear,[p. 117]
		 Lafin betrays him, and the King beheads.
		 Treason dispatched to Spain in amity, [*1]
		 The carrier caught when he has entered France, [*2]
		 And the scriv'ner will throw himself into the water.
		
		 One thing has carefully to be borne in mind in relation to the Sixains, that they were presented to Henri Quatre, and printed for the first time in 1605. That is to say, the) first appeared three years after this had happened. To the sceptically disposed they can furnish no authority, but to ordinary men, who only look for ordinary evidence, it will appear that there is very little as to style that would not appropriately spring from the pen of Nostradamus; and further, that if they are forgeries, the forgers have not taken advantage of their knowledge of the events to make the prophecies any clearer or more striking. These are quite as enigmatical as if our author had written them, and I think that common sense will generally be content to take them for what they are worth, and will regard them as probably genuine "chips of the old block" and as such very curious.

Guynaud in his Concordance, p. 137, gives a full and interesting account of Biron; chiefly extracted from Davila, Montluc, De Thou, Mezeray, Le Pere Anselm, and so forth,

[p. 118]

where the reader can refer for further details, if interested. I may just note that I have copied the date of December 2, 1602, from Le Pelletier, but that Moreri gives the date of Biron's decapitation as July 31, 1602, in the Court of the Bastille. The name of the messenger (poste) was Picote, a native of Orleans, sold, as they say, to the King of Spain (Guynaud, p. 140).

Garencieres has (p. 464) a very elaborate annotation upon this stanza, giving the whole history of Biron and Lafin in twenty-eight folio pages. Biron appears to have been a vain, a violent, and foolish man, though of great courage and audacity in war, which made him highly valued by Henri IV. After Amiens he refused to go to quiet the towns of Picardy, unless his statue were erected in brass before the Louvre. His sudden prosperity had turned his head. The treasonous proposals with Spain were, that he was to have a daughter of the Duke of Savoy in marriage, 500,000 crowns, and sovereign rights in Burgundy. These were negotiated through Lafin; and Lafin told the King. The whole trial is given, with Biron's defence in reply, which is audacious and eloquent, but much of it is highly contradictory. He was condemned and executed in the court of the Bastille, on July 31, 1602, which coincides with Moreri. The superstitious, ignorant, violent, but able soldier comes out most characteristically. He shows in emergency great rapidity of thought, decision, and presence of mind; but a deficient judgment, very little principle, and an overwhelming conceit, that, encouraged by success, almost merged into madness. A man of this sort is always a compound of inconsistencies; accordingly he said to the Chancellor, in speaking of death, "I have not been afraid of it these twenty years." And that was true, when in war, a duel, or hot blood; but in the court of the Bastille he was thought to

[p. 119]

show great fear of dying. In earlier life he had wondered at himself for fearing nothing from the thrust of a sword, though very nervous over the prick of a lancet, when he had occasion to "be let blood," as they used to phrase it. The fear of death is most in apprehension; but the apprehension is most, perhaps it may be said, of the wicked in cold blood, and of the good in violence, and when the blood is hot, if but the least pause give time for reflection to enter. Garencieres notes that the greatest courage and stoutness of a man is nothing in comparison of the weakness of human nature.

Two of Biron's adventures with astrologers are so characteristic of the manners of the time, as recounted by Guynaud [p. 137, etc.], that I think the reader should not be deprived of them. Whatever is strange and rivets the attention must have something of humanity in it, and repay the record, though a few superior people may look down upon such trifling. I shall give them at the risk of running this annotation to too great length.

When at Court with his father, at the age of eighteen or twenty, he had a duel, and killed his man. He had to hide for this, till his father could sue out his pardon, through the, Due d' Espernon, to whom fortunately the father was known. He took the disguise of a letter-carrier, and in this garb consulted an astrologer called La Brosse, who lived in a garret at the top of a house near the Luxembourg. He told the man that it was his master's horoscope he had need of. La Brosse told him that one day he would be a very great man, in fact, might almost be king, but for a caput algol that stood in the way. What this was the man would not explain. Biron, however, continuing to press very hard, got him to say at last that he would be beheaded on a scaffold. Upon this, he burst out with the want of judgment he

[p. 120]

showed all through his life (forty years in all) and beat the old man mercilessly, leaving him nearly dead. He locked him maliciously into his room, took away the key with him, and kicked down the little ladder that gave access to the loft. But still he believed what had been communicated.

On another occasion he consulted Cesar, who was thought at the time to be the most able astrologer in France. This man also affirmed that he would have good fortune in almost everything. Except for a blow from a Burgundian from behind, he might even be king. But he could not get from him a word more.

When he was confined in the Bastille, a friend called on him, and Biron asked him to ascertain for him from what part of the country the executioner of Paris was; and when he came back and told him that he was a Burgundian, Biron changed colour and said--"There will be no reprieve then; I am as good as dead."

Now as to the fulfilment of the last two lines. It will appear that my rendering is right, and that the scrivener will throw himself into the water. The scrivener turns out to be a man named Nicholas l'Oste, born at Orleans, secretary to Lord Villeroy, Chief Secretary of State, who, finding him a most capable person, confided much in him, and the more so that Oste's father had spent the greater part of his life in his service. When Lord Rochepot was starting as ambassador for Spain, Oste begged to accompany him as secretary. Villeroy immediately recommended him, and he was engaged. In a few months' time he mastered the language to such perfection, and so thoroughly accommodated himself to Spanish manners, that he might well pass for a true-born Spaniard. When Rochepot had got the treaty at Vervins ratified, the King of Spain gave him rich presents--a chain of jewels, and six gold chains valued at a hundred

[p. 121]

and fifty crowns apiece--to distribute amongst his suite, as he thought fit. Oste was so full of himself that he thought he ought to have one of them, but his master thought otherwise; on which, says Garencieres, "the Devil crept into his soul," and, as he wanted money to supply his debaucheries, he determined to betray the State secrets which passed through his hands.

With this in view, he applied to Don Fanchese, a Secretary of State, and made his proposals, but the dignified Spaniard, for some reason or other, received him coolly. "The Catholic King was in good amity with the most Christian one, and required to know no more than the French Ambassador should communicate to him." Nothing discouraged, our traitor hurries off to Don Ydiaques, another secretary, and there meets with excellent reception. He was presented to the Duke of Lerma, to whom he betrayed the Alphabet of Ciphers. He received twelve hundred crowns upon the spot, and was promised the like amount as a yearly pension. By his means the Spanish Council knew the contents of all French instructions as soon as the ambassador himself. When La Rochepot's mission ended, Oste got back into Villeroy's service, and so was able to maintain correspondence with Spain. Tuxis was ambassador from Spain in Paris, and after him Don Baltazar de Caniga. With these men he established a close intimacy, so that finally the Council in Spain got his letters before Des Barreaux at Madrid could receive those from Henri IV.

Des Barreaux told the King that he was always now forestalled. Oste had let a certain reprobate Raffis into his secret, and this fellow, who had been banished, in order to obtain a reprieve of sentence, betrayed Oste to Des Barreaux. When he got his pardon, he gave up the name of Oste. Raffis came to Paris to communicate with Villeroy, and orders were

[p. 122]

given to detain the two Spanish couriers that had reached the post-office. They then kept a watch upon Oste, who was "doing his devotions at the Charter-house of Paris,"--excellent Catholic, plotter as he was. On reaching the post-office, he soon found he was betrayed; and Descardes, who was to watch him, did not let him out of his sight until he brought him to Villeroy's. When there, he thought his man was safe, and went to announce his capture to Villeroy. Oste instantly ran down to the stable, where his horse stood, still saddled, and galloped away. A hue and cry was soon raised. Oste got a Spanish disguise at De Cuniga's, and made off post-haste for Luxembourg. Postmasters were forbidden to let out horses to any one; but at Meaux the postmaster had received the order too late, for Oste was already on horseback, but no sooner did he begin to gallop than his horse fell under him. His look of dismay impressed the postillion who accompanied him, and he told his master on his return. The postmaster told the sheriff, who came up with him at the second ferry of la Ferte sous Jouare; but he was already on the boat, and threatening the ferryman's life, the man put him ashore, in spite of the sheriff's commands, shouted to him from the bank. He rushed into the bushes and brambles near the Marne, hoping to escape in the darkness of the night, the sheriff scattered his men everywhere, raised the whole country side, and caused bonfires to be lighted in all directions. Oste crept from bush to bush, but, either accidentally or with intention, fell into the river Marne and was drowned. His hat was found next day, stopped between two posts, and his body two days later. So befitting a close to the career of a gifted dastard is a wholesome exemplar of retributive justice, and should not easily be suffered to fall out of men's recollection. Horace thinks that lame-foot justice always trips the sinner. No

[p. 123]

doubt, if we could see both worlds; but, as we cannot, I wish that here the lame foot were considerably less lame. In England law and the lawyers, her two crutches, seem to reduce Justice to a gouty incapable. With our new Palace of Justice the morals of a Court seem to have dawned upon us.

POPULARITY OF HENRI IV. (AFTER HIS DEATH). [I. 112.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 70.

	 
		An chef du monde le grand Chyren [*1] sera,
		 Plus outre apres ayme, craint, redoute;
		 Son bruit et los [*2] les cieux surpassera,
		 Et du seul titre victeur [*3] fort contente.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Chief of the world Henri le Grand shall be,
		 More loved in death than life, more honoured he:
		 His name and praise shall rise above the skies,
		 And men will call him victor when he dies.
		
		 French self-esteem has always appropriated to France a throne of pre-eminence beyond all other thrones. If it were possible, they would set theirs above that of Jupiter. They pretend a most manly contempt for kings. But the throne, you are to remember, is the work of sans cullottes, French

[p. 124]

cabinet-makers, and therefore the best thing of its kind in the universe, and so chef du monde. If Nostradamus is no prophet for you, you shall at least admit that he was a Frenchman. The Frenchman whips the old world, and the American whips creation. The rest of us may look forward to an eternity of corporal punishment in spite of the nominal abolition of slavery. Condillac will furnish the logical distinction, that establishes the honour of the throne, when a manly contempt has been duly engendered for the sanctity of the king's majesty. Honest Democrat! Do you read Condillac?

One of Voltaire's rhetorical squibs in the Henriade, which the French are so indulgent as to call not only verse, but poetry, runs--

	 
		"Il fut de ses sujets le vainqueur et le pere."
		 "He was the papa and conquestor of his people."
		
		 When our Charles II. was addressed as "the father of his people," he said he thought that he might be of a good many of them. But Henri Quatre is too noble a creature for any good and wise man to wish to dwell long upon his foibles. What a contrast between him and the Napoleons!

Footnotes

^113:1 Mendosus, anagram of Vendosme (the u standing for v of course), The texte-type reads Mandosus; but as Mendosus is the perfect anagram of Vendosme, and makes also the Latin word's meaning full of faults, it is best to read Mendosus.

^113:2 Norlaris, anagram for Lorrains the patronymic of the Guise family.

^114:1 Romance, esleu, elu, chosen.

^114:2 Cape, for Capet, a descendant of Hugh Capet.

^115:1 Latin, tacite, silently.

^115:2 Norlarin, anagram for Lorrain; here it represents the Duc de Mayenne,

^115:3 Qu'a for qui a.

^115:4 Romance, si for tres, very.

^115:5 Latin, traditor, traitor.

^115:6 His body shall be dragged through the streets in the mud of the gutters.

^116:1 Robin, anagram for Biron.

^116:2 Romance, sceu for su, known.

^116:3 Lafin was the name of the secretary, the accomplice of Biron.

^116:4 The ordo here is dans l'Espagne amye which means, then at peace with Henri IV.

^116:5 Romance, poste, messenger, postillion.

^117:1 La plume au vent is supposed by le Pelletier to stand for currente calamo. I should rather think it means the feather (wing) to the wind. It was written with a quill, and started on its way as a bird flies; but irrevocabile semel emissum. We are to understand this line to relate to l'Oste's treasonable complicity with Spain, of which an account will be given further on. Also, l'escrivain, in the closing line stands for the same individual.

^117:2 We shall see that the two Spanish couriers were arrested at the post office in Paris. Le Pelletier confuses all this from not happening to know that l'Oste is the scrivener, so he applies it to the affair of Lafin, whose messenger, when carrying Spanish despatches, had thrown them into the river when he found himself pursued. Unfortunately, when he finds himself in the difficulty which this involves him in, he glazes till he has forced the words to fit his erroneous view. He had far better have stated the difficulty, and said that he could not harmonize the text. But he very rarely trips thus.

^123:1 Le Grand Chyren is the anagram of Henri le Grand. Before mounting the throne, he bore the name of Vendosme, from his father Antoine de Bourbon, Duke of Vendome and King of Navarre. In the first Quatrain of the series, Henri Quatre, Vendosme was anagrammatically given as Mendosus; as to Chiren it is the precise anagram of Henri, as spelt in the old language Henric, from the Latin Henricus. Numerous etymologies have been assigned to Henry. Camden derived it from honore, Verstegan from the Teutonic Han, a haven, and Rice, Saxon for rich. Killian writes it Heynrick, or Heymrick, rich home. This is very nearly right, but now it is generally considered that rick stands for powerful; so chief of a house or district.

^123:2 Los, old word for glory. Latin, laus.

	 
		"A la sainte divinite,
		 Soit los, honeur, et poteste."
		               Le Mystere des Actes des Apotres.
		
		 

^123:3 Latin, victor, conqueror.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

 

Louis XIII

(1610-1643.)

PUNISHMENT OF THE GREAT MONTMORENCY (OCTOBER 30, 1632.) [I. 113.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 18.

	 
		Le lys Dauffois [*1] portera [*2] dans Nanci
		 Jusques en Flandres electeur de l'Empire;
		 Neufve obturee [*3] an grand Montmorency,
		 Hors lieux prouves [*4] delivre [*5] a clere peyne. [*6]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Dauphin shall carry his lily standards into Nancy, just as in Flanders the Elector of Treves shall be carried prisoner of the Spaniards into Brussels. A new prison will be given to the great Montmorency, who will be delivered for execution into the hands of Clerepeyne. This man will behead him in a spot not devoted to executions.
		
		 I HAVE given this in prose, as it could only yield ingenious doggerel in verse.

[p. 126]

Louis XIII., of whom it may be remarked that he was the first who bore the title of Dauphin de France since the publication of Century IX., in 1506, entered Nancy on September 25, 1633, a day after his army. In 1635 he enters Flanders on behalf of the Elector, whom the Spaniards had, on t e 26th of March of that year, carried prisoner to Brussels. Nostradamus then reverts to October 30, 1632, when the great Montmorency was executed for rebellion, being first confined in the newly built (neufve obturee) Hotel de Ville at Toulouse. In the courtyard of this building Clerepeyne, a soldier, shall cut off his head, and not, as ought to have been the case, at the place appointed for public executions, such as was La Give at Paris.

It so happens that Clerepeyne's name is fully attested by Etienne Joubert and by the Chevalier de Jant, both contemporary with the event. Further than this, M. Motret has brought to light, after minute historic research, that the family, by solicitation of the King, could obtain only two concessions of mere formality--that the execution should be with closed doors, and by a soldier in lieu of the common headsman. The place publique or marche would be the place mentioned in the official order.

If the reader will carefully give his attention to the full drift of this quatrain, when the mere difficulty of verbal contortion has been resolved, he must feel that the prognostication has to be reckoned as one of the most astounding of oracles ever set forth in history. A French King takes Nancy. The Elector of Treves is bandied about between France and Spain, like a shuttlecock of State; and then, by name, comes the execution of the great Montmorency, detailed with, it is true, the brevity of Tacitus, but, when understood, with a singular felicity of detail implied in the pregnant words neufve obturee, of the newly built town

[p. 127]

hall. Not in the market-place is he executed, but in the central courtyard. Let clere peyne (clara poena) stand merely for celebrated attainder, the thing is still prodigious beyond all precedent. But when you know, in addition, that a part of Nostradamus's prophetic method consists in using every possible play of words, including paronomasia and anagram, and you find that the soldier who acted as headsman--a man called upon by chance to gratify the almost absurd sensibilities of the family--was Clerepeyne, a name that corresponds to a title with the two words employed by the prophet, then, indeed, the marvel mounts into the stupendous. It cannot be paralleled out of the works of the individual we are busy with. It is incredible, and yet you must believe it. It is not to be understood, but it must be accepted. Joubert, de Jant, the Cure de Louvicamp, and Motret, have all contributed to its historical confirmation on independent lines. It was in print, beyond possibility of gainsaying, more than fifty years before any of the events occurred. Clerepeyne could not have been even born at the time his name was being put through the printing press at Lyons. The mind that can realize all these details, and then be content to fall back upon chance to explain them, or upon the verbal fact that visions must be visionary--an axiom quite as philosophic, by-the-bye, as Hume's "Essay on Miracles" is built upon--is a mind not at all to be envied, Such incredulity is more astounding than the prophecy itself. It is easier to believe the prophecy than the philosopher who says he does not believe it. The Tower is below London Bridge. Has anybody ever asked "why?" This 18th quatrain of Century IX. of Nostradamus is just as much a fact as the Tower of London is, and vastly more impregnable. Intelligent people will be amused by an explanation; but the substantive fact can stand without any,

[p. 128]

till the day of Doom if necessary. It is only some human popinjay, Plato Pry, the philosopher, who would like to gossip to us the How, and so sport another borrowed feather in his feather-brain,--or hum us with another bee from his bonnet; that hive of mad insects.

THE CONSPIRACY OF CINQ MARS (MARCH 13, 1642.) [I. 115.]

 Century VIII--Quatrain 68.

	 
		Vieux Cardinal par la jeusne deccu, [*1]
		 Hors de sa charge sa verra desarme,
		 Arles ne monstres [*2] double [*3] soit apperceu;
		 Et Liqueduct [*4] et le Prince embausme.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The old cardinal is supplanted by a young man, and will see himself deprived of his charge, and disarmed. [Le Pelletier renders]: If Arles you do not show, in a manner that shall be visible, a counterpart of the treaty, then the man who will cause himself to be conveyed by water will be embalmed, and the Prince also.
		
		 The above is the contortion to which Le Pelletier resorts to force out of it the sense it undoubtedly contains. My proposed reading reduces the difficulty.

The old Cardinal Richelieu shall find himself supplanted by the young Cinq Mars. He was but twenty-two when he achieved this bit of dexterous Court intrigue against Richelieu, [*5] the most ruse fox in Europe, as rumour ran.

[p. 129]

Cinq Mars was his own protege, and no doubt threw him with a trick learned from his master. A sprightly youngster of the apt breed can learn such things quickly. But when the cardinal was at Arles he learnt that a certain treasonable treaty was negotiated with Spain by his rival in the name of the King's brother, and this made known brought Richelieu back to power straight. Now, if we read the line

Arles, le monstre double soit apperceu:
 At Arles, let the monster diploma (treacherous treaty) be discovered,--

or Cinq Mars himself might be the double monster,--it would be but a gentle emendation in a classic line, and it makes the sense run well. Richelieu returned by water (Liqueduct) from Tarascon to Lyons, by the Rhone, with his bed upon the boat, but sick unto death, carrying Cinq Mars and De Thou prisoners along with him. In the same style he descended the Seine from Fontainebleau to Paris, where he died, two months later, on December 4, 1642. Louis XIII. died on the 14th of the following May. Both were embalmed, which was the practice then customary. The King when dead becomes a Prince again, when the breath was out of the body that 4th of December. Le roi est mort, vive le Roy Louis XIV.

IMPROVEMENT IN FIREARMS (1630-1671.) [I. 116.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 44.

	 
		Quand l'animal a l'homme domestique,  [*1] [p. 130]
		 Apres grands peines et sauts viendra parler,
		 Le foudre a vierge [*1] sera sit [*2] malefique,
		 De terre prinse [*3] et suspendue en l'air.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When the dog, [*4] after many trials, shall begin to leap and speak, the powder loaded by ram-rod shall spread destruction round (sera tres malefique.) Powder taken from the earth and exploded in the air.
		
		 When the firelock shall have been invented after many trials, and shall speak through the mouth of the gun, with recoil [sauts, or kick], after the powder-charge is well driven home with the ramrod, it will be most murderous by explosion in the air. The invention of the musket dates 1630. Troops, Le Pelletier says, were first armed with it in 1671. Nostradamus, it is to be observed, anticipates by an ingenious amplification and periphrasis the very name chien, by which the French designate this portion of the lock. It would not have served its purpose for the name of the same thing in English. This anticipation of the slang term of manufacture, a hundred years before the thing itself was used or named, seems to show an intimacy with what would be called matters of chance, that is inconceivable and beyond all comprehensibility.

I cannot but append here a translation of Guynaud's remarks upon this quatrain. They are, I think, the funniest that occur in the whole book. He says:

"Nostradamus warns us here that two prodigious things are to occur at last: one, that the industry and care of man will arrive at such a point that a domestic animal, such as dogs are, will be got to speak. For to imagine that this can be intended of birds is out of the question quite, as they are excluded from the list of domestic animals created by God for the service of man, as quadrupeds are. The words of the two first lines of the

[p. 131]

prophecy are Quand apres grande peine l'animal domestique viendra parler a l'homme et qu'il sautera,--just as dogs do in approaching their master. A  thing is to happen that is no less astonishing: a demon is to mingle himself with powder, and suddenly transport a girl into the air, when she will remain suspended for possibly a whole day long, according to these words: 'La foudre a vierge sera si malefique; de terre prinse et surpendue en l'air.' The critics may suppose that to mean that the girl will be hanged; but this is not so, in my opinion, because the word malefique is derived from the Latin maleficus, which in itself indicates a maleficent spirit delighting to work evil, as the devil always is."--GUYNAUD, "Concordances," p. 271.

Footnotes

^125:1 Dauffois, for Dauphinois synonym, for Dauphin.

^125:2 Portera, for supportera, says Le Pelletier. For my part, it seems best to leave it to its natural rendering, that he will carry his colours into Nancy.

^125:3 Latin, obturare, to shut up in.

^125:4 Prouves is for approuves.

^125:5 Delivre, is for livre.

^125:6 This is a play upon words, unrecognized by Garencieres, as he did not know that Clerepeyne was the name of the man who cut off Montmorency's head, although, of course, Garencieres is quite alive to the fact that the quatrain refers to Louis XIII. and the great Montmorency. In Latin clara poena means celebrated punishment. Here is another instance of the mention of a name of an obscure individual that history for a moment flashes light upon, and then drops him back into the mud of oblivious ooze for ever,--emblem apt of Fame! This was written, if not Printed, a good eighty years before Clerepeyne became the midge-mote of a sunbeam upon that late autumnal day in history, when the night struck chilly on high roofs in Dauphiny.

^128:1 Latin, decisus, suppressed cut off.

^128:2 Ne monstres. I think there is a printer's error here in the texte-type, and that we should read le monstre.

^128:3 Double, diploma, or duplicate of a treaty.

^128:4 Latin, ille aqua ductus, he that is taken by water.

^128:5 Richelieu, if you examine him by Philippe de Champagne's splendid triple portrait of him, hanging in our Gallery, may be read as if in life by any physiognomist who pleases to devote the time to it. I have gazed many a time, through long years, with gifted friends and others, and oftener still alone, into those heartless eyes, attracted irresistibly (I only now see why) by the vast discrepancy between the world-wide renown of this French Minister, and his cynically petty face-sly, vulpine, unfeeling, unprincipled, spiteful, a coxcomb of feminine manners, of an [p. 129] egotism and paltry vanity inordinate, but of a refinement, showing the highest social culture, a tongue that could gloze with ladies; he might, by lettre de cachet, have shut up a French Walsingham in the Bastille to prevent his own overthrow; but as to coping with him or a Burleigh as a statesman, as an equal in any powerful cabinet in Europe, by force of character, he could not have done it. Artifice, backed by the force of France, then rising into unity of action, or helped by circumstances that tied the hands of his antagonist, he might even throw a giant unawares. Richelieu was an artificial contriver, not a born ruler, if a mature face of fifty be any index to the volume or memoir of a man's life.

^129:1 Arrange these words, l'animal domestique a l'homme, i.e. the dog.

^130:1 Latinism, fulmen a virga, saltpetre; that is, the powder and ram-rod.

^130:2 Romance, si, synonym of tres, very.

^130:3 Romance, prinse, prise, taken, brought.

^130:4 The chien is the cock or hammer of the lock.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

 

Louis XIV

(1643-1715.)

COMMENCEMENT OF HIS PERSONAL REIGN (MARCH 10, 1661). [I. 118.]

 Quatrain added to the Xth Century. [*1]

	 
		Quand le fourchu sera soustenu de deux paux, [*2]
		 Avec six demy-corps [*3] et six sizeaux ouverts,
		 Le tres puissant Seigneur, heritier des crapaux,
		 Alors subjugera sous soy tout l'univers.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When a fork sustained by two stakes (i.e. V, fourchu, sustained by two stakes upright, II. = M, a thousand,) and six half horns and six scissors open (CCCCCC, XXXXXX). (Half horn is the cor de chasse, or French horn cut in half, like a C, making altogether 1600).
		
		The very mighty King, inheritor of the toads, shall subjugate to his power the whole universe.
		
		 THESE TWO first lines are clumsily employed in giving the date, but still were in print fifty-five years before the date named.

Mazarin died on March 9, 1661. The following day Louis XIV. became full inheritor of the lilies, took the reins of government, and subjected everything to his will.

Upon this Le Pelletier remarks that the toads, as emblematic of France, were standards borne under the early kings of the Merovingian race. The fleurs-de-lys were of later introduction, under Clovis, son of Childeric I., the founder of the Christian monarchy of the Franks.

[p. 133]

TREATY OF WESTPHALIA, ETC. (1648-1661). [I. 119.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 7.

	 
		Le grand conflit qu'on appreste a Nancy;
		 L'Aemathien [*1] dira, tout je soubmets;
		 L'isle Britanne par [*2] vin sel en soucy;
		 Hem-mi [*3] deux Phi [*4] longtemps ne tiendra Metz.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A great conflict will approach Nancy;
		 The Aemathion will say, I submit all to me;
		 The isle of Britain will be agitated for lack of force and wisdom;
		 Metz will not hold out long against the two Philips.
		
		 Nancy was taken in 1660 by the French, when they razed the fortifications and united it with France. It appears to me that the first two lines of this quatrain should have formed the last two, but how any such error as that could have crept in is quite inexplicable. The reader will discern that a difference of about twelve years exists between the dates involved in the two distichs, that, as they are given, they are contrary to chronology, and that for such disarrangement

[p. 134]

no reason is assignable. If this is the way in which visions presented themselves to our seer, there is no reason to suppose, as I do, that he shook up the separate quatrains purposely to destroy a sequence that would have rendered them too easy of interpretation. It might have been a printer's error.

We have already seen what is the classical meaning to be attributed to Aemathion--that it relates to the sun and to Alexander the Great. In Nostradamus it refers to Louis XIV. (Louis le Grand). Of him it is to be remembered that he assumed as his emblem and that of France, the sun, with the motto Nec pluribus impar. Now, the sun, in the language of alchemists, stands for gold, and, in the metaphorical language of the Church, for Christianity. Gold is all the Christianity that many Christians possess. Les Solaires, in Nostradamus, is used for Christians. It is especially connected with France, inasmuch as her King is held at Rome, that centre of titles and of prelatical humility, to be Christianissimus. But this stout Capetian glorious King meant it of sovereignty. It was to signify, as Nostradamus has it, tout le soubmets. What is this man's own choice of a posy, to be cut around his signet? Nec pluribus impar. What is the axiom his blind self-pride invents when the death of Mazarin emancipates him from tutelage, and he grips the reins of France in his sole left hand (in 1661)? L'Etat, c'est Moi. Can insolence rise higher? Wait an odd century or so and see a scaffold spring before your Tuilleries windows, see an Aemathion, but twice removed in blood, roll his head, red, gushing, spurting, and bounding on the sawdust-sprinkled planks there; its motto, could it speak, would be your axiom recast fatally, L'Etat du Capet! (Caput!)

We have not quite concluded yet. When the treaty of Westphalia shall be agreed to between France and Philip

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] IV. of Spain in 1648, and before the war of Succession to, seat Philip V., grandson of Louis XIV., on the throne, Metz shall be ceded to France, and lose for ever its title of Imperial City, between the two Philips--Philip IV. and, Philip V., protege of France.

England about the same time, in revolution kindled by that imp of malevolence, Richelieu, shall behead its king, 1649, and be in anxiety because of the want of force and wisdom (vin et sel). This symbol Le Pelletier interprets thus: Wine is the symbol of force, because of its heat; and salt, because of its incorruptibility, is the symbol of wisdom.. I think it clear that this is not to be the interpretation here. He does not allude to want of force and wisdom; but anxiety (soucy) is caused by force and wisdom (a l'envers, as he puts again in reference to England, Century IX. 49; vol. i. 140 applied in the wrong direction.

This, though a highly unsatisfactory quatrain, as I have: shown above, is, nevertheless, one of the most remarkable of the whole series. The time of the Westphalian treaty synchronises with the revolt in England--a revolt which we have seen to be fostered out of mere pique by the vulpine Richelieu; a Churchman plotting royal murder, taught by Rome's consent that regicide was God's service, when a king (Henri III.) stood in her way; and when the Church once corrupted herself, baptizing her St. Bartholomew whose emblem was a knife, in blood, she absolved Paris, [cite au glaive, i. 182] who in midsummer madness stained her kennels red. The example of Whitehall--in re-enactment before the Tuilleries (vin et sel a l'envers), with force and wisdom converted into violence and democratic sensibility,--next turned Paris rouge, and the blood carnation burst into bloom at every street corner.

[p. 136]

	 
		"When nations are to perish in their sins,
		 'Tis in the Church the leprosy begins;"
		
		 says the wise, mild, thoughtful, but much underrated bard, Cowper, who has done Gilpin inimitably, and Homer better than anybody else, by a long way.

LOSS OF DE LA FERRIERE'S SQUADRON (1655). [I. 121.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 87.

	 
		Classe [*1] Gauloise n'approche de Corsegue, [*2]
		 Moins de Sardaigne, tu t'en repentiras;
		 Trestous mourrez frustres de l'aide grogne;
		 Sang nagera, captif ne me croiras.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Approach not Corsica, thou fleet of France,
		 Nor yet Sardinia, lest thou rue the chance:
		 For ye no headland aids, ye all shall die,
		 The captive drown, for unbelieved am I.
		
		 M. le Pelletier tells us of a French squadron, commanded by the Chevalier de la Ferriere in 1655, that foundered in the Gulf of Lyons in coasting Corsica and Sardinia. All hands perished: they did not, he says, pass Cape Pourceau. He points out that Grogne is the synonym of Pourceau, which is a cape with a little port in the Mediterranean. This may have more to support it than appears at first sight, but I think it much simpler to take it for what it says. Grogne is the same as Groin, cape, or headland which runs out into the sea. In other words: nothing will put off to you from the headland where you founder; there will you all be drowned; for what the better will your master pilot be for this advertisement of mine? Jean de Rian was this master pilot, and Le Captif was his nickname, as he had been a slave.

[p. 137]

Though perfectly useless for interpretation, Garencieres makes annotations on this quatrain, that have an interest of their own. He takes the fulfilment to have been in 1555, just about the time when the quatrains were copied out for presentation to Henri II. But he remarks that Greigne, which is the word in his reading, signifies galley in the Provencal language, which was that of Nostradamus by his mother's side; and this makes very good sense: "they shall all founder without a galley putting out to them from the shore."

Of course Garencieres knows nothing about Jean de Rian, or the curious precision with which Nostradamus gives us his nickname Captif; but he appends to his "Poor prisoner, thou shalt not believe me" the following comment that is worth recording, as it may furnish a link to some inquiry in the future:

"We find in this work many examples of those who went to consult with the author concerning the success of their undertakings, as did the Earl of Sommerive, before the besieging of Bagnole; to whom he answered, that he should leave the trees loaded with a new kind of fruit, that is to say, the rebels, whom he caused to be hanged on the trees."

FORTIFICATIONS OF VAUBAN AND THE CANAL OF LANGUENDOC
 (1659-1666). [I. 122.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 93.

	 
		Les ennemies du fort bien esloignes,
		 Par chariots conduict le bastion,
		 Par sur les murs de Bourges esgrongnes, [*1]
		 Quand Hercules bastira l'Haemathion. [*2]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When the enemy are driven from French soil,
		 And earthworks or bastions are brought by carts;
		 When the walls of Bourges have crumbled by time,
		 Then will Aemathion undertake a work of Hercules.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 138]

When the peace of the Pyrenees, concluded with Spain in 1659, had removed the enemy from the French frontiers, and Vauban had invented earthworks: at least so says Le Pelletier; Nostradamus only says he used them. Moreri tells us that the castle of Grosse Tour at Bourges was not repaired by Louis XIV., and was already partly ruined in 1651. This line seems to be a whimsical, but special announcement of the fact. Then Aemathion, or Louis XIV., will undertake the Herculean labour of constructing the Canal of Languedoc, which opened the Mediterranean to the ocean. It was begun by Paul Riquet in 1666, and terminated in 1681. It cost thirty-four million francs. It is said that when Vauban visited it he gave some useful hints that were acted upon with advantage. Vauban, like Turenne, was a glory, not to France, but to mankind. He was truly great, for he despised riches, and loved truth to indiscretion; yet his life shows that in judgment he much excelled those who loved truth less.

PEACE OF THE PYRENEES (NOVEMBER 7, 1659). [I. 123.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 58.

	 
		An temps du dueil clue le felin [*1] monarque,
		 Guerroyera le jeune Aemathien:
		 Gaule bransler, perecliter la barque, [*2]
		 Tenter [*3] Phossen, [*4] an Ponant [*5] entretien.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When the court of France shall be in mourning, the cat-like monarch shall make war against the young Aemathien. France will stagger; the bark of St. Peter be in danger. Marseilles will be taken. Two great personages will meet in the West of France.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 139]

More at large this may be read, that at the death of Louis XIII., when the French Court is in mourning, shrewd Philip IV. of Spain will make war on the boy King. France will be greatly shaken (1648-1653) by the civil war of the Fronde, whilst Rome will be endangered by the growth of Jansenism. This is Le Pelletier's version. Garencieres says that Paris is signified, as she carries a ship represented in her arms. The 2nd of March, 1660, Louis XIV. enters Phocea or Marseilles by a breach, after which it submits to him. He then hurries to the west of the Isle of Conference on the Bidassoa, and there concludes the peace of the Pyrenees with Philip IV., and marries his daughter, the infanta Maria Theresa, of Austria.

THE EXPEDITION TO IRELAND IN SUPPORT OF JAMES II. (1689-1691). [I. 125.]

 Century II.--Quatrain 68.

	 
		De l'Aquilon les efforts seront grands,
		 Sur l'Ocean sera la porte ouverte,
		 Le regne en l'Isle sera reintegrand,
		 Tremblera Londres par [*1] voilles [*2] descouverte.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Ireland, on the north of England, shall make great efforts. The door of the ocean shall be opened to the fleets of France; the kingdom in the island of Ireland shall be set up again; London shall tremble at the discovery of sails.
		
		 When William III., in 1688, shall have established himself on the throne, when James II. absconded; Ireland will still be a stronghold, and the French fleets, commanded by Chateau Renaud and Tourville, will convoy the King to Ireland, in spite of the combined fleets of England and Holland, in 1689-1690. They will become masters of the sea, and London will for a moment tremble before the

[p. 140]

fleets of Louis XIV. This is Le Pelletier's statement. After the fight off Beachy Head on June 30, 1690, it seems to have been pretty much as he relates; for Smollett's account (ed. 1822, i. 93) is that;

"Torrington retreated without further interruption into the mouth of the Thames; and, having taken precautions against any attempts of the enemy in that quarter, returned to London, the inhabitants of which were overwhelmed with consternation."

There is a most remarkable passage in the work of M. Bouys on this quatrain. He professes to apply it to the coming victory that was to confer on Napoleon the coveted command of the seas, saying that you need not always wait until after the event to interpret Nostradamus. His own conduct, however, in this very instance does but enforce the rule. He pretends not to know anything of the fulfilment in 1689-1690. In furtherance of the same view he cites Century VIII., Quatrain 37:

	 
		La forteresse aupres de la Thamise
		 Cherra pour lors le roi dedans serre,
		 Aupres du pont sera vu en chemise,
		 Un devant mort, puis dans le fort barre.
		
		 The word cherra presents the only difficulty here as to the mere words. It is the future of the verb choir, tomber, to fall. Of the prophecy I know of no interpretation. Garencieres significantly quotes Dan. iv. 10: "The dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies."

WAR OF THE CAMISARDS (1702-1704). [I. 126.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 38.

	 
		L'entree de Blaye par Rochelle et l'Anglois,
		 Passera outre le grand Aemathien:
		 Non loin d'Agen attendra le Gaulois,
		 Secours Narbonne deceu par entretien.
		
		 [p. 141]

 Translation.

	 
		The great Aemathion shall pass out of the Garonne at Blaye, the seaport of Bordeaux, no longer impeded by Rochelle and the English; the Camisards shall look for aid from their co-religionists on the side of Agen and Narbonne, but will be disappointed by an arrangement.
		
		 Louis XIV. shall pass out by the Pate de Blaye, a fort of that name, built by him in 1689 to command the entrance of the Gironde against the English and the Protestants of Rochelle. The Camisards in revolt in the Cevennes (les Gaulois) will wait at Agens and Narbonne for promised help, but quite in vain, after the submission of Jean Cavalier (1704) to Marshal Villars, at a Conference held at Nimes. Louis XIV. was so beset by the enemies of France that he sent the Marshal into Languedoc to pacify the districts he despaired of subduing by force.

In this quatrain, Garencieres shows that there is some analogy between Aemathien, which we are quite sure is Louis XIV. from the frequency of the application to him. and the country of Macedon, so-called, where Caesar and Pompey fought their last battle in the field of Pharsalia; and he quotes Lucan's line--

Bella per Aemathios plus quam civilia campos.

It is very probable that line was in the mind of Nostradamus at the moment.

WAR OF THE SPANISH SUCCESSION (1701-1713). [I. 127.]

 Century IV.--Quatrain 2.

	 
		Par mort la France prendra voyage a faire,
		 Classe [*1] par mer, marcher Incurs Pyrenees,
		 Espaigne en trouble, marcher gent militaire;
		 Des plus grands Dames en France emmenees.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		By reason of a death, France shall, undertake a foreign expedition. The [p. 142] fleet will go by sea, the troops will cross the Pyrenees. Spain in trouble will march her military forces, because great ladies have migrated to France.
		
		 Philip V., grandson of Louis le Grand, by will of Charles II., will ascend the Spanish throne. But Austria, England, Holland, Prussia, Portugal, and Savoy will coalesce to support the pretensions of the Archduke Charles. The fleets of France will put to sea, her armies will cross the Pyrenees. Spain, in two camps, will be trampled by troops in every direction: all springing out of Bourbon marriages with the two Infantas; one, daughter of Philip III. married to Louis XIII., the other, a daughter of Philip IV., married to Louis XIV. This war lasted twelve years, and was disastrous to France. Philip V. found himself chased from Spain by the Austrians. By the Peace of Utrecht, 1713, the Spanish monarchy was dismembered, and some of his earlier conquests were snatched from Louis XIV.

OVERTHROW OF PHILIP V., grandson of Louis XIV. (1706). [I. 129.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 64.

	 
		L'Aemathion passer monts Pyrenees,
		 En Mars Narbon [*1] ne fera resistance,
		 Par mer terre fera si [*2] grand menee,
		 Cap [*3] n'ayant terre seure pour demeurance.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Aemathion is to pass the Pyrenean Mount;
		 In Narbo Martius no resistance shows;
		 By sea and land are greatest efforts made;
		 The Capet holds no foot of land is safe.
		
		 Louis XIV. will leap the Pyrenees, and will treat (as we have before seen) with the Camisards of Narbonne. He

[p. 143]

will make desperate efforts by sea and land. But the Capetian, his grandson, Philip V., will be driven out of Spain by the Imperial forces, and not retain a foot of soil on which to live.

In all these passages of history, quite detached as they seem to be, we find analogies springing up at all points: Aemathion the Macedonian, and Louis le Grand; the Spanish succession which came up again in Louis Philippe's time, even to uniting the very two names of Louis XIV. and his grandson Philip V. in his own baptismal one. Louis wished to expel a Charles, and Louis Philippe actually expelled Charles X. Leibnitz made an express journey to Paris to persuade Louis XIV. to undertake a grand expedition against Egypt. Napoleon, the next Aemathion or Apollon leading France to mischief, was thrust into an Egyptian expedition, and entered into a desperate Spanish war to follow, that crippled France again. History repeats itself, they say. It seems at every turn to be perpetually engaged in a process of replaiting its old lines and once-discarded threads.

Footnotes

^132:1 Added to the text in the edition of 1605.

^132:2 Paux, plural of pal, pieu, a term of blazonry, stake.

^132:3 Read cors, horns.

^133:1 Aemathien, or Emathion, Le Pelletier says, son of Cephalus and Aurora, who opened the gates of the morning to the sun. I do not find this account of him anywhere. Cephalus is the chaste Joseph of mythology, tempted by Aurora. But Hesiod makes him father of Phaeton by her. Possibly M. le Pelletier has mistaken Emathion for Phaeton. Generally. Emathion is reckoned as son of Titan and Aurora, and a King of Macedonia. His connection in some way however with the sun is certain, and this suffices for the use made of his name by Nostradamus. Emathiun is given by Suidas as a proper name. Now, Emathios is daily, with but the change of one letter. Further than this Emathios is Macedonian, and Alexander is called Emathius dux, as in Milton, "the Emathian conqueror bid spare;" implying that Louis le Grand should be a counterpart to Alexander the Great, an impostor who also pretended birth from Apollo. By which flight of ambition he bastardized himself by choice, dishonoured his mother, and put his father outside the door. Shakespeare says, "By this sin fell the angels;" but a too prosperous fool seems equally ready to annihilate himself by it, and all belonging to him, of his own act.

^133:2 Latin, per, through.

^133:3 Romance, emmy, entre, between.

^133:4 Phi, for Philip.

^136:1 Latin, classis, fleet.

^136:2 Carseque, Romance for Corsica.

^137:1 Romance, esgrongne, or esgrune, pulverised.

^137:2 Turn this; when Aemathion shall build Hercules.

^138:1 Latin, felinus, like a cat.

^138:2 La barque of St. Peter, the Holy Seat, Rome.

^138:3 Latin, tentare, to assail.

^138:4 Phocen is another reading. Marseilles, founded by the Phocians, A.C. 660.

^138:5 Old word for west, or sundown.

^139:1 Latin, per, because of.

^139:2 Voiles, for vessels.

^141:1 Latin, classis, fleet.

^142:1 Latin, Narbo Martius, Narbonne, in the department de l'Aude, said to be so called from its founder Martius. [See p. 140, ix. 38.]

^142:2 Romance, si, very.

^142:3 Cap, for Capet.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 144]

 

Louis XV

MINORITY OF Louis XV. (SEPTEMBER 1, 1715). [I. 131.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 15.

	 
		Coeur, vigueur, gloire, le regne changera.
		 De tous points contre ayant son adversaire:
		 Lors France enfance par mort subjuguera;
		 Un grand Regent sera lors plus contraire.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Heart, vigour, glory, change with change of reign,--
		 At every point opposed by something cross:
		 An infant is set up in France by death;
		 And a great Regent helps the contrary.
		
		 WITH the death of Louis XIV., the splendour of his reign will pass away, and every point show contrary in his successor. By failure of direct inheritors of the throne, Louis XV., a child of five will rule, under Philippe d'Orleans (un grand Regent), whose vices will show him more contrary to Louis XIV. than even to Louis XV.

DECADENCE OF MONARCHY (1715-1774). [I. 132.]

 Century V.--Quatrain 38.

	 
		Ce grand monarque qu'au mort succedera, [*1]
		 Donnera vie illicite lubrique,
		 Par nonchalance a tous concedera,
		 Qu'a la parfin faudra [*2] la loy Salique.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		He who succeeds to the great monarch dead, will lead an evil and illicit life. By his neglectful habit he will entrust business to the management[p. 145] of others, so that at last (a la parfin, per finem) the Salic law will fail.
		
		 In other words, this is a plain announcement that the reign of Louis XV. will serve as a simple prelude or introduction to the establishment of a Republic; the annihilation of the Salic law; and of the French throne.

Footnotes

^144:1 Ordo. He who shall succeed to the great monarch dead.

^144:2 Faudra, future tense of faillir, fail, or disappear.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

 

England

	 
		CHANGES OF GOVERNMENT IN ENGLAND (1501-1791). [I. 135.]
		
		   Century VI.--Quatrain 57.

	 
		Sept fois changer verrez gent [*1] Britannique.
		 Teints en sang en deux cens nonante an;
		 Franche [*2] non point, par [*3] appuy Germanique;
		 Aries [*4] doubte son pole Bastarnan. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		You will see the British nation change seven times, stained with blood, in two hundred and ninety years; but not so France, thanks to the strength of its Germanic Kings [of the Capetian race]. The sign of the Ram will not know (doubte) the northern district (son pole Bastarnan), so changed will it be.
		
		 ENGLAND will change its government seven times in a period of 290 years, inundated with blood, says Le Pelletier,--making this long run of years commence at what he calls the Renaissance (1501-1791). Not so in France; thanks to the firmness of the Germanic kings, she will hold out till 1792, I take this to be, in effect, a French endeavour to chalk out a grand epoch in French annals. Poland (la Bastarnie) will be dismembered. The first partition took place in 1772. There will arise in the north of Europe;--Peter the Great ascending the Russian throne, 1682, and Lutheranism triumphing in Germany, 1517,--so that Aries cannot identify

[p. 147]

the regions adjacent to its northern pole (son pole Bastarnan).

M. le Pelletier gives an elaborate statement of what he conceives to be the seven Revolutions in England (1501-1791). But starting from the Renaissance, at the fancy date 1501, he vitiates the whole of the interpretation as it relates to England; but for the last half of the quatrain he is excellent. His interpretation of the fourth line is masterly. Garencieres gives a lengthy annotation, to me in the main unintelligible, but he makes the Period to run out about the year 1845; in which year I can see nothing to chronicle but the Maynooth Grant of L26,000 per annum. He says the two first lines refer to England, and he leaves the English nation to interpret them. We shall shortly try to do so.

(1) The Revolution Le Pelletier dates 1532, when Henry VIII. is proclaimed by Parliament the head of the Church; 1534 this should be. (2) Re-establishment of Popery under Queen Mary. (3) Elizabeth comes back to Protestantism. (4) Commonwealth follows upon death of Charles I. (5) Restoration under Charles II. (6) William III. takes the throne of James II. (7) The House of Hanover succeeds.

This is exceedingly faulty. It omits as one Revolution the most important of all, if consequences are to be regarded,. that is, the lapse of the Tudor race in Elizabeth and the succession of the Stuarts. Another very weak point is the commencing of the 290 years prior to the first issue of the quatrains. According to this, two of the Revolutions were already elapsed. A man does not prophesy of what is past, Nostradamus was writing in the reign of Queen Mary, so that the first Revolution would naturally count from 1558, when Elizabeth re-introduced Protestantism.

Now that we have contrived a firmer basis, let us see what this leads to.

[p. 148]

No. 1. Elizabeth comes to the throne, November 17, 1558.

No. 2. James I. (Stuart succession), March 24, 1603. Queen Elizabeth dies exactly one hundred years after her namesake, Queen of Henry VII.

No. 3. Commonwealth on death of Charles I., January 30, 1649; Protectorate, Cromwell, December 16, 1653.

No. 4. Restoration, Charles II., May 29, 1660 (on his 30th birthday).

No. 5. William III. and Mary, November 5, 1668; Revolution (Gunpowder Day).

No. 6. Hanoverian succession, George I., May 21, 1714.

No. 7. Reform Bill, June 17, 1832. (Dulling the lustre of the Crown, as we shall see the French King mitre.)

Those who wish to prophesy pleasant things can do away with the disagreeable date of the Reform Bill, in part, because the No. 3 Revolution can fairly be interpreted as two Revolutions. Cromwell's usurpation belied the pretended principles of his whole life and conduct prior to that assumption, and can be called a new order of things. This arrangement will obviate the necessity of classifying the Reform Bill as the 7th Revolution. But the 290 years must end where they do, though you can regard the matter in what light you please. But I look upon Cromwell's treason, not to the King, but to himself as a man, as being practically part and parcel of the Commonwealth, or a horn growing out of the head of that rhinoceros or unicorn: nothing more. Given a popular revolt, a self-seeking horn always grows out of the forehead of the beast, till, with a ring in its nostril, it is driven whither its sublime liberties shall dictate.

Take it either way, it seems to me quite beyond the reach of the ordinary human mind, simply left to its own resources, to strike out four lines so pregnant as these, and await silently, for three hundred years, an interpretation, so

[p. 149]

little forced or driven as this is. I may say that to even pack into the space of four lines a mass of assertions so pregnant with hints, is a feat in condensation that no poet has ever equalled. Tacitus, the tersest of historians, has never approached it. No precis writer of the most accomplished skill has ever reduced the facts furnished to him in a well-drawn manuscript to such a compass. He could not, and remain intelligible. To those who will merely look at it in this light it may afford endless matter of reflection and curious study. As a forecast, its appearance to me is purely miraculous. Let any one explain it otherwise who thinks he can; we shall all be ready to learn.

STUART DYNASTY (1603-1649). [I. 138.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 40.

	 
		La jeunne [*1] nay au regne Britannique,
		 Qu'aura le pere mourant recommande
		 Iceluy mort, Lonole [*2] donra [*3] topique, [*4]
		 Et a son fils le regne, demande.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The young Prince of the Kingdom of Britain,
		 Whose dying father will have recommended him;
		 This one being dead, Lonole will perorate,
		 And snatch the kingdom from his very son.
		
		 James I. of England and VI. of Scotland was born June 19, 566: the son of Mary Stuart and Henry Lord Darnley; who, before his assassination by Bothwell, had commended the young prince to the fidelity of the Scotch lords. He ascended the throne of England in 1603, and under him England and Scotland were first denominated Great Britain

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] (au regne Britannique). [*1] When King James I. dies (Iceluy mort), Lonole will seduce England with artificial rhetoric, and demand the kingdom and the life of his son Charles I.

Lonole is the right reading, according to the Texte-type; others read Doudle, and Garencieres reads Londre. He also, fancies that the prophecy concerns Charles II., because Charles I. commended him to the people of England. It is rather curious that Lonole should give the anagram of Olleon, or Olluun, as Napoleon does that of Napolluun and Apollyon. Cromwell and he have many analogies and points of contact, whether in history, character, or prophecy. But a further anagram, still more wonderful, springs here into view, which, I believe, has hitherto escaped all the commentators. Ole Nol, or Old Noll, has always been the Protector's nickname, and in the first form is letter for letter Lonole. It may stand for Apollyon also, and as such for "Old Nick" too.

I ought not to pass away from this mass and congeries of singular hints and disclosures without pointing out. the remarkable fact or link connecting James I. with Nostradamus,

[p. 151]

and the particular quatrain we are now dealing with. James I. was born June 19, 1566, and thirteen days after, July 2, 1566, Nostradamus breathed his last. This quatrain, once understood, is one of the clearest and most extraordinary of the forecasts of Nostradamus. The commencing event, the birth of James I., just touches his own death; and the last event, the death of Charles I., 1649, stretches to nearly a hundred years later.

Anagram seems to have been once a passion with the people. We find the white cloth of Lincoln in the thirteenth century alluded to as "Drap blanc de Nicole," that standing for Lincoln. [Le Roux de Lincy "Livre des Prov. Franc." i. 195.]

FALL OF CHARLES I. (MARCH 31, 1646). [I. 139.]

 Century III.--Quatrain 80.

	 
		Du regne Anglais le digne dechasse, [*1]
		 Le conseiller part [*2] ire, [*3] mis a feu,
		 Ses adherans iront si has tracer, [*4]
		 Que le bastard sera demy receu.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		He who had the right to reign in England, shall be driven from the throne, his counsellor abandoned (mis a feu) to the fury of the populace (par ire). His adherents will follow so low a track that the usurper (le bastard) will come to be Protector (demy receu, or half King).
		
		 Garencieres fancies this to relate to Charles II., and, that it is very clear. But evidently le digne dechasse is Charles I. Strafford was surrendered weakly to the unreasoning rage of the people (par ire). The Scotch, his countrymen (ses adherents), will sell him for L40,000 (Hume, vii. 76) to

[p. 152]

the Independents with unexampled baseness (si bas tracer). After this Cromwell (le bastard) will become Protector, or half king (sera demy receu).

This could scarcely be made more remarkable than it is, had it been written historically after the event, as history, than it is now before it, as prophecy. Look, again, at the overwhelming insight and terseness: the King defeated, Strafford sacrificed, the Covenanters' money bargain, and the Protectorate chalked out in decisive outline nearly a century before the realization: and each event is contained in one metrical phrase.

EXECUTION OF CHARLES I. (JANUARY 30, 1649). [L 141.]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 49.

	 
		Gand et Bruceles marcheront contre [*1] Anvers,
		 Senat de Londres mettront a mort leur Roy:
		 Le set et vin luy seront a l'envers,
		 Pour eux avoir le regne en desarroy.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Gand and Brussels will march past Antwerp,
		 The Senate at London will put their King to death;
		 Salt and wine will be applied contrariwise,
		 So that they will set the whole kingdom in disarray.
		
		 Philip IV. in the Netherlands, being at war, will move Gand and Brussels towards Antwerp against Holland in revolt. Holland had, in 1579, detached itself from the Low Countries. Thus Antwerp became the border town of the Spanish possessions. Philip claimed rights over her till the treaty of Westphalia, or Munster, of which we have Terburg's curious portraiture in the National Gallery, con, eluded on October 14, 1648; three months only before the death of Charles I., so that the conjunction of the two events is extraordinarily definite and remarkable.

[p. 153]

The second line is as definite and marvellous as anything that occurs in Nostradamus. By the treaty of Munster it fixes the date to within three months. Garencieres says: "It is the most remarkable of all those [prophecies] that ever Nostradamus was author of." He notifies also, what I think nobody else has, that the number of this quatrain, 49, gives the very year of the occurrence in the seventeenth century For though we in England then called it 1648-49, Nostradamus, by the Gregorian Calendar used in France, would reckon it as 1649. We need lay no stress whatever upon this, for the quatrain wants nothing to strengthen it. Yet, be it the offspring of chance or intention, it is most singular. I have before said how much value lies in mere curiosities, and it is part of my business to point one out whenever I am able.

We have already handled the phrase vin sel at p. 133 and 135 [I. 119], but from a French, and not English point of view; yet even there the line is

L'Isle Britanne par vin set en souci.

--showing the consistency with which the visions must have shaped themselves in the mind of Nostradamus. The one we are treating of now appears in the ninth century of the prophet's quatrains, but the above line occurs in a quatrain of the tenth century. Still, what is said in the one is consistent with what is said in the other. If we call this chance, we shall have to admit an axiom far from self-evident; namely, that method is discernible in chance as well as in madness. Here, as. at disgraceful Old Pancras graveyard, there is clearly a slight derangement of epitaphs,

Bouys and nearly all the commentators treat the figure of le vin et sel, as representing force and wisdom, which were wanting to the King of England. I think we are not

[p. 154]

at all necessitated to adopt this interpretation. Supposing salt and wine in a good sense to symbolize wisdom and power, before we settle that to be their application here, we shall have to understand what a l'envers means. In the first place, it is not the preposition envers, meaning for, or in regard to. It is a noun substantive, masculine, and stands for the wrong side of a fabric, as contrasted with, or opposed to, the right side, called l'endroit. It means that wisdom and power will present their wrong aspect at this juncture, and become intrigue and violence, and will so stand to him (lui seront a l'envers), as that they will convert into their opposites, intrigue and violence. It has the old sense of inversus, as in the Roman de la Rose. A person is there told that on going to bed no sleep will come, but tossing from one side to the other:

	 
		Une heure envers et l'autre adens
		 Come cil qui a mal aus dens.
		
		 Here it reads one hour on the back, another on the teeth. Moliere says of a character (l'Et. ii. 14):

	 
		                      Vous serez toujours....
		 Un envers du bon sens, un jugement a gauche.
		
		 Nothing can better describe the mockery in Westminster Hall of the trial of the King than un jugement a gauche. The third line of the quatrain is the precise equivalent. Vin so nearly resembles vis that it is sure to mean force, the two extremes of which are power and violence, law and lawlessness. We see this very distinctly in the old French word vimaire, force majeure (vis major) and the word further signified storm, tempest, famine, and pestilence (vide Roquefort, s.v.). That wine does not at all definitely stand for power well directed, is plain enough from "the wine of fornication" (Rev. xvii. 2); and that salt is not to be taken

[p. 155]

as wisdom personified with fixity may be gathered, if from nothing else, from the sanctification of the sacramental elements in the Church of Rome; where before salt is used, it is first exorcised, to purify it from the stain of original sin, that passed upon all creation at the fall (Auber's "Symbolisme," iii. 394). Whatever wisdom Godwin, Carlyle, and other modern revolutionists may suppose themselves to have discovered in the character of Cromwell, Nostradamus certainly had formed no such notion of him, as we shall immediately feel assured by the next quatrain. Nostradamus's opinion of Cromwell may determine nothing at all as to the final estimate of that man. I adduce it only to help to settle what he meant by the words we are studying, le sel et vin. The next line is plain enough. The Independents set the whole kingdom by the ears.

I think we have reached a point at which every line of this quatrain has become tolerably clear. A wiseacre, writing about it in the Quarterly Review (vol. xxvi. p. 189) says: "Oedipus himself could not give the sense of the whole verse." This is the way in which people treat a difficult, abstruse, and intricate subject. It is so easy to say we have made up our mind about a man; that he is unintelligible, a charlatan, an impostor; that his forecasts are oracular nonsense, meaning nothing, or that if at times they do light on something, chance has more to do with it than seership or vision. You would certainly think that a sane man, finding in a book,--that indubitably was in print,--in 1558 a line prophesying the death of the King of England nearly a hundred years after, "Senat de Londres mettront a Mort leur Roy," would be struck with astonishment at the clearness of that, rather than with the difficulty of making sense of the other three lines. But this is what prejudice can do with us all.

[p. 156]

CROMWELL'S PROTECTORATE (1653-1658). [I. 142.]

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 76.

	 
		Plus Macelin [*1] clue Roy en Angleterre,
		 Lieu obscur nay [*2] par force aura l'empire,
		 Lasche sans foy sans loy saignera terre:
		 Son temps approche si pres que je souspire.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A Butcher more than king rules England. A man of no birth will seize the government by violence. Of loose morals, without faith or law he will bleed the earth. The, hour approaches me so near that I breathe with difficulty.
		
		 Here we have a most remarkable forecast. It puts in a clear light what view Nostradamus had formed of Cromwell. There appears to have been visually present to him the butcher-like face of Cromwell, with its fleshly conch and hideous warts. This seems to have struck him with such a sense of vividness and horror, that he is willing to imagine that the time is very near at hand. A full century had, however, to elapse; but he sighs as with a present shudder, and the blood creeps:

Son temps s'approche si pres que je souspire.

One of the most remarkable features throughout the work of Nostradamus, is the general absence of any sense of time, apart from the mere enumeration of years as an algebraic or arithmetical formula; further than this, he so regulates and controls his feelings as to appear almost impassable; but this announcement is of such unparalleled and terrific import that he departs from his usual practice and stands horror-stricken as in the presence of a fearful vision.

It was intended to treat here of the portraiture of Cromwell.

[p. 157]

[paragraph continues] To complete, however, my observations, I had to go to Chequers Court, the Print Room, and the National Portrait Gallery. These and other necessary steps occupied so much time that the printers had to commence paging; then, as the enlarged matter could not find room here, there was no alternative but an Appendix, which will be found at <page 305>. My remarks, which make so little show now that they are done, cost me far more trouble than ten time,, the mere amount of writing would. The final settlement depends on the cast at Florence, if still in existence. I have cleared the road for a decisive conclusion; which, though it is not much, is yet something.

Bouys specially comments (p. 109) upon the word Lasche in this quatrain, and takes it to mean cowardly, the same as lache does in modern French. Both forms of the word are alike deduced from the Latin, laxare, laxatus, and then if might well mean of loose morals, as I have rendered it. That the Latin may mean this Bailey's "Facciolati" shows, s.v. Laxitas: "Liber membris cum mollibus fingitur, et liquoris feminei dissolutissimus laxitate"; and Cromwell's dissolute life in early youth has been insisted on by many, though, of course, contradicted by others. Frederic Harrison is the last of these, and passes over the charge of vice with a very light hand, saying that "Such testimony as theirs we cannot trust; but we cannot now refute it." Suffice it to say, I do not think cowardice was what Nostradamus meant to impute to Cromwell.

The obscure birth requires a moment's consideration, as none of the French commentators allude in any way to it. The household of Robert Cromwell, Oliver's father, in Huntingdon, was of the industrious, jog-trot, somewhat over-professingly pious, middle-class order, common enough then in the Eastern counties. What is most remarkable,

[p. 158]

perhaps, is that the homestead, in which he was born, had been built upon the ruins of a convent of Augustine Friars, and that the two estates which came to him, one from his father and the other from his mother's brother, consisted of old church-lands. Oliver's branch of the family had rather fallen away from the county position which such inheritance infers. But it was always the more prominent families that stole, or possessed themselves of, the church-lands at the spoliation, and thus the Cromwells were married in and in with gentry. This scion of the robbers of the Church was soon to develop, on his own account, into a robber of the State; a man of violence and passion quite after the heart of Thomas Carlyle. Carlyle's notion of a hero, is a strong devil in a tantrum, mollifying, now and again, to the drone of a Psalm tune. Cromwell's branch seems to have drifted from the more courtly side to Calvinistic burghers and narrow-souled Independents; whilst Milton, who was born a London citizen, far away from gentry, was floated by his tastes and nature to the Court side of things, to the Bridgewaters, Ludlow Castle (see his deathless Masque of Comus), until a lofty idea of principle,--taken up by an unripe judgment, and dazzled by that false illusion, Liberty,--dashed him headlong into polemics, and irretrievably damaged the greatest poet ever born to England. They were exact opposites--these two. Milton sacrificed himself to his principles, Cromwell his principles to his person. Still, an old brewing concern at Huntingdon may well be designated by Nostradamus lieu obscur, as contrasted with Whitehall, and a burial, if you please, in Westminster Abbey, so wastefully extravagant as that it might well break a nation's treasury to meet it. Such prodigious pageantry belles the professions of the life, and can in no way be harmonized with "Take that bauble hence." Such empty, worthless show has less,

[p. 159]

for me, of the saint and hero in it, than of the froth of beer, and of the littleness and vanity of man. If this is to be great, prythee, tell us, what is it to be little?

BRITISH ASCENDANCY OF THE SEA (OVER THREE CENTURIES). [I. 143.]

 Century X.--Quatrain 100.

	 
		Le grand empire sera par Angleterre,
		 Le pempotam [*1] des ans plus de trois cens:
		 Grandes copies [*2] passer par mer et terre,
		 Les Lusitains [*3] n'en seront pas contens.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		England the Pempotam (pan potens) will rule the great empire (of the waters) for more than three hundred years. Great armies will pass by sea and land; the Portuguese will not be satisfied.
		
		 The French render this as meaning the destruction of England by large forces coming to overwhelm her by sea and land, but the reader will see that it does not at all necessarily show this. If we altered the colon, and put it at the end of the third line, it would simply mean that, whilst she was "all powerful" at sea, she moved large bodies of troops by both elements. I do not think it is very clear what the last line intends. But the three hundred years' dominion of the sea is a very palpable and most important object. That it is now drawing to a close is a somewhat melancholy subject for the contemplation of Englishmen, when we consider the searching revolution introduced by steam. If it really forebodes evil to England, it would involve dissatisfaction to the Lusitanians, as, if England fell, Portugal would be overwhelmed simultaneously by Spain.

The Invincible Armada of Philip II. was destroyed in 1588 by storms first, and the residue by Drake in Cadiz Bay.

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] From that epoch we naturally date the maritime supremacy of our country, which, according to Nostradamus, is to last for more than three centuries, but not four. Nelson's death at Trafalgar in 1805 was the culminating event of our naval history. Its salt-sea tale still stirs young hearts in far-off seaboard cottages on stormy nights in winter with a flush of heroism, and that yet more sacred thing, a solemn sense of duty. But the old sobriety and obedient spirit of reverence, that was common in English homes last century is greatly decadent under the rotten knowledge dropping widely from the Upas Board Schools,--with reverence banished and obedience lost. The bare three hundred years ended in 1888. What the plus may count for, with Revolt thus bred at every hearth, a wise Englishman might ask with some emotion now.

It is said, in James's "Naval History," that from 1793 to 1815--I have not referred to verify--two hundred ships of the line, and three to four hundred frigates were taken or destroyed of the fleets opposed to England; and of the sea as at the pouring out of the second vial, egeneto ai'ma us nekrou, it became as the blood of a dead man (Rev. xvi. 3)This completely crushed out all chance of Napoleon's descent upon England; but, with the lying spirit that distinguished his administration at all times, he: managed to disguise the fact from Frenchmen at the time; so that we find Bouys, at p. 92, promising him--out of two misinterpreted quatrains--in 1806, when his fleet was annihilated, the empire of the sea and a conquest of England as complete as that of William the Conqueror. It only proves once more how far from truth is the wish that is father to the thought. Let him stand aloof who would read the future by the light of the lantern of his prejudices.

We are now at the end of the guidance of Le Pelletier.

[p. 161]

[paragraph continues] Nevertheless, I will adduce several other quatrains to bring the English sequence down to the succession of the House of Hanover. They will perhaps not be devoid of instruction, though they will not be so remarkable as those already adduced. Several quatrains, more or less intelligibly wrought out, are enumerated in a pamphlet of the year 1715 by D. D. [*1] The first relates to Queen Mary.

QUEEN MARY.

 Century IV.--Quatrain 96.

	 
		La Soeur aisnee de L'Isle Britannique,
		 Quinze ans devant le frere aura naissance,
		 Par son promis, moyennant verrifique,
		 Succedera au Regne dc Balance.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The elder sister of the British Isle shall be born fifteen years before her brother; true to her intervening promise, she will succeed to the Kingdom of the Balance.
		
		 This means that Mary, elder sister of Edward VI., shall ascend the throne of England. She was not born fifteen years before him. Her birth took place February 18, 1516, whilst Edward VI. was born October 12, 1537, over twenty-one years later. The fulfilment of her truthful promise lay in carrying out her vow to reinstate the Papists, causing even her sister Elizabeth to be imprisoned in the Tower on a charge of conspiracy. Moyennant seems to refer to the temporary nature and duration of her papal restorations; en la moyenne, in the midst or interim, between the Protestantism of her young brother, and that of Elizabeth, who succeeded

[p. 162]

her. Mary's birth was an event actually contemporary with Nostradamus; a very little inquiry, we may be sure, would have enabled him to have rendered it conformable to the facts of history. As exemplifying his method and procedure, it is very important to find that he took no trouble whatever to do so. It is evident that our prophet acted quite independently of external aids. He seems to have had methods and ways of his own, in which he had the most entire and implicit faith. In whatsoever manner the impressions reached him, he laid himself open to their reception, a reception to all appearance of pure passivity: he took the earliest moment of noting them down, more after the manner of an amanuensis under dictation than as being personally at all responsible for anything he committed to paper. The explanation of D. D. upon this passage is very singular, and implies somewhat of the insight of an adept into magical processes and fatidical language, of which we should be glad to know more. We must, however, content ourselves with it as it is; and even this little glimpse will be valued by those who love to study the human mind in all its byeways, and who are qualified to do so by thrusting aside from their own mind all private prejudice and vain prepossession. He says with regard to the discrepancy:

"But, if he has not known it, then has he either overheard it in raptu whilst his genius dictated unto him one year and three Heptades, or forgot it post raptum, and did write one year and two Heptades. The Lingua Demonum uses Septenarios in numerando, as we do Denarios."

Where he gets this intelligence from I have no idea. What he heard in raptu, could not have been one year and three heptades, for that would have represented twenty-two years, and we have to do with twenty-one years. What he might have heard, supposing we are right as to the lingua demonum, would be "one, plus two heptades," meaning three 

[p. 163]

 heptades; and he might have supposed it to mean one year plus two heptades, or fifteen years. If not satisfactory, this at least, has something of plausibility about it.

The phrase Regne de Balance has much of importance attaching to it. Garencieres translates the last line, "She shall succeed in the Kingdom of Libra," and he annotates that the princess, whom he does not recognize at all, born so long before her brother, shall be married to a King of France, which is signified by the "Kingdom of Libra." He also says that Louis XIII. was called The Just, because he was born under the sign Libra. I give this for the sake of its being curious, though quite beside the mark, so far as I am able to see.

The phrase Regne de Balance is one of those pithy pregnant sentences, ever and anon dropping instinctively from the pen of Nostradamus, on all topics treated by him or glanced at. The whole bent of England's policy, from Henry VII.'s day to the Treaty of Vienna, has been to maintain a European equipoise, and to provide that no State should grow so strong as to overwhelm the rest. The wise counsels of the statesmen of Elizabeth were all directed in the hope of fortifying it; and it was never seriously infringed until the first partition of Poland in 1772, which was completed by the third in 1795. Napoleon's false profession to restore it in 1806 may count--like all he said, "as false as dicers' oaths"--for nothing. England's permission of that crime,--that satanry of royal crowns, struck her with judicial blindness;--and hired publicists, the venal reptiles that preceded the journalists, soon sprang up in abundance, to confuse and smoke-dry the moral sense of Europe. Poland had established that most unworkable of all governmental schemes, an elective monarchy; an arrangement that insures periodical anarchy at every election, and generally

[p. 164]

a wrong choice at last. The satanry of Split Eagles gave out, that the Poles could not govern themselves. But the fourth article in Peter the Great's will shows that they were not to be allowed to govern themselves. They were to be kept in continual jealousy, whilst the other powers were to be corrupted by gold, and a share of the plunder; till Russia could retake all. The bribers, the bribed, and the publicists succeeded so well that the very phrase "Balance of power" became, and stilt is, a topic of ridicule in common conversation. By this means its obvious rationality is excluded from any chance of a fair hearing. The Navigation Laws, Corn Laws, and Protection, have all been treated in the same way in our own time, and with the same revolutionary consequences, and loss of English supremacy. The Marquis de Bouille, in his "Memoires," ed. 1821, p. 8,--one of the few modern men who is entitled to be called a statesman,--says of England, that it is an empire whose support all other nations stand in need of, and that its happiness is intimately bound up with that of the world at large, but that if its thirst of gold should destroy its patriotism; or that bold demagogues and orators should get power to meddle with its fundamental laws, it would soon become chaotic and fall, leaving nothing behind it but another great ghost of empire perished, to glimmer as an historical beacon through the night of time. Again he says, at p. 24, that for thirty years (speaking about 1783) she has been the happy rival of France, and in some sort the arbitress of Europe. A little later on, when we crushed Napoleon by sea and land, and yet preserved France, we rose to our highest; but at Vienna the Regne de Balance [*1] passed, probably for ever,

[p. 165]

from the sceptre of England; just twenty years after the final partition of Poland. Cursed are those who, with arms in their hands, stand by and allow evil to be done! We repeated

[p. 166]

the cowardice when France was under the heel of Prussia. If no virtue remained, the common policy of equalization should have weighed, to throw in aid to the weaker side.

QUEEN ELIZABETH (1533-1603).

 Century VI.--Quatrain 74.

	 
		La dechassee au regne tournera,
		 Ses ennemies trouvez des conjurez;
		 Plusque jamais son temps triomphera,
		 Trois, et Septante, la mort, trop asseurez.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The rejected one shall at last reach the throne, her enemies found to have been traitors. More than ever shall her period be triumphant. At seventy she shall go assuredly to death, in the third year of the century.
		
		 Elizabeth was long withheld from the throne. When she reached it, of course all enemies were regarded as traitors, and no reign was ever more triumphant. She proved a thorn in the side of popery; overthrew the Armada; and crippled the power of Spain, despoiling it of a large tract of land in America, which has been called after her Virginia; and under Essex, in 1596, inflicted on it a loss of twenty million ducats or pieces of eight, in the Bay of Cadiz. The next

[p. 167]

quatrain that we shall take seems to refer to the expedition by Essex.

The fourth line is a very singular one. It has no punctuation in the edition of 1558; so I introduce a comma between trois and septante. Septante is "seventy," a good old word that has dropped out of French usage, but which many French scholars think infinitely preferable to the clumsy circumlocution Soixante dix. Trois stands for 1603. Nostradamus often drops the thousands and hundreds from a date. We shall shortly come to a case in point, at the Fire of London, 1666. When Nostradamus describes the doomed city, he writes: "Brusle par fond, de vingt-trois les six." The nought in 1603 cannot be given, so that, omitting the figures in the tens, hundreds, and thousands, the trois remaining gives the date; so that the line remains "In the third year [of the seventeenth century] and seventy years old, assured death comes." Elizabeth was born September 7, 1533, and she died March 24 (April 3, N.S.), 1603; fulfilling to a nicety the conditions of the line as thus set forth.

ATTACK ON CADIZ BAY (1596).

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 94.

	 
		Devant le lac ou plus cher fut gette
		 De sept mois, et son ost desconfit
		 Seront Hispans par Albanois gastez,
		 Par delay perte en dormant le conflict.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Before the lake, where much treasure (plus cher) was stranded, after a seven months' voyage, and the host discomforted. Spaniards shall bc worsted by the English, by time lost before giving battle.
		
		 Garencieres here takes Albanois for Albanians, which of course prevents him from reaching any conceivable meaning. It stands for English, as Albanies, or Albions. The quatrain may reasonably enough be interpreted of the

[p. 168]

attack made by Essex, Howard, and Raleigh, June, 1596, on Cadiz Bay. They destroyed there thirteen ships of war, and forty huge South American galleons, part of the great "silver fleet," or "plate fleet." They had got stranded in their own harbour. Had the Spaniards been alert, they might have unloaded the treasure-ships, and so saved the cargoes. If they had attacked the English at once, instead of awaiting the onset, they might have beaten them off, or at least have kept them out of the harbour. But they were so supine that the Duke de Medina had at last to fire the ships to prevent their capture. The Spartans and Spaniards have been noted as being of small despatch: Mi venga la muerta di Spagna--"Let my death come from Spain, for then it will be sure to be long in coming" (Bacon's Essay on Despatch). Collins does not give this in his Spanish proverbs. But not only did Spaniards and Spartans procrastinate. "Business tomorrow," said the Theban Polymarch, in Plutarch, as he laid under his pillow some despatches relating to a conspiracy, and was killed before he read them. Copyslip wisdom saith "Delays are dangerous."

The bay and harbour of Cadiz may very well be called a lake, being twelve miles one way, and at least six the other, whilst the entrance to it from Rota to the Castle of St. Sebastian is a good six miles. When Essex got possession of the Castle of Puntales, he commanded the whole town and harbour. The idea of lake is actually expressed in the very name of Cadiz, which is derived from the Punic word Gaddir, an enclosed place. The Greeks corrupted this into gadeira, or geis deire, "neck of land." The Romans contracted either this or the Punic word into Gades, and the Spaniards into Xerez, by the help of their Arabic guttural.

[p. 169]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 22.

	 
		Dedans la terre du grand temple celique,
		 Nepueu a Londre par paix feincte meurtry:
		 La barque alors deviendra scismatique,
		 Liberte feincte sera an corn' et cry.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		In the country of the great heavenly temple the nephew is murdered [by her who comes] to London under a feigned truce. The ship [of Peter] will then become schismatic, and feigned liberty become the hue and cry.
		
		 I cannot, I confess. altogether make this out. D. D. interprets it of the murder of Henry Stuart, I 567, and the final establishment of the Reformation. If it mean this, it will be a proof of the uncertainty, and almost caprice with which forecasts are concerned. It is strange that Henry Stuart's murder should find any representation, when, so far as I yet know, nothing is recorded of the fate of Mary Stuart herself. The heavenly temple is, according to D. D., the kingdom of the Angeli, Angels, or Angles, meaning the English. We are by no means forced to accept this interpretation, for Celique may stand for luminous, according to Le Pelletier's Glossary, where he derives the word from the Greek silas though I see no such word. Celique is generally considered to stand for celeste, caelitus, from caelum. We might read it as a misprint for Celtique. Then la terre du grand temple Celtique would be the island in which is placed the great Druid temple of Stonehenge--the island of Apollo, Templum Solis, as Bath is the fountain of the sun, Aqua Solis. I record these hints, not as possessing much value in themselves, but as being possible aids towards future elucidation.

 La Barque, in Nostradamus, is no doubt usually to be interpreted of the Popedom, the ship of St. Peter; but if, as I think, the general reference of the quatrain be to England

[p. 170]

and English affairs, then I should interpret La Barque as the Ship of State, becoming more and more schismatical, and in which the Puritans, Independents, and other Dissenters raise a great hue and cry about liberty, and liberty of conscience (au corn' et cry, or a cor et a cri, which is a variant of the early edition). The Puritans were becoming most troublesome both in England and Scotland all through the reigns of Elizabeth and Mary Stuart. Here D. D. insists upon what it is the business of his book to establish; that the accession of the House of Hanover to the throne of England is one distinct topic of the prophecies of Nostradamus. James I. was the great-grandfather of George I. His daughter Elizabeth married Frederic, the Elector Palatine, and had issue the Princess Sophia, Electress of Brunswick-Lunenberg, the mother of George I.

ENGLAND BECOMES GREAT BRITAIN (1603).

 Century III.--Quatrain 70.

	 
		La grand Bretaigne comprinse d'Angleterre,
		 Viendra par eaux si [*1] haut a inonder
		 La Ligue neuve d'Ausonne fera guerre,
		 Que contre eux ils se viendront bander.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Great Britain comprising England, will come to be inundated very forcibly by the waters. The new League in Italy will make war against all such as band together against any one of the cosignatories.
		
		 England was politically called Great Britain when Scotland was united to her at the accession of James I. in 1603. Still, in an indefinite way, the term, or kindred terms, had often been employed. To go no further than the "Faerie Queene" of Spenser (Book III. c. ii.  section 7), we find:

Far fro my native soyle, that is by name
 The Greater Brytayne, here to seeke for praise and fame.

 

[p. 171]

In this passage, Church says, it means Wales, as distinguished from the Lesser Brittany in France. The Greater Brytayne would hardly be Wales, but England and Wales together before the Saxon Heptarchy. This, however, in no way interferes with the propriety of the distinction drawn by Nostradamus. His allusion is clearly to the time of James I., who assumed the title of "King of Great Britain" on October 24, 1604.

The floods spoken of commenced about the end of January, 1607. The principal damage occurred in Somersetshire, where the sea broke down the dykes, and overflowed the country for thirty miles in length and six miles inland, to the destruction of all property and most of the inhabitants. Bristol suffered. The east coast by Norfolk suffered in like manner, though not quite to so great an extent. A long account of it, giving curious details of the calamity, was hunted up by Garencieres, and found in an old, almost forgotten Latin book, entitled "Rerum in Gallia, Belgia, Hispania, Anglia, etc., gestarum anno 1607," a Nicolao Gotardo Artus Dantisco, VII., Book 2.

 La Ligue neufve, D. D. says, was a renewal of the Liga Sancta first entered into in 1526 between the King of France, the Pope, and the Venetians. The renewal took place in 1606, and was simply defensive, precisely as the quatrain puts it. Thus the quatrain stretches over a space of three years, from October, 1604, establishing the title of "Great Britain;" the ratification of the Liga Sancta in 1606; and the inundations in Somerset and Norfolk in 1607. The alliance of 1526 goes by the name of the Treaty of Cognac (or Holy League). It was concluded on March 22, 1526, between the Pope, Francis I., Venice, Henry VIII., the Swiss, and Florence. The second or defensive alliance, according to D, D., was between three only of the original signatories;

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] France, the Pope, and the Venetians. I do not find it mentioned, but presume he is right. Garencieres evidently writes in entire ignorance of both these treaties; but he says that the League will be of Bordeaux, which is called Ausone, from Ausonius, the famous Latin poet, who was born there. Here it certainly means Italy; but I mention it, as it is quite likely that Nostradamus might so employ the word, though he does not on this occasion. Ausone occurs once again, at least, in Quatrain 22 of Century VII., which I do not know that anybody has yet interpreted.

CHARLES I.

 Century V.--Quatrain 93.

	 
		Soubs le terroir du rond globe lunaire,
		 Lors que sera dominateur Mercure:
		 L'isle d'Escosse fera un luminaire,
		 Qui les Anglois mettra a deconfiture. [*1]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Under the jurisdiction of the round globe of the moon, when Mercury shall be lord of the ascendant: the island of Scotland will produce a luminary (prince) that shall throw the English into a great discomfiture. [*1]
		
		 Garencieres entirely misses the purpose of this, but re, marks that the prophecy must of necessity relate to the past, for since the Union nothing of the kind has happened, Charles I. was born at Dunfermline on November 19, 1600; in astrological language, when Mercury, lord of the horizon, was combust and following Saturn cosmically with the sun: the sun leaning to a conjunction with Mars, and the moon, in her worst location, in quadrature with Mars. He succeeded to the throne in 1625.

D. D. translates the quatrain, oddly enough, as follows:

	 
		In regione aeris sublunari,
		   Mercurius shall govern, [p. 173]
		 When a light shall be born in Scotland,
		   Which will put England into great disorder.
		
		 We have here the stars in their courses fighting against King Charles, and, as soon as we had disposed of the historical remarks appended to the quatrain by D. D., our intention was to have thrown together some of the fatalistic signs of the time and the ill omens that attended this unhappy monarch almost throughout life, but unfortunately this intention must be laid aside for the present.

In 1609 James I. tried to induce the Scotch to conform to some sort of uniformity in Church ceremony, but he stopped short of endeavouring to thrust it down their throats. Archbishop Laud was less moderate. With the zealous persistency of a shard-borne beetle flying against a stone wall, he, in 1637, advised Charles to introduce the English Liturgy into the churches of Scotland, auctoritate regis. It was flying in the face of Fate. Quem Deus vult perdere prius dementat.

Next to the folly of establishing it, was the folly of its public withdrawal in less than twelve months' time. It was established by royal mandate, July 23, 1637, and by royal proclamation, June 20, 1638, withdrawn; a further undertaking being given that no English ceremonies should be thrust upon the Church of Scotland. Any tyro in statesmanship would have known that this course was doomed to fall utterly. Having taken the first inconsiderate step, it should have received no other impulse from England; private instructions should have been communicated to the chief clergy that no proceedings would be taken to enforce the law, and it would have died down of itself. As it was, the concession came too late, and gave the Scotch time to enter into a covenant never to permit the establishment of the English ritual; or, as they called it, the English Service 

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] Book. The fault was committed that, over and over again, the English commit as to Irish affairs; the yielding to outside pressure. Contentious opposition should be crushed by force first, and then conceded to as of grace. You will never get thanks from any party for having yielded to their threats. This only cemented disaffection; and, in 1643, England, puritanically urged, went further still, and established the Solemn League to like effect. This was a pure piece of political claptrap intended to secure general disaffection.

In 1641 the discontent had spread into Ireland, and, as usual in such cases, English reasoning and Scotch logic developed into bloodshed on the other side of St. George's Channel. The English often content themselves with ink and oratory, but an Irish Celt prefers to record his dissent in a rubric of blood. During the first four months of antagonism, the rebellion under Phelim O'Neil caused the massacre Of 40,000 English Protestants in Ulster: D. D. says 150,000, massacred by Papists, and they could be reckoned up by name. But where he got his list I do not know. His comment on this is: Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum. His quotation is not correct; I hope the same may be said of his statistics.

As we all know, Laud expiated his mistake with his head on Tower Hill, and the King himself was to follow on five years later at Whitehall, after being surrendered for money by the Scotch to the English. As Nostradamus puts it [II. 531, Du juste sang par pris damne sans crime.

King Charles was only twenty-five when he ascended the throne, labouring in that respect under almost the same disadvantage as Louis XVI. Both of these kings could derive but little wisdom from the Council-table. Charles's early acts consequently were rash, and those of the French King speculative rather than practical. Clarendon, in his History

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] (i. 23, ed. 1731), devotes a paragraph or two of great interest to the impeachment of the Earl of Middlesex (Lionel Cranfield). Clarendon admits him to have been "a man of great wit and understanding," and to have held every place with great ability. He had been raised by Buckingham from a city trader to a statesman, and in his success seems to have quite forgotten the patron to whom he owed it. The rash Buckingham, on his return from the Spanish Quixotism, influenced the House of Commons to impeach him; altogether overlooking the consequences of employing such a machinery to revenge a private pique, and he must needs drag in the young Prince Charles to help him. The King foresaw the evil. "The wise King," says Clarendon, "knew well enough the ill consequence," [*1] and he sent for these two,--his son and Buckingham-to lecture them if possible into wisdom. He pointed out that it wounded the Crown and shook his authority, as Ministers would thus have to look to the House, and not to the King alone, as heretofore. At last he burst out in choler: "By God, Steenie, you are a fool, and will shortly repent this folly, and will find that, in this fit of popularity, you are making a rod with which you will be scourged yourself!" He then turned to the prince, and told him: "You will live to have your bellyfull of Parliament impeachments; and, when I shall be dead, you will have too much cause to remember how much you have contributed to the weakening of the Crown by the two precedents you are now so fond of," i.e. engaging the Parliament in the war, and the prosecution of Cranfield. It was, indeed, to teach the many-headed (which is equal to no head) beast to taste blood. Here, indeed, a King turns prophet; foreseeing,

[p. 176]

from existing facts misdirected, what future evils will arise. This, of course, is quite different from Nostradamus. "Flambe exigue sortant de solitude" [I. 1], and all that can be got out of visions of the night by secret estude or otherwise.

CHARLES II.--CAPITULATION OF EDINBURGH (DECEMBER 12, 1650).

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 40.

	 
		Le sang du Juste par [*1] Taurer la daurade,
		 Pour se venger contre les Saturnins
		 Au nouveau lac plongeront la maynade,
		 Puis marcheront contre les Albanins.
		
		 The above is the reading in the texte-type, 1558. D. D.'s version runs as below:

	 
		Le sang du juste, par Tore et les Torads,
		 Pour se venger contre les Saturnins:
		 Au nouveau lac plongeront la Menade,
		 Puis marcheront contre les Albanins.
		
		 He translates thus--

The blood of the righteous, for Torah and Torees' sakes, cries for vengeance against the Saturnine rebels, who will plunge the priestess of Bacchus, la menade, into the sea of their novelties, and march afterwards against the Scotch.

D. D.'s idea of the interpretation of this is that, for the sake of the law-abiding people (the Torah and Torees), the King's blood cries for vengeance against the Saturnian Roundheads. The intoxicated people shall plunge into a new course of wickedness, and will then march against the Highlanders. He considers that this was fulfilled in 1650, when, after the capitulation, as he calls it, with the Scotch at Breda, Charles II. landed in Scotland on June 23, and joined the royal army, consisting mainly of Highlanders.

[p. 177]

[paragraph continues] About the same moment Cromwell reached London from Ireland, and General Fairfax retired from the army. Cromwell, at this critical moment, jumps into his post, and, on June 29, heads the Parliamentary army against the Scots.

Without at all insisting upon the accuracy of this interpretation, I think it furnishes sufficient of curiosity to make it worthy of insertion. What follows, touching the Tories, I give in his own words:

"Some people stick to the Church of England discipline, even to a superstition, and to their last breath. These people had the nickname of Tories, cast on them by the Cromwellites; which is as much as to say some have the law of the Church put upon them, from the Hebrew Torah, which signifies the law, or the law of the Church of God. Perhaps did Cromwell himself, or some of his confident advocates and ministers, designedly invent that cursed name; as it is likely from what happened in the year 1651, when the Parliament ordered the law-books to be translated out of Latin into English, wherein the lawyers took a great deal of freedom by using the verbalia passiva very frequently, and almost on all occasions, according to their own fancy and pleasure. As, for instance, Apellans and Apellatus, they made an Apealer and an Apealee; the Arrestans and Arrestatus, the Challenger and the Challengee; as likewise the Warranter and the Warrantee; the Voucher and the Vouchee; the Leaser and the Leasee; in which manner they used likewise the terms of Torer and Toree; a Torer, in the first place--that is, a promoter of the Common Prayer and Church of England service; and an imposer of human traditions, instead of God's law; and, in the second place, a Toree; that is, one that submits and suffereth such laws to be imposed upon him. Which nomina verbalia passiva, so much in vogue amongst the English lawyers, are not at all

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] English but mere French, and the Participium Passivum itself; and more proper to the neat French than the corrupted Provincial Dialect; which last our Nostradamus very often mixes with his style; wherein they commonly used to say, Les confirmads, les restads, les escilads, instead of les confirmez, les restez, les exilez, etc. And according to this Dialect one must say, LES TORADS, instead of LES TOREZ, and thus does our Poet."

If what he says above has any value, the Toree would be the prelates and clergy; the Torads the laity, who adhere to the Church of England and its discipline and ritual. This in the context would have a greater appropriateness than D. D. himself seems to be aware of, for the word it is contrasted with in the context is les Saturnins. This word in Nostradamus is constantly used for pagans, in contradistinction to Albanins, Christians, robed in white albus. In this quatrain also the men of Albany, if we take them for Scotch, are fighting on the side of Church and State against the Roundheads. Saturne is often put for Antichrist by Nostradamus.

The French of this quatrain, as it stands, does not appear to be correct. The first two lines require a verb understood to connect them: "The blood of the king [cries] few vengeance," etc. The third line has an embarrassed construction: "They will plunge the Menade into a new lake." If Saturnins, again repeated, be understood, it is difficult to see what plunging their mad priestess into the lake can effect. If it could be read as les Menades, then the frantic Bacchantes would plunge into a fresh sea of evil or troubles, and, in their wild intoxication, march northwards. If we could put any interpretation upon Taurer that would be applicable to the rendering, the whole quatrain might then apply to the French Revolution, and not the English. I

[p. 179]

think that the sang du Juste furnishes thus much of certainty as to the interpretation. It must relate to one of two periods; the death of Charles I. or Louis XVI. Then it would be that the Revolutionists, finding the Royalists to be seeking revenge, declared against the Church, and plunged madly into a new order of things. The Menade would be more appropriate to that period than to the earlier one. Bad as they were in England, there was more of lust, infidelity, and blood, corruption, vice, and madness, in France.

Menade. The mainades were Bacchantes, the priestesses who celebrated the festivals of Bacchus. Stephanus says that it is to be explained not only as Bacchic, but as frantic; and this is unquestionably the meaning here. The Greek word appears to be connected with the Sanscrit man, to think; and thence the word manyu, anger, is said to be derived. They used to run dishevelled, half-naked, and, brandishing the thyrsus; in their fury they would kill and behead men whom they encountered by the way, and carry off their heads, leaping with rage and joy. According to Nonnus, they were virgins so careful of their chastity that they slept with a cincture of serpents. Juvenal attributes no great severity of virtue to them, but their pretensions to such superlative purism renders them all the fitter emblem of the canting Puritans who won Cromwell's battles for him. In Le Pelletier's Glossary maynade is given as a Romance word for "a child of four or five years;" but this throws no additional light on our difficulty.

THE BATTLE OF DUNBAR (SEPTEMBER 3, 1650).

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 56.

	 
		La bande foible la terre [*1] occupera,
		 Ceux du haut lieu feront horribles cris: [p. 180]
		 Le gros trouppeau d'estre coin troublera,
		 Tombe pres Dinebro descouvers les escrits.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The weak band shall occupy the knoll (or, if preferred, it can be, occupy the ground or field [after the battle]). The Highlanders (Ceux du haut lieu) shall raise horrible shouts (before they engage, and also after their defeat). The large force shall be hampered or cornered (d'estre en coin), and fall close to Edinburgh, their papers even falling into the victor's hands.
		
		 This is a very important forecast indeed. The little band on the knoll--for I prefer that reading--is clearly enough Cromwell's small force, very much in the condition he describes it to be in, in his letter to Haslerig at Newcastle, September 2, 1650 (Carlyle's "Cromwell Letters," ii. 201):

"We are upon an engagement very difficult. The enemy hath blocked up our way at the Pass at Copperspath, through which we cannot get without almost a miracle."

Before sunrise Lesley sends down on Monday his horse to cross the small Brocksburn. Whoso wishes to attack must first cross this little brook, in its deep ditch, as they then called it (the picturesque tourist would now say glen), forty feet deep. Lesley's army comes out and places itself in "rather narrow ground," says Carlyle (p. 202) in 1846; d'estre en coin, says Nostradamus in 1558; or 1546, if you like to have it so, for it was probably on paper a clean three hundred years before Carlyle commented; you may even translate him, "takes the trouble to put itself into a corner." "Hampered in narrow, sloping ground," says Carlyle again (p. 206).

The reader who wishes for it can here leave off to peruse Carlyle's very celebrated prose lyric, as they call it, about this "Dunbar Battle," with its "moon" that "gleams out, hard and blue, riding among hailclouds;" whatever "a blue

[p. 181]

moon" may mean, or not mean. Carlyle makes Nol there, as the level sun shoots up over St. Abb's Head and across the sea, quote the sixty-eighth Psalm, in Rous's doggerel:

	 
		"Let God arise, and scattered
		     Let all His enemies be;
		 And let all those that do Him hate
		     Before His presence flee!"
		
		 Observe here that it is the Saturnins, in a frenzy of antichrist, who do this, according to Nostradamus. But you can take which side you please. "The Lord General made a halt," says Hodgson, "and sang the hundred-and-seventeenth Psalm" at the foot of Doon Hill; to the tune of Bangor or other, says Carlyle, "strong and great against the sky," this grand strain arises, in which the metre, like the Lord General himself, makes a halt too:

	 
		"O give ye praise unto the Lord,
		    All nations that be;
		 Likewise ye people all, accord
		    His name to magnify"--
		
		 which, to eke out the measure, has to be read, nay-shy-ons, and, for the rhyme's sake, magnifee. This energy is really not dramatic, but it is stagey; on the border-land of sublimity, it curls the lip of humour to a smile.

The poor Highlanders taken prisoners were sold, "not," says Cotton, "to perpetual servitude, but for six, or seven, or eight years, as we do our own" (blessed are they who are of the household of faith); "which is really a mild arrangement," in the estimation of "the Sage of Chelsea" (p. 358).

But now back to our exegesis let us go. Cromwell captured, on this occasion, the whole of the papers of the Scotch, War Office, as well as the Great Seal of Scotland, which he sent forward as a trophy to London. Cromwell's letter to

[p. 182]

[paragraph continues] Speaker Lenthall excuses his making "no more frequent address to Parliament," but "it hath now pleased God to bestow a mercy upon you worthy of your knowledge;" and so he goes on, for a space occupying eight closely printed pages 8vo. He says he wishes to treat the Scotch very kindly, for that "God hath a people here fearing his name, though deceived;" and he concludes, in the dirty language of the godly of his century, that he has "offered much love unto such, in the bowels of Christ." His bowels, to the Highlanders made prisoner, awarded slavery, not perpetual, but for eight years only. Here are tender mercies and bowels commiserate for contemplation! sufficient, as we have seen, to make Nostradamus shudder at their approach.

	 
		Son temps s'approche si pres que je souspire (viii. 76, p. 156).
		
		 All that was done here, however, could not prevent Charles from being crowned on January 1, 1654, at Scone, in Scotland. In the next summer he penetrated into England, and was pursued by Cromwell and his Ironsides.

D. D. follows up the Quatrain 56, which we have just treated, with Century VIII., Quatrain 57, which stands next to it:

	 
		De Soldat simple parviendra en Empire. [II. 171.]
		
		 D. D. interpreting it of Cromwell, as was most natural at that time. Garencieres does the same, saying, "I never knew nor heard of anybody to whom this stanza might be better applied than to the late usurper Cromwell;" but unless it be a type of two handles, of the old ecclesiastical sort, I think it will apply still better to Napoleon; and I shall so apply it further on, giving the reasons why it is more appropriate to him than to the Protector. Further than this, as a general

[p. 183]

rule in regard to the succession of the quatrains in Nostradamus, they have no more affinity to each other than that they lie together, as one bean touches another in a bushel measure. Still, the next we shall treat is in sequence with the two preceding.

CHARLES II. AFTER THE BATTLE OF WORCESTER. (SEPTEMBER 3, 1651).

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 58.

	 
		Regne en querelle aux freres divise,
		 Prendre les armes et le nom Britannique:
		 Titre Anglican sera tard avise,
		 Surprins de nuict mener a l'air Gallique.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When a kingdom in quarrel divided between two brothers takes up arms. and the name of Great Britain: The King (Tiltre Anglican) too late advised, surprised at night (is forced) to seek the air of France.
		
		 It is rather harsh, but to make sense of this we shall be forced to understand the two brothers to be England and Scotland, or simply civil war. When Charles at last made up his mind to visit Scotland and fight for his crown, it was already too late. The Parliamentary side had developed a strength that he was never equal to cope with. The loss of the battle of Dunbar was a disaster that settled the question. He might as well have quilted the field to Cromwell at once. Instead of that, on the 3rd of September--ominous day! being the anniversary of the Dunbar fight--he engages him again at Worcester. Charles was completely routed and his cause hopelessly broken. He managed, under the cover of night, to escape from the city of Worcester, and, flying from place to place for weeks, as most romantically chronicled in the Boscobel Tracts, he at last, on the 20th of October, got well shipped for Dieppe, and finally rejoined his mother safely at St. Germain.

[p. 184]

DEATH OF CROMWELL (SEPTEMBER 3, 1658).

KING CHARLES II.'S FLIGHT AND RESTORATION (SEPTEMBER 3, 1651-1660).

 Century X.--Quatrain 4.

	 
		Sur la minuict conducteur de l'armee
		 Se sauvera, subit esvanouy,
		 Sept ans apres la fame non blasmee;
		 A son retour ne dira one ouy. [*1]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Upon the stroke of midnight, the leader of the army (King Charles II.) shall Save himself (by flight), and suddenly evanish. For seven years longer that is, to a day, till the death of Cromwell, his reputation will survive unchallenged; at his Restoration no one will say anything but yes.
		
		 In other words, Nostradamus tells King Charles II. to continue to hope on, for that though he will have to fly by night from Worcester, his memory will be preserved without diminution till the death of his victor, seven years later to a day. Further, that when the day of his Restoration does come round, he will be received back with universal acclaim. Had it been given as neuf ans, it would have been more complete as regards Charles II. personally. But, as it is, the date to a day coinciding with the death of Cromwell, makes one suppose it to have been given to point to that interesting coincidence. It would have been no more wonderful than are many others amongst the quatrains, had this been intended; but whether it shall be so allowed or not rests with the reader,--now that he knows exactly how it stands,--to accept or to reject.

The French used always to engage in a battle willingly on St. Louis's Day, April ii, and the English upon St. George's Day, April 23. But September 3, St. Mansuetus's Day, was ruinous to the Royalists and prosperous to Cromwell. The Battle of Worcester, so decisive in its consequences,

[p. 185]

was commenced at three o'clock in the afternoon on September 3, 1651; and at three o'clock in the afternoon of September 3, 1658, Cromwell died on what has been called his Fortunate Day: "Nature herself," says his last chronicler in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica,' "seeming to prophesy, in the voice of the great tempest that swept over England, that a great power had passed away." [*1] It was a tremendous tempest no doubt, and men at the time said the Devil had run away with Old Noll. Some say he died broken-hearted, when the last Parliament convened by him in January, 1658, refused to acknowledge his House of Peers. So great a burden "drank up his spirits," said Maidston.

CROMWELL DECLARED PROTECTOR (DECEMBER 16, 1653).

 Century X.--Quatrain 22.

	 
		Pour ne vouloir consentir an divorce,
		 Qui puis apres sera cogneu indigne,
		 Le Roy des isles sera chasse par force:
		 Mis a son lieu qui de Roy n'aura signe.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The King will agree to the divorce of his crown, which would afterwards have been regarded as an unworthy action, and hence will by force be expelled from the island. One who will have no sign of kingship will be put in his place.
		
		 

[p. 186]

Garencieres was alive to the true sense of this and its fulfilment. The Republicans murdered the king, gave the government, if not the crown, to Cromwell, and drove Charles II. into France.

CROMWELL THE FOX.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 41.

	 
		Esleu sera Renard, ne sonnant mot,
		 Faisant le saint public, vivant pain d'orge, [*1]
		 Tyrannizer apres tant [*2] a un cop, [*3]
		 Mettant a pied des plus grands sur la gorge. [*4]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A Fox shall be elected, uttering not a word, playing saint in public and helping himself to other people's property, in order to tyrannize after a while by a coup d'etat, placing his foot on the throat of the greatest.
		
		 Garencieres thinks this to apply to some Pope, but D. D. refers it much more aptly to Cromwell. If my proposed readings are allowed, the quatrain can fit no one so well, especially as it follows Quatrain 40, which we already have interpreted of the Commonwealth. D. D. reminds us that the Protector was a great Chiliast and Fifth Monarchy man, and certainly Faisant le saint public; even so as to gull, in this our late day, Thomas Carlyle, who allowed the heroism of violence, in this case, to dazzle him into the belief that the hypocrisy of Saintship was Godfearing. As to Cromwell, D. D. says truly, that he was moderate in diet. This he says to strengthen the barley bread, though I feel very strongly

[p. 187]

that it is differently intended. It might even mean that he got his bread by barley, or John Barleycorn, from the Huntingdon brewery. He was more given to ambition than to pleasure, says D. D., as is the case with men of his saturnine complexion. This may, by such as choose to use it so, connect him with Quatrain 40 and les saturnins. "His fortunate star, Mars," writes D. D., "had brought him the glory of a valiant hero and general."

Here D. D. entertains us, somewhat at large, upon his notion of a "wig, or trimmer, that is, a wavering man or hypocrite, from the original words to wag and to trim about." We, however, know that this etymology is not worth very much.

Our next is a sequence of three quatrains, all of which seem to refer to English affairs.

THE FIRE OF LONDON--DUTCH WAR--PLAGUE (1665-1667).

 Century II.--Quatrains 51, 52, 53.

	 
		Le sang du juste a Londres fera faute,
		 Brulez par foudres [*1] de vingt trois les six;
		 La dame [*2] antique cherra [*3] de place haute,
		 De mesme secte [*4] plusieurs seront occis.
		
		 

[p. 188]

	 
		Dans plusieurs nuits la terre tremblera:
		 Sur le printemps deux effors suite:
		 Corinthe, Ephese aux deux mers nagera,
		 Guerre s'esmeut par deux vaillans de luite. [*1]
		
		La grand peste de cite maritime
		 Ne cessera, que mort ne soit vengee
		 Du juste sang par pris damne sans crime,
		 De la grand dame [*2] par feincte n'outragee.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The blood of the just shall be required of London, burnt by fireballs in thrice twenty and six; the old Cathedral shall fall from its high place, and many (edifices) of the same sort shall be destroyed.
		
		Through many nights the earth shall tremble; in the spring two shocks follow each other; Corinth and Ephesus shall swim in the two seas, war arising between two combatants strong in battle.
		
		The great Plague of the maritime city shall not diminish till death is sated for the just blood, basely sold (for L 2,000,000), and condemned for no fault. The great Cathedral outraged by feigning (saints).
		
		 The first quatrain deals most remarkably with the great fire of London; noting the precise year, the burning of St. Paul's, and other injury to the Protestant interest.

The second shows that a bloody sea-war shall rage, the earth quaking under the cannonade from the ships, shaking the cliffs. There was such a war in 1665, 1666, and 1667, between England and the seven united provinces of the Netherlands. Cruising within the narrow seas, he likens to the Aegean waters between Corinth for England, and Ephesus for Antwerp. He describes them as they really occurred, commencing afresh with every ensuing spring,--sur le printemps. D. D. remarks that they were so obstinately contested, all these fights, that they would last for days on a stretch, or, as Nostradamus says, nights: plusieurs nuits la terre tremblera, according to the English custom of reckoning by a fortnight, and not fourteen days. Now the French

[p. 189]

reckon the fortnight as a quinzaine, that is, up to the fifteenth day, which of course contains only fourteen nights; and you might say la terre tremblera, for the cannon reverberating between the cliffs would move them perceptibly. D. D. thinks that la grande dame in the last quatrain is the great city of London, the metropolis, or mother-city; an Eastern way of speaking. In his learned way, he adds: "The great fire has only metamorphosed the city--ex Lignea in Lateritiam," converting it from wood to brick.

The distance at which sounds may be heard seems variable. Captain Parry, in his "Third Voyage," p. 58, relates, it is said, that at Port Bowen a conversation could be carried on distinctly at 6696 feet, which is over a mile. Dr. Clark, in his Travels (ii. 331), whilst sailing from the Gulf of Glaucus to Alexandria, heard the firing of the English upon the fortress of Rachmanie, upon the Nile. All on board heard it, at a distance of 130 miles. The earthquake at Sumbawn, in 1815, was heard 970 miles away (Elliot's "Horae. Apoc.," iv. 218). In Dereham's "Physico-Theology" (i. p. 185, ed. 1786), a Dr. Hearn is quoted as certifying that guns fired at Stockholm in 1685 were heard at a distance of 180 English miles; and in the above Dutch war, 1672, the guns were heard above two hundred miles (vide Philosophical Transactions, No. 113.) I remember reading, though I have not noted where, that the guns employed at Waterloo were heard, at Hythe in Kent, on the Sunday morning, so that it was known Wellington and Napoleon had engaged in battle somewhere; the fact was confirmed by intelligence shortly after. The buzz of London traffic in 1820 could be heard by putting the ear to the ground on the top of Putney Hill, as Sir Richard Phillips relates in his "Morning's Walk to Kew" (p. 152). But the whole south of Thames was then tricked out rurally in Nature's emerald vest, and herself at case, the

[p. 190]

earth could transmit vibrations from the troubled town; but now she shudders with a like palsy of her own, and Putney is as rural as Clerkenwell Green. Much of the conveyance of sound depends upon the wind, no doubt. J. p. Malcolm ("Londinium Redivivum," iii. p. 117) has some interesting remarks upon St. Paul's bell. He lived in Somer's Town, and with a strong north-east wind he could hear every hour tolled as clear as if only a quarter of a mile distant, but with the wind east, south-west, or north, not a sound could be heard. Now Somer's Town is north-northwest from St. Paul's, which, in a straight line, is two miles and a half away; so that a north-east wind should convey the vibrations to Lambeth. He found that this wind carried away all the smoke, and so left the air free for the sound to travel through it. A south wind overwhelmed him with noise. He could distinctly hear the guard at St. James's Park beat the tattoo at eight, nine, ten, and eleven, to each distinct roll of the drum. One would judge from this that the wind was blowing nearly due east at Waterloo on that famous Sunday, the 18th of June. It was an east wind at Baalzephon that ruined Pharaoh. I have dwelt thus episodically upon sound to show, if possible, that this tremblement de terre was an effect of sound arising on the waters but vibrating upon land, and not the convulsion of an earthquake.

Quatrain 80 of Century III. we have already treated of by the help of Le Pelletier, and interpreted it of Charles I., and we there made the bastard to stand for Cromwell. D. D. takes the alternative reading of l'indigne, and understands James II. The bastard then is naturally the Duke of Monmouth, natural son of Charles II.; but he was never demy receu; and had it been intended to portray him, he would not have been mentioned after, but before, the abdication. Hence we prefer to leave it as we placed it at first.

[p. 191]

WILLIAM III. AND THE REVOLUTION (1688),

 Century IV.--Quatrain 89.

	 
		Trente do Londres secret conjureront,
		 Contre leur Roy, sur le pont l'entreprise:
		 Leuy, satalites la mort de gousteront, [*1]
		 Un Roy esleut [*2] blonde, natif do Frize.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Thirty of London shall conspire secretly against their King; upon the bridge the plot shall be devised. These Satellites shall taste of death. A fair-haired King shall be elected, native of Friesland.
		
		 D. D. reads for trente, trained. Had the true reading been trained it would have been very wonderful, because the trained bands of London had not been thought of in Nostradamus's time. Garencieres interprets the quatrain to refer to Charles I., and says it is well known that the plotters used to assemble at the Bear at the Bridge foot. This was a celebrated inn on the south side of London Bridge. It was pulled down 1761, when the houses were removed from London Bridge (Public Advertiser, December 26, 1761), "Hist. Sign.," p. 154.

The Quarterly Review (xxvi. 189), in some very disparaging remarks on Nostradamus, says of this particular quatrain that it predicts "the Revolution of 1688 with tolerable clearness," resting upon the last line, which it prints in italics. As, however, William III. was born at the Hague, he was not born in what is called Friesland, but South Holland. I do not know whether it formed a part of Friesland in Nostradamus's time. D. D. is puzzled with the word blonde, and suggests that perhaps William had fair hair in his youth, "or it might be an allusion to his name, Guillaume, because (sic?) of cil, signifying eyebrows." This vermicular

[p. 192]

wriggle must be permitted to our highly excellent cleric, who is manifestly unable to get the quatrain to say what he wants it to say. We have had numerous quatrains that, when properly understood, have appeared to be clear enough, and which are disparaged as "perplexed verses" by the Quarterly. But this which they find expressed with "tolerable clearness," I do not find clear at all. I find no plot of thirty, no meeting of conspirators at the Bear at the Bridge foot, or at any other bridge, nor satellites who are executed, nor of a blond king, nor of a native of Friesland.

MARLBOROUGH AND THE CARDINAL DE BOUILLON.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 53

	 
		Le grand Prelat Celtique a Roy suspect,
		 De nuict par cours sortira hors de regne:
		 Par Duc fertile a son grand Roy Bretaine,
		 Bisance a Cypres et Tunes insuspect.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great Celtic Prelate suspected by the King,
		 Shall post with haste by night out of the realm,
		 Through Bisance, Ypres, and Bethune, undiscovered,
		 By aid of the duke fertile (in conquest) to the great King of Britain.
		
		 This refers to the Cardinal de Bouillon, Great Almoner of France, who was misrepresented to the French King to such an extent that he could not appear at Court. After some years he threw up his charge and determined to quit France. He was related to Prince Eugene, who was with Marlborough, near Arras. The Cardinal came over to them under cover of night, precisely as described by Nostradamus, under the protection of a strong convoy, sent by Marlborough to protect him from the scouts of Ypres and the other places named. When he reached Antwerp, he simply sent in his ribbon of the Order to the French Court, accompanied with his resignation. He is called "Prelat Celtique" as the

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Duchy of Bouillon is in Gallia Celtica. D. D. holds that grand Roy is an abbreviation of Royaume. But the sense is better if taken literally as it stands.

I transcribe for the curious reader from D. D. the following passage; it is too singular to be neglected:

"But the allusion on the Duke of Marlborough is stilt prettier. Had his [Nostradamus's] genius dictated unto him Marnebourg, he might have understood and written down without hesitation, for the English Marl and the French Marne are one and the same. The  speak all sorts of languages, but Nostradamus did not understand the English, whence it came that at the hearing of the name Marlborough, he startled, and thought, 'Qu'est-ce que Marl?' Thereupon it was inspired to him, 'C'est une terre fertile et graisse,' whereby he is ascribing to him both Nomen and Omen at once; the Duke, by whose indefatigable zeal and incomparable valour the Kingdom of Great Britain should be fertile in conquests."

 Century II.--Quatrain 68.

This has already been treated by Le Pelletier (i. 125) under Louis XIV., as fulfilled in the endeavour to re-establish James II. in Ireland. But D. D. refers it to March 23, 1708, when the Pretender cast anchor before Edinburgh, and nobody came out to him. He sailed away, narrowly escaping the English fleet. On this account an Act of Parliament was passed, declaring him a rebel, and setting a reward upon his head. D. D. says that from this time forth Nostradamus always designates him by the title of Rebel. As this quatrain, which we are upon, does not refer to the Pretender, the above remark would only show that Nostradamus always speaks of the Pretender as a rebel. Bouys interprets this, as we have said before, of Napoleon's victories at sea; as also that Bouys was blindly prophesying after the battle of Trafalgar, and in ignorance that such a decisive engagement had been fought. Garencieres interprets it as fulfilled in Charles II.'s times: so that with four interpreters we have four interpretations. Sceptics can employ this fact

[p. 194]

how they like; I am pleased to furnish them with the opportunity. The total of the interpretations seems to me so astounding that we can well afford to submit to deductions such as this. Besides which, I am not endeavouring to establish any point; I wish the facts to establish themselves. What they finally show to be tenable, let us adopt.

GEORGE I.'S SUCCESSION (OCTOBER 20, 1714).

 Century VI.--Quatrain 64.

	 
		On ne tiendra pache aucune arreste,
		 Tous recevans iront per tromperie:
		 De paix et trefue, et terre et mer proteste.
		 Par Barcelone classe prins d'industrie
		
		   Translation.

	 
		They will keep no treaty fixedly (arrested). All who have gained by cheating will go (free). Peace and truce are proclaimed by land and sea. Barcelona captured by the perseverance of the fleet.
		
		 This quatrain is exceedingly obscure, and very difficult even to translate adequately. D. D., who is writing only a year after the actual events,--the publishing date of his book being 1715,--makes sense of it thus: George I. is proclaimed King, October 20, 1714, and Nostradamus notifies that there shall be a general liberation of all prisoners for debt. But it is hard to extract that sense out of the first two lines, especially as not a word occurs about England, a king, or a throne. The other two lines approach the period well enough. The Peace of Utrecht was concluded in 1713, and the peace between Germany and France at Radstadt followed in March, 1714. The war between France and Spain also was concluded before King George ascended the throne; even Barcelona was taken, before he was crowned (October 20), by the French fleet for the King of Spain, September 12, 1714. At the intercession of Great Britain, honourable terms were conceded to the Catalonians in Barcelona,

[p. 195]

so that the mention of that city by Nostradamus comes with much felicity and appropriateness, if we decide that he refers to George I. at all here. D. D.'s book must have been written before October 20, 1714, as he says it is hoped that on the Coronation Day the King will empty most of the prisons.

GEORGE 1. (1714).

 Century II.--Quatrain 87.

	 
		Apres viendra des extremes contrees,
		 Prince Germain, dessus le throsne dore;
		 La servitude et eaux rencontrees,
		 La dame serve, son temps plus n'adore.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Afterwards shall come, from a distant land, a German prince upon the gilded throne. The slavery and waters shall meet. The lady shall serve, her time no more adored.
		
		 D. D. considers this to relate to King George, and he remarks that the King exercised a stronger control than it was possible for Queen Anne to do. The German prince ascending the throne of gold certainly seems to point to George I. But Brunswick is not a very far country. It might be said that modern constitutional government was established first by the Georges, so serfdom and les eaux, or the people and their so-called rights, met together, but then you would have to interpret figuratively the last line: authority (la dame) serves, or is to become subordinate to, the phantom. of Freedom, the time of reverence and good feeling having gone by. This, I say, might be so interpreted, but it does not carry much more conviction with it than does the meaning found by Garencieres. He will have it to be a prophecy relating to Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, called German because of German ancestry. His gilded throne was the gilded ship he sailed in. He made slavery and waters meet,

[p. 196]

because on landing he began to conquer Germania,--that lady who was no more worshipped afterwards as she had been before.

GEORGE I. AND PEACE (1714-1727).

 Century X.--Quatrain 42.

	 
		Le regne humain d'Anglique geniture,
		 Fera son regne paix union tenir:
		 Captive guerre demy de sa closture,
		 Longtemps la paix leur fera maintenir.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The human throne of English geniture will make its rule to maintain peace and union. War will be captive, or at least confined to half its usual area. (George will contend only with Spain. Peace abroad and an endeavour to maintain union at home, against the Pretender's efforts.) Thus peace will be secured to the country for a long stretch of years.
		
		 We have already given our interpretation to D. D.'s next quatrain (III. 57, p. 166). He discovers from it that George shall never want for an heir to the throne up to the Day of Judgment. Myself I see nothing of the kind to be warranted out of Nostradamus. He seems here to be contrasting the numerous changes in Britain with the happy stability of France. I should have made no reference to this, but for the opportunity it affords of introducing some of D. D.'s curious remarks upon the astrological portion of the verses.

At the Creation the Gemini stood in the house or sign Aries, near the equinoctial colure, which has but its own one pole; but they are now in the fourth house called Cancer, near the solstial colure, which has a double pole, viz. Mundi et eclipticae. Basharion is an Arabic word, and denotes Humanus. Bashar, a substantive Caro, hominis cutis, homo. In the three signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, which have successively formed the Caput Zodiaci, none but Gemini is of human figure; that sign must be intended by the word

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] Basharion (especially as the word is not Basharion at all, but Bastarnan); so that, till the age of the world is six or seven thousand years old, i.e., till the Day of Judgment, this will last; and when the great day comes there will be found a direct descendant of that great king sitting on the English throne.

He has taken no notice of the Pempotam and its duration of three hundred years, as a sort of measure of the seven changes, and Nostradamus nowhere says that the seventh change shall endure to the end of time. Like almost all interpreters, D. D. reads his own imagination into the prophecy.

The reader who cares about such explanations as these will find a great deal more of the same sort in Garencieres' annotations upon this quatrain. He remarks that the sign of Aries doth govern France, and that by doubling his pole is meant his returning a second time to the same place, so that the stars do promise France a long continuance in exaltation. He adds that if he were a great astrologer himself he should work out exactly the whole calculation, and he thinks Aries should come to that pole in the year 1845. But Garencieres seems to have had no inkling whatever of the French Revolution of 1789, as forecast by Nostradamus; nor yet of the second Revolution of 1848, though he translated all the quatrains into English.

Footnotes

^146:1 Latin, gens, nation.

^146:2 Franche, for gent Franche, French nation.

^146:3 Latin, per, by reason of.

^146:4 Latin; Aries sign of the Ram.

^146:5 Bastarnie, corresponding to ancient Poland.

^149:1 Romance, nay, ne, born.

^149:2 Lonole, anagram for Olluun, destroying, from the verb olluein, to destroy. Destroyer.

^149:3 Donra, for donnera, will give.

^149:4 Topique, flowers of rhetoric, oratory.

^150:1

	 
		When hempe is sponne,
		 England's done.
		
		 When Elizabeth was in the flower of her age, Bacon remembered well to have heard the above; hempe standing for Henry, Edward, Mary and Philip, and Elizabeth. "Which," says he, "thanks be to God, is verified only in the change of name; for that the King's style is now no more of England but of Britain." Observe the wonderful propriety of the words used by Nostradamus. He noted at the right spot and instant a national change of name; a point of precision that nine out of ten lettered Englishmen would fail to reply to correctly, in answer to the sudden question, When was England first called Great Britain? It would be interesting to know the history of this "trivial prophecy" as his lordship calls it, for it has a good deal of the true spirit of forecast in it. It certainly was genuine, as it evidently was known to the narrator as being in circulation before it was accomplished.

^151:1 Romance, dechasse, simply chasse.

^151:2 Latin, per, by reason of.

^151:3 Latin, ira, anger.

^151:4 Romance, tracer, follow a road, track.

^152:1 Contre, a cote de, opposite, or near to.

^156:1 Italian, macellaio, butcher, from Latin macellum.

^156:2 Romance, nay, ne, born.

^159:1 Pempotam, a shocking word made out of Greek and Latin pan-potens, all powerful.

^159:2 Latin, Copia, military forces.

^159:3 Latin, Lusitani, Portuguese.

^161:1 The full title runs: "The Prophecies of Nostradamus concerning the fate of all the Kings and Queens of Great Britain since the Reformation, and the succession of his present Majesty King George, and the continuation of the British Crown in his most serene Royal House to the last day of the world. Collected and explained by D. D., 1715." This book is In the British Museum. I do not know whether it is scarce or not. It is not common, for I never meet with it in booksellers catalogues.

^164:1 Hume has very ably handled this important question in his Seventh Essay (Hume's "Philosophical Works," iii. 373, Edinburgh, 1826). He there sets out that it is no modern invention as some have maintained, for the Asiatics combined against the Medes and Persians, as Xenophon shows [p. 165] in his "Institutions of Cyrus." Likewise Thucydides exhibits the league formed against Athens, which led to the Peloponnesian war, as being grounded on this principle. Afterwards, when Thebes and Lacedaemon disputed the supremacy, Athens always threw her strength into the lighter scale to preserve the balance. She was for Thebes against Sparta till Epaminondas won at Leuctra, and then she immediately changed sides, as of generosity, but really jealous to preserve the balance. If you will read Demosthenes, he says, in the oration for the Megapolitans you may "see the utmost refinements on this principle that ever entered into the head of a Venetian or English speculatist." On the rise of the crafty Macedonian he again bugled the alarm to Greece, which brought the banners together that fell at Chaeronea. The principle was right, but the too great delay had knit Fate's smile into a frown. Envy (if you like to call it so, but I call it a jealous prudence) must in a community of States prevent any one from overtopping, as Athenian ostracism expelled the citizen who grew too lush and vigorous for a communion in equality. Flume points out with perspicuous beauty how England went too far. Her emulous antagonism to France made her so alert to defend her allies that they could count upon her as a force of their own. The expenses consequent upon this imprudent course led to funding, i.e. the National Debt; and that has led us into an absurd meekness, a dread of war, and the peace barkings of the Quaker Bright; so that England dares not fire a howitzer when Russia, contrary to her most solemn pledges, annexes Merv, Bokara, and Khiva, and cannot find one word to say when Germany has her foot on the throat of France. Blunders in extravagant advocacy, blunders in parsimonious neglect of a principle, do not diminish its importance; they only emphasize it. With a prophecy out of dry reason Hume says it will become "more prejudical another way, by begetting, as is usual, the opposite extreme, and rendering us totally careless and supine with regard to the fate of Europe." That is how we now stand. In a very recent French cyclopaedia, l'equilibre European is said to be quite a modern idea, with nothing corresponding to it in antiquity. The writer pretends that it originated with the Church, and that Podichad the King of Bohemia sent Marini to Louis XI. to point out the necessity there was for a Parliament of Kings to adjust matters between the Church and people. This may be the first form of a Congress. Francis I. carried on the same policy, and Henri IV. extended it to an idea of a Christian republic of federated nations, as against v universal monarchy. This idea enabled Cromwell to meddle as European arbiter, whereas he ought only to have acted as moderator and equalizer of parties. Leibnitz called the House of Hapsburgh a continual conspiracy against the rights of the people, and Richelieu got the equilibrium established and introduced at the Treaty of Westphalia, as a principle of the law of nations, though with the concomitant of Congresses. The princes so assembled plotted against Poland, as might have been anticipated, and [p. 166] in the course of seventy years they were enabled entirely to break up the Balance of Power in Europe. Cromwell, Richelieu, Napoleon, and Bismarck, by force, finesse, chicane, and brutal bluntness, have overturned the very groundwork of the principle. The English, having at first stirred up war by means of subventions, have now tumbled, only too laxly, into the stupid doctrine of non-intervention. Congresses should never have been allowed. These "Parliaments of Kings" can only do mischief, as they have no controlling power to refer to. They lack a King above the Parliaments, and as that is impossible, Congresses can only meet for evil. The strongest are irresistible in such congregations. The weaker can get no justice and no sympathy. If they take the field, everybody is against them; if they submit, they are despoiled without hope of a remedy: whereas, formerly, a wrong done might excite a feeling of justice in a neighbour, and so induce him to help; or, where justice was weak, fear of similar treatment might opportunely bring forth the required aid.

^170:1 Si, for tres.

^172:1 Read, Qui mettra les Anglois en deconfiture.

^175:1 Observe here how very different is Clarendon's estimate of James I. from the trash that Sir Walter Scott indulges in at the King's expense, in those romances of his from which half the world draw their notions of history.

^176:1 Latin, per, during.

^179:1 Variant, le tertre, the knoll or rising ground.

^184:1 D. D. reads here ne dira t-on qu'ouy, and I think the sense requires it.

^185:1 Historical discrepancies ought to be chronicled, for they confuse all investigation, and force every conscientious new comer to commence the whole work over again. A writer in the "Book of Days" pretends to be particularly accurate (ii 309), noting that "the storm in reality happened on Monday, August 30, and must have been pretty well spent before the Friday afternoon, when Oliver breathed his last." Rosse, in his "Index of Dates," says (v. Storms) that there was one on September 3. Carlyle ("Cromwell Letters," iii. 457) chronicles the stormy Monday, but not the stormy Friday. Hume says a violent tempest "immediately succeeded his death." Clarendon, who may be supposed to know better than any of them, writes (v. 648, ed. 1731:) "And this now was a day (i.e. the Friday) very memorable for the greatest storm of wind that had ever been known. for some hours before and after his death."

^186:1 This, of course, is "living on barley bread," as everybody translates it. I think, however, it has reference to the phrase faire ses orges, to enrich one's self unscrupulously at the expense of others. If that be so, it becomes excellently applicable in the present context [Noel.] He had sown his wild oats, and now began a faire ses orges.

^186:2 Tant, should, I think, be temps.

^186:3 Greek, koptein, to strike = coup; it may even stand here for a coup d'etat. [Borel.]

^186:4 Construction is mettant a des plus grands le pied sur la gorge.

^187:1 Foudre metaphorically, saltpetre, here fireballs. The belief at the time was that the fire was the work of incendiaries, and it has never been disproved, though it has been ridiculed by those who set up for liberty and enlightenment. The Illuminati will not allow London to have been thus burnt by others; and it is quite certain that they themselves will never set the Thames on fire. What Nostradamus asserts here, history has asserted. That is enough for the present purpose.

^187:2 La dame. Garencieres takes this for St. Paul's, once dedicated to Diana, who is the ancient dame. We may take it for the mother Church, if we like; and it would not be using much violence if we read le dome, for that might very well mean, as in the Latin, doma, house or church, as St. Jerome uses it--Domus Dei, in fact.

^187:3 Cherra, future of the verb choir, tomber, to fall.

^187:4 Secte. By this Garencieres thinks is meant the eighty-seven churches that were burnt with St. Paul's, belonging to the same Protestant sect. We might read sorte.

^188:1 Luite, Romance, for lutte, battle.

^188:2 See note on previous page.

^191:1 Variant, Luy, satallites la mort degousteront.

^191:2 Esteut, or esleu.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

 

French Revolution

THE VULGAR ADVENT. [I. 160.]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 74.

	 
		La. dechassee [*1] an regne tournera,
		 Ses ennemies trouves des conjures:
		 Plus que jamais son temps triomphera,
		 Trois et septante a mort trop asseures.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		She who was proscribed will return to the kingdom,
		 Her enemies will be treated as conspirators;
		 More than ever her time (or empire) will triumph;
		 Seventy-three years its deathly domination is assured.
		
		 THE Revolution (la dechassee), repressed in 1816, shall again obtain the government. Its enemies will be treated as conspirators, and it will be stronger than ever. Seventy-three years are assured to its death-like rule. I give this as M. le Pelletier does, but I see no reason whatever to think that it is correct. Garencieres makes it apply to Charles II. of England, and the seventy-three put to death are those who abetted the murder of his father. This is very vague. Garencieres reads Le dechasse. Here we may remark that Napoleon himself [p. 280] dates his nobility from the battle of Montenotte, 1797, Seventy-three years added to this yields us the remarkable date of the fall of his dynasty at Sedan, 1870,

[p. 199]

 Century I.--Quatrain 3. (September 22, 1792.) [I. 162.]

	 
		Quand la lictiere du tourbillion versee, [*1]
		 Et seront faces de leurs manteaux [*2] couvers,
		 La republique par gens nouveaux vexee, [*3]
		 Lors blancs et rouges jugeront a l'envers.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When the litter is turned topsy-turvey by the typhoon,
		 Men will mask their faces with the cloak of hypocrisy.
		 The republic will be troubled by new-risen men;
		 The white and red will judge by contraries.
		
		 This means that the royalists (les blancs) and the republicans (les rouges) will judge of everything from utterly opposed points of view. What was top will become bottom, when the blast blows the litter over; and, new men rising to power, the rest will cover their faces with hypocrisy, as men do with their cloaks in a storm. Compare the phrase a l'envers with <page 154>.

Century II.--Quatrain 30. [I. 163.]

	 
		 
			 
				Un qui les dieux d'Annibal infernaux
				 Fera renaistre, effrayeur des humains.
				 Oncq' [*4] plus d'horreur ne [*5] plus pire journaux
				 Qu'avint viendra par Babel aux Romains. [*6]
				
				 
				
				   

[p. 200]

 Translation.

	 
		There will be one who will revive the infernal gods
		 Of Hannibal, a terror to mankind.
		 Never arrived by Babel note horror
		 Nor worse day's work than will fall upon Roman Catholics.
		
		 The meaning is, Napoleon shall arise, who will reawaken the solemn curse on Rome uttered by Hannibal, when he called the infernal gods to witness his hatred to her, to the terror of all mortals. Not Babel at the dispersion brought on the world more horror, nor days of more evil-ploughing for the present or seed-sowing for the future than shall fall upon the Roman world by him. This is much better than to limit it to an ecclesiastical area merely. We shall see that Charles V. is a sort of prototype of Napoleon, and Garencieres adduces Charles V. as fulfilling this prophecy. Hannibal is also a prototype of Napoleon in attacking Italy by crossing the Alps.

 Century I.--Quatrain 14. (1789-1793.) [I. 164.]

	 
		De gent esclave chansons, chants et requestes
		 Captifs par [*1] Princes et Seigneur aux prisons,
		 A l'advenir par idiots sans testes
		 Seront receus par [*2] divines oraisons.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Songs, chants, and refrains of the slavish mob,
		 Whilst the Princes and King are captive in prison,
		 Shall be received in the future as oracles divine
		 By headless idiots deprived of judgment.
		
		 Songs--such as the Marseillaise while the King and Princes are imprisoned in the Temple,--songs of the mob (gent esclave) are received by brainless fools for divine utterances, even prayers (divines oraisons). Vox populi, vox Dei, is always the fools' blasphemous formula, when swine

[p. 201]

chose Barabbas for Pontifex or Generalissimo. A cruelly entreated people; whose burdens are aggravated by wickedness in high places needlessly, above and beyond the grief, which every man is born to by the act of birth into a world of sickness, sorrow, and injustice; sighs heavily at this unduly heaped-up burden, and that sigh, that vox populi, runs upward like a lightning conductor to elicit fire from the clouds, coming back charged with electricity and thunder,--a vox Dei of terrible divinity. But when scum rises to the direction, as with the Revolutionists, and is followed by some brutalized sabreur aggrandizing himself as king of chaos and disorder, with shouts of subservient applause from the smutty mob, saying, "Herod, thou art a god," the vox populi that split the welkin once, is now the vox infernorum demonum, the whole upspring and outcome of which is bestiality and lawlessness enthroned in defiance of the decalogue and heaven. Thenceforth the appeal of all good men and sane is, "Ye who worship God, good and alone from eternity, down with them." The men must work and serve. This fiat is in the air, is in the sea, is on the earth. It is the vox naturae, in comparison with which the people's voice, vox populi, is nothing, beyond a momentary troubling of the silences.

The following quatrain I give for what it may be thought worth. M. le Pelletier thinks it to relate to the creation of assignats, December 19, 1789. It would be a pity to lose sight of his identification, if even some should presume it to be incorrect.

 Century I.--Quatrain 53. (December 19, 1789.) [I. 165.]

	 
		Las! qu'on verra grand peuple tourmente,
		 Et la loi saincte en totale ruine;
		 Par autres loix route la Chrestiente;
		 Quand d'or d'argent trouve nouvelle mine.
		
		 [p. 202]

 Translation.

	 
		Alas! how great a people shall tormented be,
		 And holy law in utter ruin laid:
		 By newer laws all Christendom is vexed,
		 With a new mine of gold and silver found.
		
		 We shall see, alas! the French people (grand peuple) agitated, the Catholic religion (la loy saincte) totally ruined, all Christendom put under new laws, when the National Assembly decrees that four hundred million assignats shall .be issued (nouvelle mine d'or, etc.), secured on the property of the clergy, in the interests of the Revolution.

Older commentators applied this to the paper-money schemes of Law 1716; and Garencieres finds the fulfilment in the discovery of the Spanish-American gold and silver mines.

A properly regulated paper-money issue, based on the taxation of a State, having absolutely no intrinsic value whatever in itself, could undoubtedly be converted into a circulating medium that would work more smoothly than any metallic one can, because the market value of the ore, employed as now in coinage, is perpetually introducing a fluctuation of values that conflicts with the nominal standard of the coin, so that the standard is never uniform. The currency required would never amount to a tenth part of the taxation leviable. Paper could therefore be destroyed at the Bank of England, or issued exactly according to the needs of trade and commerce. Fluctuation in the market value of metals would no longer affect the circulating medium in the least. Thus might one cause of recurrent panics be removed for ever. But can bank directors or ministers be trusted with such a responsibility? This hinges on honesty, and there is none to spare.

[p. 203]

 Century VII.--Quatrain 14. (1789-1793.) [I. 166.]

	 
		Faux exposer viendra topographie,
		 Seront les cruches [*1] des monumens ouvertes,
		 Pulluler secte, sancte philosophie,
		 Pour blanches noires, et pour antiques vertes.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Topography will soon be falsified,
		 The urns and sepulchres stand violate,
		 Sects swarm, and babbling sentiment
		 Black put for white, and green fruit for the ripe.
		
		 The curse be on them for changing old landmarks. The provinces turned into departments (by decree of the Assembly, December 22, 1789). The sepulture of Kings violated at St. Denis. Unholy sects will swarm, and a sentimental philosophy, of Rousseau and other maddened sophists, usurping the office of religion, black will stand for white, and green, crude fruit be substituted for the ripe.

 Century IV.--Quatrain 24.

	 
		Ouy soubs Terre Sainte Dame [*2] voix feinte,
		 Humaine flamme pour Divine voit luire:
		 Fera des soeurs de leur sang terre tainte,
		 Et les saints temples par les impures destruire.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Hear from the ground a voice of Halidom,
		 A human flame pretending light divine.
		 The blood of sisters stains the earth to red,
		 And holy temples the impure destroy.
		
		 

[p. 204]

This, I think, refers to the sentimental advocacy of the Rights of man, as substitutionary of religion and faith in the literary movement of the eighteenth century. It would comprise Rousseau's gospel of dirt and sentimentality, Voltaire's substitution of wit for wisdom, and the science of the encyclopaedists floating disoriented upon the waters of un,, certainty, in lieu of the deep thought of the solitary thinkers that preceded them. These last were men who, heretofore walking humbly and without association in conspiracy, interrogated the universe, divinely sown with riddles in great abundance by a hand invisible, until they fell asleep into that hand, and awoke to the illuminated answers.

The blood of sisters was the wholesale slaughter of women that distinguished the Revolution, whilst church altars were desecrated by naked women, set there to personate the goddess of impure reason, feigning la sante dame.

The quatrain 25 that follows this in the text of Nostradamus I now give; but this verse 24, so far as I have seen, has never been commented upon nor has the connection been pointed out. Yet this stanza furnishes the reasons why the stars became overclouded to a people that were benighted, par ces raisons, as the reader will perceive by the second line that succeeds this.

 Century IV.--Quatrain 25. [I. 167.]

	 
		Corps sublimes [*1] sans fin a l'oeil visibles,
		 Obnubiler [*2] viendront par ces raisons.
		 Corps front comprins, [*3] sens [*4] chief [*5] et invisibles.
		 Diminuant les sacrees oraisons.
		
		 

[p. 205]

 Translation.

	 
		The infinite stars are links that light to doubt,
		 And drop the pall of night upon the soul:
		 The eye and front of man,--and soul,--grown cerebral,
		 God and His host withdraw; and with them prayer!
		
		 M. le Pelletier considers that Nostradamus attributes these effects to the reasonings hostile to the faith that improved optical instruments will introduce, as they suggest a plurality of worlds. I quite admit that in many minds this has been the tendency. Almost any discovery, giving a new hint as to infinitude, launches a number of inferior but vigorous brains into new lines of reasoning. We then get great multiplication of secondary volumes, which supply minced Aristotle or chaff to represent any amount of sausage-meat required by the reading public. Of course the further you can see by the telescope the further you put heaven away from the earth-dweller, and he loves it the less; for it is the near things we love, and not the remote. The heart is not universal, and cannot be stretched to it. I look upon the telescope, to an ordinary man, as a drain-pipe, through which he can run off and lose the moisture of his soul and live the worse for it afterwards; to the multitude of men, useless; to the scientific man, a means of inflation and puffing up; and to the really serious and isolated thinker, as the threshold of infinitude that may, though it has hardly yet done so, answer a few out of the ten million astral riddles sown in space. The last-named individual alone may benefit a little by it. But I question if anything at all of this was present to Nostradamus.

He seems to me, in these two closely interlinked quatrains, to enlarge much upon the theme of St. Paul (Rom. i. 28) that, as at the French Revolution, "they did not like

[p. 206]

to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind;" or one void of judgment, "to do things which are not convenient." So that the earth gave out deceptive voices to them, and false lights for Divine light, to slay women and desecrate the temples; and then that the very stars visible to the eye, which should teach faith to all, will for these reasons veil themselves and leave nothing to mankind but the darkness of night. Pure materialism follows, God and His host withdraw, and prayer is no more heard upon the earth.

 Century I.--Quatrain 60. [I. 168.]

	 
		Un empereur naistra pres d'Italie,
		 Qui a l'Empire sera vendu bien cher:
		 Diront avec quels gens il se ralie,
		 Qu'on trouvera moins prince que boucher.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		An emperor shall be born near Italy,
		 Bought by the Empire at a bankrupt rate:
		 You'd say the herd, he gathers to himself,
		 Denote him butcher rather than a prince.
		
		An emperor shall be born in Corsica--Napoleon Bonaparte. His advent to the throne of France will prove prodigiously costly to her. It is enough to make one say, from the tribe he surrounds himself with, that he is more like a butcher far, with the steel dangling at his side, and slaughter-man apprentices, than a prince.
		
		 It is natural that Bouys, who has hunted Nostradamus for quatrains that will serve for adulation of Napoleon, has passed this over, sub silentio, entirely. Garencieres, speaking of this, says it is a prophecy for the future, for that until now (1672) no such emperor has been heard of, born near Italy, that cost so much and proved a butcher.

[p. 207]

 Century VI.--Quatrain 23. [I. 169.]

	 
		D'esprit de regne munismes [*1] descries,
		 Et seront peuples esmeus contre leur Roy:
		 Paix, sainct nouveau, sainctes loix empirees,
		 Rapis [*2] onc [*3] fut en si tresdur arroy. [*4]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The rampart of tradition battered down,
		 The people rise against their King anoint':
		 Peace, a new Saint, and sacred laws made worse,
		 Paris was never in such disarray.
		
		 The traditions of the French monarchy are thrown to the ground and the people rise against the King, Louis XVI. Peace will succeed the anarchy when Napoleon comes to power. Pius VII., to flatter the Emperor, will interpolate the ritual on the 15th of August with a new saint, the fete of St. Napoleon, [*5] who was martyred under Diocletian. The Emperor's interference will hurt the Church greatly, and foreign armies (1814-1815) will reduce Paris to extremities she has never before undergone.

As to the fete of St. Napoleon, the story runs that when it was first instituted its impropriety, if not blasphemy, was

[p. 208]

much discussed in Catholic circles. An Irish priest from Rome was one day communicating the strange fact at a dinner-table in Dublin, when an Irish gentleman exclaimed with vehemence, "What d----d impudence!" "No, no!" said the priest, "what you mean to call it is the Blessed Assumption," for that day falls on the 15th of August.

 Century I.--Quatrain 31. [I. 170.]

	 
		Tant [*1] d'ans en Gaule les guerres dureront,
		 Outre [*2] la course du Castulon [*3] monarque:
		 Victoire incerte [*4] trois grands couronneront,
		 Aigle, Coq-lune, Lyon-soleil en marque.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		War draws her length in Gaul for many a day,
		 Beyond the course of Castula the Queen;
		 Uncertain victory will crown three thrones,
		 The Eagle, Cock-moon, Lion-sun, on coin.
		
		 Civil war and foreign will last in France long after the ephemeral Republic has perished. Victory, always uncertain, will crown three houses in succession. They will coin money with the Imperial eagle of Napoleon; the revolutionary Gallic cock appearing with the house of Orleans, instituted by revolution, and adding the crescent of Mahomet for successes in Algeria; whilst the Lion represents Louis XVIII. and Charles X. of the Capetian Monarchy, with the sun representing Catholicism. Le Pelletier says the Sun symbolises Christianity, and the moon Mahomet or Antichrist. Myself I think it would be best to consider the sun

[p. 209]

as the symbol of Christ; the moon as the symbol of atheistic democracy or Antichrist.

This Garencieres thought to be interpretable in his time He reads the second line,

	 
		"Outre la course du Castulon monarque,"
		
		 as, after the death of the King of Spain a Castilian monarch. The eagle as Charles V. [a further analogy with Napoleon]. Henry II., contemporary with Nostradamus, and Soliman, which three crowns met under Leo with uncertain odds in war.

The quatrain that follows this is:

 Century I.--Quatrain 32.

	 
		Le grand Empire sera tost translate,
		 En lieu petit qui bientost viendra croistre,
		 Lieu bien infime d'exigue comte,
		 Ou au milieu viendra poser son sceptre.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great Empire will soon be translated into a little place that quickly, will expand. An unworthy spot, a mere county, from the midst of which he will come to lay aside his sceptre.
		
		 Garencieres interprets this of Charles V., who, three years before his death, resigned Spain and the Low Countries to Philip II., his son, and the empire to his brother Ferdinand. He then shut himself up in the Escurial, in Castile, a monastery; which the son afterwards enlarged into a grand palace. accounted by Spaniards as the eighth wonder of the world. But I am not aware that any one has yet pointed out that it fits Napoleon as patly just as it can Charles. His empire was cramped into Elba--Aethalia, the soot island (lieu bien infime); a mere countship was his monarchy there. It soon

[p. 210]

grew again into an empire, but he only came out of its midst to resign his sceptre a second time and for ever.

After these prelusory flourishes relating to the Vulgar Advent and French Revolution, we are now to enter upon a more special theme; the murder of the King, and the ragged beggars' festival and brawl, called the First Republic of the Sans Culottes.

Footnotes

^198:1 Romance, dechasse, driven away.

^199:1 Versee, for renversee.

^199:2 In this high-wind of revolution men will mask their countenances with the cloak of hypocrisy.

^199:3 Latin, vexata, troubled.

^199:4 Oncques, never, nunquam.

^199:5 Romance, ne, ni, nor.

^199:6 The order is "Qu'avant oncq' plus d'horreur ni plus pire a Babel qu'il n'adviendra aux Remains par les journaux." This is M. le Pelletier's reading, and he interprets it of Voltaire, the encyclopedists and journalists of the seventeenth century, who assailed the faith and the Church of Rome. But surely the one like Hannibal was Napoleon, and the journaux in this old speech does not stand for journals and newspapers that had no existence, and therefore no name in the time of Nostradamus Journal meant a day's work, such as could, in ploughing, be done by a man with two oxen.

^200:1 Latin, per, whilst.

^200:2 Latin, pro, for.

^203:1 Cruches = urns, Cinerary urns. Garencieres read urnes.

^203:2 Sainte Dame I take to be equivalent to our English Halidom, consisting of Holy and Dome--a terminative seen in kingdom and Christendom, and signifying rule or lordship. It has also been written as Holidame, as if referring to the Virgin Mary. Of course, if that were the correct etymology, it would furnish the exact rendering of Sainte Dame: but, as it is, it is equivalent. A voice feigning that of the Blessed Virgin may well be represented by a voice feigning that of religion and faith. I take this from Garencieres, and not the texte-type.

^204:1 Sublimis, high, elevated.

^204:2 Latin, obnubilare, to cloud, obscure.

^204:3 Romance, comprins, compris, contained in.

^204:4 Sens = sans, without.

^204:5 Chief = chef, God.

^207:1 Latin, munimen, rampart.

^207:2 Rapis, anagram, for Paris.

^207:3 Latin, nunquam, never.

^207:4 Arroi, for desarroi, disorder.

^207:5 "On designe quelquefois sous ce nom un habitant d'Alexandrie dont le veritable nom est Neopol, qui fut martyrise sous Diocletien. Outre ce Saint, dont la vie est completement inconnue, les bollandistes font mention d'un Napoleon, brilliant cavalier, neveu dc Cardinal Fossa-Nuova, qui se tua en tombant de cheval a Rome en 1218. Saint Dominique, temoin de la douleur du pauvre cardinal, ressuscita le jeune homme. Napoleon reconnut ce bienfait en menant une vie fort chretienne et, quand il fut mort pour tout de bon, l'Eglise le beatifia. Toutefois, il n'avait pas sa place fixe dans le calendrier. Ce fut Pie VII. qui lui assigna pour sa fete la date du 15 aout, dans le but sans doute de plaire a Napoleon Bonaparte."--"Grand Dictionnaire Universel du dixneuvieme Siecle," par M. Pierre Larousse, tom. xi. p. 804. Paris: 1874.

^208:1 Latin, tantum, so much.

^208:2 Romance, outre, beyond.

^208:3 Latin, castula, tunic. It was a kind of petticoat worn by women next the skin, and fastened under the breasts, which it left exposed. It stands here for the goddess of Republican Liberty, which is generally represented in this dress of the Roman virgins.

^208:4 Latin, incerta, uncertain.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 211]

 

Louis XVI

WE enter now upon the lamentable period comprised in the Reign of Louis XVI.--a period whose only parallel in history is the false and Illegal trial of Charles I. of England; the perfectibility of man being evinced only by the increased savagery and augmented moral turpitude exhibited at the later period. The first quatrain that has been adduced as pertaining to this period in the Centuries of Nostradamus is that of:

 Century I.--Quatrain 57. [I. 173.]

	 
		Par [*1] grand discord la terre [*2] tremblera,
		 Accord rompu dressant la teste au ciel,
		 Bouche sanglante dans le sang nagera,
		 Au sol la face ointe de laict et miel.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		By reason of great discord the earth shall quake.
		 Revolt destroys the old order and lifts its head to heaven.
		 The [King's] mouth will swim in its own blood,
		 And his front, anointed with milk and honey, roll upon the sod.
		
		 Tremblement de terre is earthquake, and from the time of Virgil, and much earlier than that, has been always taken to forebode convulsions of the State; disturbance of all things rooted and firm, and typifying upheavals of the populace.

[p. 212]

[paragraph continues] That it is the King's mouth shall swim in blood is shown unmistakably by the fourth line that follows, where the face is said to be anointed with the milk and honey of the holy ampulla. The Kings of France were crowned at Reims with the oil that was kept there in la sainte ampoule for this purpose. The milk and honey is merely a figurative expression; oil and wine, milk and honey, equally represent the fatness of the land.

Upon this quatrain, about the meaning of which he manifestly could know nothing, Garencieres naively says: "The words and sense are plain, and I cannot believe there is any great mystery hidden under these words." Words put a slight upon men's minds to think they understand what they see written; from this it is clear that you may understand the words, and yet comprehend nothing from understanding them. Orators please take note.

 Century III.--Quatrain 59. [Bouys, 55.]

	 
		Barbare empire par le tiers usurpe.
		 La plus grand part dc son sang mettra a mort.
		 Par mort senile par lui le quart frappe;
		 De peur que sang par le sang ne soit mort.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The rude empire is usurped by the third estate (tiers etat).
		 It will put to death the greatest part of his [the Royal] family.
		 A quarter [of the kingdom] is struck with senile death;
		 For fear of retribution of death, from children of those murdered.
		
		 This must relate to 1789, as in no country but in France had the third estate usurped exclusive power to itself. Since that period the House of Commons in England has pursued the same lines, in a more covert, gradual, and, as some would say, lawful manner. In the Lyons edition, 1558, the second line reads mettra a mort, which makes better sense,

[p. 213]

though it spoils the rhythm, unless the a in mettra may suffer elision in old French prosody--a question I lack knowledge to determine. The quarter being destroyed, as old age withers a man, is to be understood analogically of the lives of citizens removed by terror, or emigration, or spoliation of property, or revolutionary taxation, or by imprisonment.

Bouys tells us that sang is to be understood in Nostradamus of children, family, relatives, so that que sang par le sang here would mean, lest the families of the injured should rise against the assassins of their flesh and blood. Such a reaction actually took place in the South, in spite of all the truculent precautions taken. The quatrains exhibit no kind of method or chronological order in their arrangement. So that, out of the thousand and more that exist of them, the commentator must hunt at large until he comes upon something salient that enables him to attach the passage to some event, when often he will be led to the most extraordinary results. The usurpation by the tiers etat here, with all but the very phrase supplied, and with the results that would follow from the usurpation so unmistakably set forth, fixes the pertinency of the quatrain almost as perfectly as if it had been headed French Revolution. Yet a reader of less observance and care than is requisite to stay the attention which leads to discovery, might readily pass it over as jargon and mere nonsense. But, once you have deciphered the quaint phrases and their connection, you cannot doubt the meaning, nor the author's vivid gift of expression in conveying ideas, with a terseness more than Tacitean, if less artistic. You discover that Nostradamus can hint in a phrase of three words what would require a long paragraph to make it explicit in an ordinary way. This is truly the language

[p. 214]

of prophecy. It becomes legible in the light of the event it prefigures, as characters written in milk upon paper become visible at the fire, or when placed in the hot light of the sun.

 Century I.--Quatrain 36. [Bouys, 56.]

	 
		Tard le monarque se viendra repentir,
		 De n'avoir mis a mort son adversaire;
		 Mais viendra bien a plus haut consentir,
		 (a ce) Que tout son sang par mort fera defaire.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The monarch shall too late repent
		 That he hath not put to death his adversary;
		 But he will have to permit later on,
		 That all his family shall suffer for it by death.
		
		 Taking this to be the meaning, it is clear that the adversary is the Duke of Orleans,--that centre of all plotting and intrigue against Louis,--who had so forgotten himself as, at a public bed of justice, in 1788, to shake his fist in the King's fact with a most threatening expression of countenance. For this he was only sent into exile when he ought to have suffered death. In the last line sang again stands for family and relatives. This could scarcely be plainer if the names were given; but, had Nostradamus here deviated from the secret idiom of prophetic language, he would have prevented the accomplishment of what he was asserting. Things like this may be happened on by chance, if you choose to say so, but the theory reels under the constant repetition of such chances. Men whose names are prominently before the world can hardly be introduced into prophecy. But we shall see shortly that Nostradamus is able to assign names with precision where the individuals are of a lesser rank, and that their names may so pass unobserved until history has recorded them with her iron pen.

[p. 215]

 Century IX.--Quatrain 20. (June 20, 1791.) [I. 174.]

	 
		De nuict viendra par le forest de Reines,
		 Deux pars, vaultorte, Herne la pierre blanche,
		 Le moyne noir en gris dcdans Varennes:
		 Esleu Cap. cause tempeste, feu, sang, tranche.
		
		   Translation. [II. P., I. 174.]

	 
		By night shall come through the forest of Reines
		 Two parts, face about, the Queen a white stone,
		 The black monk in gray within Varennes.
		 Chosen Cap. causes tempest, fire, blood, slice.
		
		 In the translation of this, Garencieres leaves the two words vaultorte Herne as in the original French, and does not attempt the translation. He also mistakes Reines for Rennes, the chief town in Little Brittany. He evidently has no conception whatever of the meaning of the quatrain. Bouys and Le Pelletier differ on minor points in rendering these words, Forest, Le Pelletier reads, in Latin, as fores, gate, that is, by the Queen's gate, and he quotes Thiers to show ("Hist. Revol. Fran." i. 309) that the Queen made sure of a secret gate out of the Tuileries, by which they escaped. But Bouys takes it for the forest of Reines, which is on the road to Varennes. Deux pars is husband and wife; voltorte, or vaultorte, is a cross-road, or a divergent road; vaulx, a valley, and torte, tortuous, says Le Pelletier. One does not quite see how to educe cross road from this. Roquefort gives volt for face, and torte would be turned, which seems to me more likely, However, it stands for the road through St. Menehould, on the way to Montmedi. This, it seems, they were forced into by posting arrangements. Prudhomme ("Revol. de Paris," No. 102, p. 542) sets the divergence down to vacillation or change of orders. If that be the correct statement, then my etymology of face about for vaultorte fits it best. Herne is Reine, by metaplasm of h for i. It was permissible in anagrammatic writing to change one letter in a word, but not

[p. 216]

more than one. The reader can refer for this to the "Dictionnaire de Trevoux," under Anagramme. The white stone stands for this royal or precious stone, the Queen, who was dressed in white. The King was dressed in grey. Prudhomme, in the work mentioned above (p. 554), says he wore a round hat, which hid his face, and had on an iron-grey coat (gris de fer), so he appeared like a Carmelite.

There are nearly fourteen octavo pages of small print (p. 411) of De Bouille, which it might be well, to print, called "Details du voyage du roi et de la reine a Montmedy et leur arrestation a Varennes dans le Clairmontais, le 22 juin, 1791," full of interesting particulars.

VAULTORTE

"Mais on verra que les circonstances changerent entierement jusqu'au moment de l'execution de son projet; et ce qui etait possible au mois de janvier 1791, ne l'etait plus au mois de juin."--"Memoires du Marquis de Bouille," p. 195, ed. 1821.

"Il [le roi] m'informait qu'il partirait, avec sa famille, dans une seule voiture qu'il ferait faire expres. Dans la reponse que je fis au roi, je pris la liberte de lui representer encore une fois que la route par Varennes offrait de grands inconveniens, a cause des relais qu'il fallait y placer pour suppleer a la poste. . . . J'engageai donc Sa Majeste a prendre la route par Reims, ou celle de Flandre, en passant par Chimay, et en traversant ensuite les Ardennes pour se rendre a Montmedy. Je lui representait les inconveniens de voyager avec la reine et ses enfants, dans une seule voiture faite expres, et qui serait remarquee de tout le monde," etc.--"Memoires du Marquis de Bouille," p. 217.

This flight occurred on June 20, 1791. On the following day the National Assembly suspended Louis XVI. from his functions. On the 1st of September they passed another decree, that should the King surrender to the will of the people and become a Constitutional King he might do so. This he duly signed and attested on the 14th of the same month; so Capet fut esleu. The title of King of the French instead of the King of France, had been established since October

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] 16, 1789 ("Cyclopaedia of Universal History"), which virtually was the same thing. But yet strictly it was not until after the flight that he became Esleu Cap. Madame Campan, in the "Memoires de Marie-Antoinette," ii. 150, relates that the Queen's hair had become white in a single night and she had had a lock of her white hair mounted in a ring for the Princesse de Lamballe, inscribed Blanchis par le malheur. She had become la pierre plus blanche encore. Her dress was white, and her complexion too. The tranche stands for the slice, or couperet, of the guillotine. Bouys was amongst the first to explain this quatrain in print, and he says he owed the explanation to M. de Vaudeuil, of Nevers, who has written upon Nostradamus.

 Century IX.--Quatrain 34. [I. 177.]

	 
		Le part [*1] solus, [*2] Mary [*3] sera mitre
		 Retour: conflict passera sur le thuille,
		 Par cinq cents: un trahyr [*4] sera tittre
		 Narbon: et Saulce par coutaux [*5] avons [*6] d'huille.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The husband alone afflicted will be mitred on his return. A conflict will take place at the Tuileries by five hundred men. One traitor will be titled--Narbon; and (the other) Saulce, grandfather oilman, will [hand him] over to the soldiery.
		
		 The harness broke at Montmirail, and detained them two hours (p. 247). The King showed himself at Chalons, and was recognized by the postmaster, who held his tongue.

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] Everything went wrong owing to the change of date and loss of time on the road. At St. Menehould he was recognized again, and Drouet the postmaster's son, rode on to Varennes to betray him.

On the 15th of June the Marquis de Bouille received a letter from the King, saying his departure would be delayed till the 20th, at midnight; that he could not take the Marquis d'Agoult, recommended to him by Bouille (as an "homme d'esprit, ferme et courageux, qui pent se montrer si les circonstances l'exigalent," p. 217), because Madame de Tourzel, the governess of the children, insisted on her right of place never to quit them; and this consideration carried the decision. As if the King could not have let them follow in another vehicle! Anything rather than be forced to show himself on the road as he did (p. 256).

How it all miscarried will be best understood by reading the whole of De Bouille's account. His arrangements seem to have been masterly, like the noble soldier and statesman that he was; the King's arrangements vacillating, foolish, and even perverse. In this account Monsieur Saulce is not seen at all.

This is to be filled in as follows. Louis XVI. alone, without his wife, will suffer the disgrace of being crowned with the red cap of Liberty, called the Phrygian bonnet or mitre, from its being the headdress of the priests of Mithras. The five hundred Marseillais led the attack upon the Tuileries, a palace begun by Catherine de Medici (1564) on the site of the tile-kilns (le thuille), and not in existence when Nostradamus wrote this (1555). The Count de Narbonne, Minister of War, was of the noblesse, and Saulce, father, son, and grandson, were chandlers and grocers, or oilmen, of Varennes. The father was Procureur-syndic of his commune. These oilmen betrayed him to the populace, and he

[p. 219]

was arrested per custodes. These sneaks stand as typical of representative traitors of the two classes of noblesse and bourgoisie paying cowardly court to the proletaire class.

The Madame Campan before alluded to (ii. 158) relates that their Majesties alighted at the grocery shop of the Mayor of Varennes, Saulce; and he could have saved the King. The Queen was seated in the shop between two high-piled stacks of candles, and was talking to Madame Saulce.

The Gazette Nationale, June 25, 1791, reporting what took place in the Assembly the night before, announces that M. Martinet, in addressing the House, described Saulce's conduct as wise and heroic, replying as he did to the promises and caresses of the King and Queen, "J'aime mon roi; mais je resterai fidele a ma patrie." The result of his heroism was that two months later on the Assembly voted him twenty thousand livres as the reward of his exalted vertue citoyenne. Whether, in the scramble that so soon followed, he ever received the wasteful and ridiculous Judas-gift there is nothing to show; but the bulletin recording the vote of these new-fledged statesmen, liberal of money not their own, still exists. We have here "un Brute Francais," apeing the Roman, who loved Cesar well, but blood better.

Thiers' account of the attack upon the Tuileries, June 20, 1792 ("Revol. Fran.," ii. 152), furnishes a pathetic picture of the afflicted King (marri mitre) of the red nightcap, in which he was day-dreaming. The palace was evacuated at about seven in the evening by the populace, which had effected its entry by main force; but, when the crowd had Dow withdrawn peaceably and in good order, the King, Queen, her sister, and the children, all met together, shedding a torrent of tears. The King seemed stunned by what had taken place; the red cap was still upon his head;

[p. 220]

he now, for the first time for several hours, noticed it, and flung it aside with indignation.

As to the five hundred men named by our oracle, the historian of the French Revolution again comes to our aid (ii. p. 209), saying that Barbaroux had promised the Jacobins the co-operation of his Marseillais, who were on the way to Paris. The project was to assemble at the Tuileries and depose the king (ii. p. 235). They arrived on June 30, 1792, and were five hundred men. Ils etaient cinq cents.

Those who care to see how Narbonne acted against the King, can refer to the "Histoire de la Revolution," by Bertrand de Molleville, for satisfaction.

This stands out certainly as one of the most startling of all the thousand quatrains of our strange seer. It will henceforth and to the end of time speak for itself without comment, if we merely enumerate the historic facts as here anticipated in four lines. The horror of the king at finding himself mitre. The god Mithras is depicted on coins in this very cap, and his priests made it their head-dress; further, it furnishes the lively etymology of the word mitre itself. It was for ages, before the French took it up, the received emblem of that frantic crime that has been called Liberty. I will not say the result of this is, as poetry, artistically beautiful; but, as a phrase of intense expression, it is so terse that at a stroke, beyond that of hydraulic power, it seems able to compress a truss of hay so as it may lie in a husk of beechmast. I do say, nevertheless, that, thus regarded, Dante and Shakespeare can hardly furnish between them three sentences of such compressed force; the matter in it seems to be condensed to adamant. Mari sera mitre, as it has been just explained, will be found, the more profoundly it is thought upon, to be an original miracle in phraseology. It is an actual and an awful prophecy in itself, but to devise

[p. 221]

a phrase to so convey the idea by human speech to the human mind of another is miraculous. It may sleep for centuries, as this has done, for lack of interpretation; but, when duly interpreted it cannot be resisted; it storms the understanding; and, as a phrase, seems to be a miracle begotten expressly to become the vehicle in which to convey another miracle. This horror of the King mitred is one distinct forecast. The second point is his return to Paris. There is, thirdly, the conflict of the five hundred. Fourthly, the spot, the Tuileries,--at Nostradamus' time, a thing of thin air, where the tiles were still baking, fire-hot to roof houses with, whilst the pen was writing this. Here again, if it is not poetry, it performs the poet's function, which gives to airy nothing a local habitation and a name. Fifthly, comes a titled name-Narbonne. Sixthly, that of Saulce; and finally, the handing over to the custodians. Here are seven distinct prophecies of events historical: two of them, names of men yet to be born at a period two hundred years removed. And, behold, these seven facts are put before you in four lines!

There is a point of particular interest to be noted in. that first line. Bouys (p. 62) remarks that, first line though it be, it should be the last, as the mitre was the closing act of the entire drama; and he supposes that Nostradamus wanted to make the treachery most prominent to the mind of the reader. That is to talk like a chronologer. The first cause and the final are, in spiritual matters, one. The life and death of man are reduced to two points, and epitaphs give enough about most of the lives of mortal men when they chronicle the birth and death dates. "Alone he returned and was mitred." How, step by step, it all came about follows necessarily; and that is how Nostradamus puts it to us. If he had weighted himself with what science

[p. 222]

calls method, he would have destroyed his own instinct; as science does, just as Saturn ate up the offspring of his proper loins. The soul that does this must grope to its results, but can never jump to them by prophecy.

Before we go to the next quatrain it may be instructive to note Garencieres' treatment of the pregnant forecast we have just traversed. He translates thus:

	 
		"The separated husband shall wear a mitre,
		 Returning, battle, he shall go over the tyle,
		 By five hundred one dignified shall be betrayed,
		 Narbon and Salces shall have oil by the quintal."
		
		 "The verse signifieth, that some certain man who was married shall be parted from his wife, and shall attain to some great ecclesiastical dignity. The second verse is that, coming back from some place or enterprise, he shall be met and fought with, and compelled to escape over the tiles of a house. The third verse is that a man of great account shall be betrayed by five hundred of his men. And the last that, when these things shall come to pass, Narbon and Salces, which are two cities of Languedoc, shall reap and make a great deal of oil."

This shows some skill, but what an unintelligible total we reach. I merely set it down to prove to the sceptical, and those who incline to class Nostradamus authoritatively amongst impostors whose jargon is not worth the pains of interpreting, that they may look at this and learn from it two facts: First, that before the event forecast has happened, all the keys of interpretation are wanting, the prophecy looks like jargon, and is so for all practical purposes; but that, secondly, once it has happened, or as we may say kissed sunlight, the keys appear with it, the light and the understanding awaken together. There is light in potence or in posse now; but even then they will not unlock secrets,

[p. 223]

if the keys remain in the hands of ignorant or scientific persons [or self-sufficient, which is nearly the same thing as scientific], or in the hands of romance-readers and lazy dullards. You will not unravel "the words of the wise and their dark sayings" by reading a quatrain once through. The interpreter must approach the work in a simple, unprejudiced manner; he must get light from history how he can,--from memoirs, letters, books,--and learn by the success and failure of past commentators. He must be content to work very hard all the while, and with little encouragement from others; and then at last he may so do something, that even his neighbours may allow his work to be,--according to the bent or waterpent of the particular mind of each,--some a discovery, some a revelation. He himself may probably feel that a supreme patience has had more to do with bringing the thing to pass than any other faculty that could easily be named. Things of the spirit must, of course, be spiritually discerned, and all talk about faculties when the individual soul is treated of must sound a little paradoxical. To divide the unique and indivisible unity of the soul into parts and pieces, betrays in the proposer himself perhaps some "want of parts." But from the earliest time until now, this has been the scientific way of treating the human understanding; so let us consider that it is right enough. The soul has almost always been cut into three, and then left to wriggle and wriggle, and at last to join itself together again, as best it can, like a worm in a garden. If this be according to Aristotle, let all Sorbonne profess it for right. What does it matter how we treat one thing, if only our method be perfectly scientific and in accordance with all the rest of the universal phenomena, and with a right interpretation of nature? What can it matter about the invisible, if only our eyes know how to take account of

[p. 224]

the things that are seen; that is, of the only things truly subject to the cognizance of man?

 Century IX.--Quatrain 92. [Bouys, 64.]

	 
		Le roi voudra en cite neufue entrer.
		 Par ennemis expugner l'on viendra.
		 Captif libere faux dire et perpetrer,
		 Roi dehors estre, loin d'ennemis tiendra.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The King would enter into the city.
		 (By enemies expelled, France will obtain it [or] they will arrive there;)
		 It will be false to say and reiterate that the captive is free,
		 [And] that the King who is out [of Paris] will keep aloof from enemies
		
		 M. le Pelletier does not touch this quatrain. M. Bouys gives his interpretation, which is not very convincing, and I thought of passing it by altogether. But the captif libere so links it with the journey to Varennes of the Royal family, that it seemed preferable to include it, and leave it to the reader to reject or accept it, as he might think fit. Another determining influence was from my noticing that the cite neuve, or Montmedi, which the King desired to reach, was not French when the quatrain was penned. The VIII., IX., and X. Centuries were not published with the first seven, but were issued at Lyons from the same press, namely that of Pierre Rigaud. Moreri states that Nostradamus felt encouraged by the reception accorded to the seven Centuries to publish three more (i.e. VIII., IX., and X.), in 1558. There is a copy now in the Bibliotheque Royale, to which the authorities give the date of 1558. Pierre Rigaud's name appears on the title, but no date, which is remarkable, as the first volume of 1555 has this imprint: "Ce present livre a ete acheve d'imprimer le IIIIe lour de may MDLV," giving a date as if for a nativity. M. le Pelletier demurs to the accuracy of the pretended date, and thinks it must belong to

[p. 225]

the edition of 1566, by Pierre Rigaud. if so, these three Centuries scarcely appeared in the lifetime of Nostradamus, though they are dedicated to his patron, Henry II.,--who died in 1559,--in an elaborate and interesting epistle dedicatory. In opening this, Nostradamus says he has long been in doubt as to whom he should devote (consacrer) these three Centuries, but at last took courage to lay it at the feet of royalty. Now, the edition of 1566 particularly states that the prophecies n'ont encore jamais este imprimees. One cannot read the Dedicatory Epistle without feeling sure it was written for the eye of the King, and therefore at least as early as 1558, but probably earlier by a year or two. I therefore assume that he presented them to the King in a fair manuscript, and that having done that he remained content, and that the family at his death, finding the original manuscript, put it in Rigaud's hands to be printed.

My reason for thus inquiring into the dates is this: that the investigation makes it extremely likely the above quatrain was written before 1557, the year in which Montmedi was taken by France, and, if so, it explains the line that I have thrown into a parenthesis in a manner in which it has never been interpreted before. Expugner is not French now; expugnable is all that now remains of it in the language. So that

	 
		Par ennemis expugner l'on viendra
		
		 may, I think, be regarded as a parenthetic explanation referring to the cite neuve, which was not yet French territory, though on the point of becoming so,--l'on viendra par ennemies expugner, by expulsion of the enemy, in 1557. If this rendering be thought valid, it furnishes one reason the more for explaining this quatrain as one of the series belonging to the Revolutionary epoch, and one more re deemed from the maze of Nostradamus.

[p. 226]

It would appear from Bouys, though he does not produce his historical authorities, that immediately the King escaped, France was flooded with announcements that the captive was free, and had their consent to hold himself aloof--loin d'ennemis tiendra. If this be established, it becomes certain that we can in the main determine this quatrain accurately. ("Histoire de la Revolution, par deux amis de la Liberte," in 7 vols., vol. vii. p. 126.)

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 87. [I. 179.]

	 
		Mort conspiree viendra en plein effect,
		 Charge donnee et voyage de mort:
		 Esleu, cree, receu par siens, deffait.
		 Sang d'innocent devant soy par [*1] remort.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Death hatched by treason will take its full effect,
		 A charge imposed, voyage made to death.
		 Elected, created, received by his own, and undone by them.
		 The blood of Innocency (rises) before them in remorse (eternal).
		
		 Bouys thinks by the last line Nostradamus intended to convey, that the King felt poignant grief at the innocent victims his overthrow would leave without protection to the tender mercies of the States-General. The other is better, connecting it, as it does, with that case analogous, where the mob cursed themselves out of their own mouth, and said "His blood be upon us, and on our children" (Matt. xxvii. 25).

 Century X.--Quatrain 43. [I. 180.]

	 
		Le trop bon temps, [*2] trop de bonte royale,
		 Fais et deffais, prompt, subit, negligence,
		 Legier [*3] croira faux d'espouse loyalle,
		 Luy mis a mort par [*4] sa benevolence.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 227]

 Translation.

	 
		Too much of good fortune, a too lax Royalty,
		 That makes and unmakes [appointments] sudden, hasty, negligent,
		 Lightly believes his loyal Consort false,
		 And bids good nature lead the way to death.
		
		 This is a picture to the life of the fat-making King Louis Seize. The brush of a Velasquez, as it cannot paint the moral, could hardly so well place him before the eye, as in life. He is no picture well-framed, hanging for inspection in a gallery of pictures, but flesh and blood like one's self alive, and moving with us in the gallery a spectator and observer like ourselves. We have here Louis XVI. before us in the flesh.

"He makes and unmakes appointments; yes, indeed." In a little more than eighteen years, sixty-seven ministers take office and relinquish it. Here they are alphabetically, as Bouys enumerates them. Amelot, Barentin, Bertrand de Molleville, Boyne, Breteuil, Brieune, Brogli, Beaulieu, Cahier de Gerville, Calonne, Castries, Champion de Cice, Clavieres, Chambonas, Clugny, Dabancourt, Danton, de Grave, Delessart, de Crosne, de Joly, d'Ormesson, Dabouchage, Dumourier, Duportail, Duport-Dutertre, Duranton, Foulon, Fourgueux, Fleurieres, Joly de Flemy, Lacoste, la Galaisieres, Lailliac, la Jarre, la Luzerne, Lamoignon, Lambert, Laporte, Latour-Dupin, Lenoir, Liancourt, Leroux, Malesherbes, Maurepas, Miromeuil, Montmorin, Montbarrey, Mourgues, Narbonne, Necker, Pastoret, Puysegur, Roland, Sartines, Segur, Servan, Saint-Germain, Saint-Priest, Sainte-Croix, Taboureau, Tarbe, Terrier-Monceil, Thevenard, Turgot, Vergennes, Villedeuil. Several of these served twice, and Necker was in three times; so that the number of ministries in the time mentioned is seventy-two

[p. 228]

[paragraph continues] --a thing not to be paralleled in history as a course of doing and undoing, of fais and deffais.

His temper was ungovernable and sudden, extending even to rough bathos, but was soon over. Maurepas always said, you must let the King have his first fling of humour out, and then he will soon recover. Secondly, his negligence let everything drift, finance included, till ruin brought collapse. You might think his economists had drawn their singular axiom for statesmenship, Laissez faire, from the example of their royal master. He fell at once into the intrigue of the diamond necklace belonging to Marie Antoinette, which was conveyed by the Countess of La Motte to the Cardinal de Rohan. Report runs that he even placed his wife under arrest in her own chamber for several days. "Lui mis a mort par sa benevolence" displays a most wonderful forecast, and it is open to read it now LOUIS mis a mort.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 92. [I. 182.]

	 
		Prince de beaute tant [*1] venuste, [*2]
		 An chef menee, le second faict, [*3] trahy.
		 La cite an glaive de poudre face [*4] aduste, [*5]
		 Par trop grand meurtre la chef [*6] du Roi hay.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The prince of very comely beauty (shall be)
		 Led to the head, and then betrayed to a second (place).
		 The city of the sword, with powder-torch, burns
		 The head of the King, hated on account of his illegal murder.
		
		 The edition of 1558 gives the reading as above, but the line does not scan; it wants two syllables. Bouys, without comment, reads Prince sera; Le Pelletier understands menee 

[p. 229]

as a synonym for intrigues. But I should read it rather as a misprint for mene. The city of the sword is a graphic name for Paris, where the guillotine was first erected on September 25, 1792, having been perfected by Guillotin, the doctor, whose name was given to it. Roquefort gives the word aduste as brule; but Nostradamus uses it as a verb, aduster, in the third person of the present indicative. Paris burnt the king's head with a powder-torch, or burning powder, that is to say with quicklime; and, as having done him wrong, the people hate him, and wish to obliterate the traces of the murder perpetrated.

The body and head of the King were placed in a basket of wicker-work, and carried, according to De Montgaillard ("Histoire de France," iii. p. 415. janvier, 1793 [*1]) to the cemetery of the Madeleine, and thrown into a trench twelve feet deep, which had been spread with quicklime; more was thrown in upon the top of the body, so that decomposition would follow instantly. When the grave was reopened some twenty-four years after, to bestow a more decent burial on the relics, nothing remained but a few fragments of calcined bone.

Garencieres reads Princesse de beaute tant venuste, which will not scan any better than the line of the edition of 1558; but he translates au chef menee, I find, as "shall be brought to the general," and the feminine termination is then right. This helps to confirm my rendering above. His annotation says that the only difficulty about the quatrain is as to what city is meant. As, however, he suggests no historical allusion whatever, he leaves every difficulty unsolved.

[p. 230]

I think that most readers will be inclined to allow that this is a very extraordinary forecast, and that La cite au glaive as a name for Paris, and what has been perpetrated there, is both poetic and terrific in a very high degree--a sobriquet that, once heard, is likely to cling in the memory for ever. To devise epithets of this simplicity and force constitutes an author at once master of utterance; no matter what may be the shortcomings of the adjacent text. But, when you find these startling felicities perpetually recurring to illustrate facts historical,--facts that will not come into mortal ken for centuries after the death of the writer,--stiff, indeed, must be the reader's neck if he cannot bow it a little, as to a man of God passing by; or, if he would rather have it so, to the occasional divinity shining through man's nature, that will not, cannot wholly die when death has done its worst. From Hecla to the tropics all rational creatures should rejoice at such a fact. What is the new world of Columbus to this? Why, nothing but a new hemisphere of dirt. A spirit, that can read time future, must be a spirit whose habitation is Eternity. It is this hope kindles as we decipher, in the stillness of night, rune upon strange rune of the oracular sage of Salon.

 Century X.--Quatrain 17. [I. 184.]

	 
		La Royne Ergaste [*1] voyant sa fille blesme
		 Par un regret dans l'estomach enclos:
		 Cris lamentables seront lors d'Angolesme,
		 Et an germain mariage forclos.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 231]

 Translation.

	 
		The stranger Queen, seeing her daughter fading
		 By reason of the deep regret she endured inwardly:
		 The cries of Angouleme will be lamentable,
		 And the marriage with her cousin-germain foreclosed.
		
		 The Princess did marry the Duc d'Angouleme in 1799, but there was no issue,--mariage forclos. The Queen wished to marry her daughter to a German Prince: hence all the grief. The Abbe Torne-Chavigny ('L'Histoire predite et jugee par Nostradamus," ii. 28) had the merit, M. le Pelletier says, of this learned interpretation. I cannot quite see this, as M. Bouys gave the same interpretation as far back as 1806, though with a particularity a little less minute. The prophecy thus unravelled is the more wonderful, as the event seems so little worth recording. There is the same exactitude and precision shown as where a kingdom is at stake.

 Century IX.--Quatrain 77. [I. 185.]

	 
		Le regne prins [*1] le Roy convicra,
		 La dame prinse a mort jures a sort,
		 La vie a Royne fils on desniera,
		 Et la pellix [*2] au fort de la consort.
		
		 Pierre Rigaud's edition reads conjurera for convicra, and that, at least, makes the line scan, which convicra does not. Bouys says that some ancient editions read conviera, commitari per viam, and then it would mean to arrange the funeral cortege of the King. I think conjurera the best reading, for that might be taken to mean that they condemned the King by jurors, or jury, as the Queen was in the next line.

[p. 232]

 Translation.

	 
		The assembly will condemn the King taken,
		 [And] the Queen taken to death by jurors sworn by lot;
		 They will deny life to the Dauphin (a Royne fils),
		 And the prostitute at the fort will partake of the same fate.
		
		 Upon the word jures, in the second line, M. le Pelletier remarks that the Convention, erecting itself into a supreme court of justice, proceeded to condemn the King to death. But the judgment upon Marie-Antoinette was passed by the Tribunal revolutionnaire, newly set up, which proceeded by jurors chosen by lot, jures a sort. He further says that this jury is an institution borrowed from England, and he erroneously fancies that it had been first introduced into England at the Revolution, and had no existence there, even by name, during the lifetime of Nostradamus. This shows how little a Frenchman, when even well read, cares about English institutions. Pettingal almost proves that the Roman judices, and Greek dikastai were jurors. There has been great and profitless dispute, as to whether the Anglo-Saxons had juries, or whether they came in at the Conquest. If they did it would be strange, for they died out in Normandy. If the practice be Roman, it would have prevailed in England as in Normandy, both having been under Roman law forms. Coke, Blackstone, and many others, confidently maintain its existence here prior to the Conquest. If Anglo-Saxon it would still be Roman. Were it Scandinavian in origin, or were it Teutonic, it would equally have prevailed here before the Conquest. So that the whole discussion has an interest merely archaeological; and leaves the trial by jury, no matter what its origin, a thing of immemorial usage in these islands. You might as well try, by chemical analysis, to ascertain when oxygen first entered as a component part into the air men breathe. If you could settle the question it would be no use; whilst the time lost in discussing

[p. 233]

it might otherwise be well employed. But the forensic usage was not so in France itself, as modern Frenchmen think, for in old Glossaries, like Roquefort's, you find jurie, not juree: "Assise ou l'on prononce sur le rapport des jures."

They delivered the poor Dauphin to the cordonnier Simon, with orders to let him die slowly. The inhuman villains seem to have felt they could not condemn a child to public execution; so they give orders to a murderer to make away with him by ill usage and starvation, a process that would have rendered the guillotine welcome and a boon.

The last line admits of three interpretations. M. le Pelletier takes the pellix to stand for the National Convention itself, saying that it had prostituted justice in condemning an innocent prince over whom it had no jurisdiction. But clearly it had no jurisdiction over the King or Queen. He then takes the fort to be the Conciergerie, to which it consigned its own members, consorts, as an introduction to the scaffold. This is very striking, but the quatrain does not appear to me to threaten members of the Assembly at all. The unity of conception is best maintained by limiting its meaning to the fate of Royalty; and Bouys places an excellent and forcible interpretation upon it without breaking the unity of purpose. He says that it relates to the Dubarri, the King's courtesan, and that the fort is her palace of Luciennes, which had anciently been a strong place or fort. This is good, if the Chateau de Luciennes bears it out; but the fort may so easily be sort with the old s type, which is scarcely distinguishable from an f, that I think we might very well substitute it. We should then construe the last line

	 
		"And [consign] the prostitute to the fate of the Queen consort."
		
		 This interpretation requires less force to be employed upon the line, and less explanation than any of the others.

[p. 234]

The forms of the s and ###131### are nearly identical. The reading that brings simplicity with it, and removes stumbling-blocks out of the way, usually proves the safest and the best. Here we remove the complication introduced by the word fort, which otherwise requires explanation, and it runs: The courtesan shares a like fate with the Queen. It is now for the reader to select the best.

 Sixaine 55. [I. 186.

	 
		Un peu devant ou apres tres-grand' dame,
		 Son ame au ciel, et son corps soubs la lame,
		 De plusieurs gens regrettee sera,
		 Tous ses parens seront en grand' tristesse,
		 Pleurs et souspirs d'une dame en jeunesse,
		 Et a deux Grands la deuil delaissera.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A little before or after a very great lady,
		 The soul [of Madame Elizabeth shall rise] to heaven, her body under the blade,
		 She will be grieved for by many persons;
		 All her family connections will be cast into deep sorrow,
		 One lady very young [Duchesse d'Angouleme will shed] tears and sighs,
		 And two great ones will be depressed with mourning.
		
		 This can be mistaken for no one but Madame Elizabeth, the sister of Louis XVI., her niece, the Duchess d'Angouleme, and the two brothers of Madame Elizabeth, the count of Provence and the Count of Artois. This is not one of the very striking stanzas, but the forecast is still notable, and occupies its position very well as one in a considerable series.

 Century I.--Quatrain 58. [I. 187.]

	 
		Tranche le ventre naistra avec deux testes
		 Et quatre bras: quelques ans entiers vivra,
		 Jour qui [*1] Alquiloye [*2] celebrera ses festes,
		 Fossen, Turin, chef Ferrare suivra.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 235]

 Translation.

	 
		The belly cut shall spring again with two heads
		 And four arms: Aquiloye shall live several years,
		 In great force (entiers) what (jour qui) time he holds.
		 Fossen, Turin, Ferrara shall fall under his domination (suivra chef).
		
		 This is a very crabbed, but very wonderful quatrain.

The elder branch of the Bourbons was cut short in the person of Marie-Antoinette (le ventre tranchee); shall spring up again in two heads, Louis XVIII. and Charles X. The two heads being crowned, the four lesser princes are called arms and uncrowned. They are counted thus: The Duc de Normandy, who died in the Temple, June 8,1795; the Due de Berri, assassinated January 13, 1820; the Duc d'Angouleme; and the Duc de Bordeaux, exiled August 16, 1830, who, though he had so many close chances, died without the crown,--an arm only, not a head, a hand tenaciously to the last holding to its white handkerchief as a flag. Zurich and Fossano stand, by synecdoche, for Piedmont, and Ferrara for the Papal States.

This brings us to the end of the Louis Seize series. Let us, before passing on to a fresh series, just give a glance at the ground we have traversed; and endeavour to estimate the value of the historical facts prefigured for us by Nostradamus in his book more than two hundred years before the earliest of them began to take effect upon the stage of actuality.

First, we beheld a section of the nation, the third estate, usurping the sole authority of government, and bringing down upon the whole the desolation that was witnessed in Europe in 1789. Then the intriguing Duc d'Orleans was portrayed, and the poor King was seen repenting that he had not, when insulted by him, publicly punished him by death. The next picture was that of the remarkable flight

[p. 236]

to Varennes, in which the very travelling habits of the King and Queen, to their respective colours even, were minutely given, and the precise name hinted of the fallen Capet on the road,--fallen, though elected by the people, esleu cap. At the very last moment we are told their destination was changed by the King, where changing meant his destiny. He was then depicted as betrayed. He had run into the jaws of death, and the very names of the traitors, Narbonne and Saulce, were given; with the further detail, that he was taken back to Paris and mitred with the Phrygian cap, in the desecrated Tuileries, at the dictation of five hundred Marseillais. In another quatrain that journey is called a voyage of death, and in one line is laid before us all that happened to Louis the Unfortunate. He is elected, created king, received by his own people, and undone. To this succeeds that extraordinary picture of the King himself: his best friend could scarcely have portrayed the man so truly to us. Too prosperous at the outset, too good-natured a royalty, sudden in temper, yet dilatory in act, making and unmaking ministries quarterly, and finally done to death by his own benevolence. We then have a stanza devoted to him. We see him as a beautiful youth made chief, then deposed, and his head rolling from the scaffold in the City of the Glave, even to his burial in quicklime at the Madelaine, a procedure so unheard of in the case of kings. Then that curious reference to La Royne Ergaste and the little incident touching her daughter's marriage to D'Angouleme. Then follows the Queen's death, brought about by a jury, a novelty imported from England by the innovators of that period; crowned by cruelty to the Dauphin. There follows a more or less curious sixaine, conveying the fate of Madame Elizabeth, the King's sister; till we close with a brilliant quatrain that exhibits, in a symbolical fashion, the Napoleonic

[p. 237]

interregnum, when the severed Bourbon race puts out again its last two crowns, above the Eagle-law or Alquiloye,--probably the last appearance it will ever make upon the stage of history. I think we may agree, that it would not be easy to parallel such a series of verified forecasts relating to the most striking historical incidents, that bear upon a single reign, from any one book existing in the world.

Footnotes

^211:1 Par = per, Latin, by reason of.

^211:2 A variant is trombe. We are told that the modern commentators find in this word the anagram of Rome, by syncope of t and b. So you might in rompu, by substitution of e for p and the ellision of u. But as no good comes of doing either, I should suggest to leave them alone.

^217:1 Le part is the same word as in the last quatrain, and stands here for the husband.

^217:2 Solus, Latin for seul.

^217:3 Mary, or marri, is from the old word Marrir, s'affliger, and means afflicted, full of grief.

^217:4 Trahyr. Trahitor, trahiter, from Latin traditor = traitre, English traitor.

^217:5 Coutaux M. Le Pelletier takes as soldiers. Par coutaux = per custodes. They betrayed him into the hands of guards. I think it may also mean coustiller, a soldier armed with the coustille, a short, straight cutlass.

^217:6 Avons = avus, grandfather.

^226:1 A variant reads pour.

^226:2 Construe Trop de bon temps.

^226:3 Legier, for legerement. Romance language.

^226:4 Par, for Latin per, because of.

^228:1 Tantum, Latin, very.

^228:2 Venustus, Latin, comely.

^228:3 Faict, Latin, factus made.

^228:4 Face, Latin, fax torch.
^228:5 Aduste, Latin, adustus burnt.

^228:6 Chef, head.

^229:1 Le corps et la tete places dans un panier d'osier sont a l'instant meme portes an cimetiere de la Madelaine, jetes aussitot dans une fosse profonde de douze pieds, ouverte de six, garnie et reconvene de chaux vive, et dissous immediatement. On l'inhume aupres des personnes qui avaient peri le 20 mai, 1770, jour de la fete donnee par la ville de Paris, a l'occasion de son mariage, et aupres des Suisses morts dans la journee du 10 aout."

^230:1 Ergaste is estrange in Pierre Rigaud's edition. Ergaster is a workman, and M. le Pelletier says Ergaster is Latin. It may be, but I do not find it in Facciolati, though ergastulum, a workhouse, is there given. When Marie Antoinette was in the Temple, she was reduced to working with her hands, like a workwoman (ergaste). But ergaste is the anagram of estrange, the one letter n excepted. Probably estrange is the preferable reading, inasmuch as Marie Antoinette was an Austrian, and so etrangere.

^231:1 Prins, Latin, prensus, taken, captive.

^231:2 Pellix, Latin, pellex, prostitute.

^234:1 Qui = Latin cui, to which.

^234:2 Alquiloye = Aquilae lex, law or rule of the Imperial Eagle.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238]

 

The National Convention

WE now reach a fresh division, and shall treat of the National Convention,--a period of about three years.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 17. [I. 189.]

	 
		Les bien aises subit [*1] seront desmis;
		 Par les trois freres le monde mis en trouble.
		 Cite marine saisiront ennemies;
		 Faim, feu, sang, peste, et de tous maux le double.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The well-to-do [members] shall be suddenly dismissed,
		 On account of three brothers the world shall suffer trouble.
		 Enemies shall take possession of the marine city;
		 Hunger, fire, slaughter, plague, of evils all the double.
		
		 Privilege is to be abolished suddenly. The three brothers who trouble the world are the Royal trio, Louis XVI., Louis XVIII., and Charles X. Toulon is the maritime city. We shall come upon it again, further on, in Century VII. 13, where it is treated of more fully. M. le Pelletier interprets feu as being war, and peste as standing for irreligion. As goods were all doubled to Job, so here all evils are to be doubled. On the night of August 4, 1789, feudal privilege was abolished suddenly (subit). The clergy and nobility were dispossessed of property and title. Toulon, taken by the English, is the Cite marine. It was retaken, in the name of Louis XVII., on August 23, 1793, by the French; on the

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] 19th of December, Marie-Antoinette and Egalite, Duc d'Orleans, being both executed during the British tenure.

 Century IX.--Quatrain 17. [I. 191.]

	 
		Le tiers [*1] premier pis que ne fit Neron,
		 Vuidez [*2] vaillant que [*3] sang humain respandre!
		 Redifier fera le forneron, [*4]
		 Siecle d'or mort, nouveau Roy, grand esclandre!
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The third become first does worse than Nero,
		 See how much valiant human blood it squanders!
		 It will rebuild the old tile kilns,
		 The age of gold is dead, a new dynasty, and great scandal.
		
		 This interprets itself. M. le Pelletier explains the rebuilding of the kilns as setting up the scaffolds to consume the clergy and nobility. I do not myself see the force or necessity of this. The age of gold yields to that of iron or the sword; the new dynasty (the Napoleonic) is a vast scandal, and reintroduces pomp and ceremonial at the Tuileries.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 19. [I. 192.]

	 
		A [*5] soustenir la grand' cappe [*6] troublee,
		 Pour l'esclaircir les rouges marcheront:
		 De mort famille sera presque accablee,
		 Les rouges rouges la rouge assommeront.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		They will not sustain the great but troubled Capets,
		 The reds will take steps to purge their number,
		 They will almost exterminate the family with death,
		 The red of reds will overwhelm the red.
		
		 

[p. 240]

This very forcibly announces the Reign of Terror to have set in. The reds will do what in them lies to crush the Capets, till they have almost annihilated the family in death; and, then the reddest reds will guillotine the reds,--the Montagnards the Girondists. Bouys does not allude to this, though one would have thought it must strike every reader as far as what is said relating to the conduct of the double-dyed reds against the moderate reds. Garencieres' mistakes serve to show how impossible it was to guess at the meaning of a quatrain in the seventeenth century. He fancies this to refer to some conspiracy of red Cardinals against a Pope, to be designated the Red one.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 69. [I. 193.]

	 
		La pitie grand' sera sans loing tarder,
		 Ceux qui donoyent seront contraints de prendre:
		 Nuds, affames, de froid, soif, soy bander,
		 Les monts passer commettant grand esclandre.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A sight of pity will not long delay,
		 The almoners will soon be forced to beg:
		 Hungered, athirst, naked, proscribed, and cold.
		 In bands they cross the Alps, a scandal to be seen.
		
		 This conveys a forcible picture of the calamitous emigration the clergy of France would undergo between 1792 and 1801. Once the clue is supplied, it leads So naturally, that one almost finds insight from it into the manner in which these representations presented themselves to Nostradamus. One feels, that he must have seen the events passing before the field of sight as visions, sometimes accompanied with uttered words; otherwise how could he get intimation of names? But, if it was thus that intuition came to him, the quatrains, that he now scattered up and down throughout the Centuries in utter disorder and disconnection, must hare

[p. 241]

come to him in a sequence, rendering them comprehensible; more or less, indeed, in the very order probably into which the chronology of historical record enables the careful student to replace them now, as soon as they are understood by him. If this be so, a rather curious fact presents itself, in a form approaching to something like a certainty, which is this: disorder must have been the method of the book. We know that generally his practice was to write down the matter in prose, and at leisure convert this into separate quatrains rhymed; these he must afterwards have taken up in a bag or hat, and when inextricably mixed have counted them out into hundreds. I think it quite possible that he found his forecasts became too intelligible when put together in their natural order, and in the sequence of events. No doubt, with regard to those events of his own time and to be soon fulfilled, he first began to perceive the necessity for inverting or displacing the order. Consecutive and interlinking stanzas would form a kind of commentary, and throw mutual light one upon the other; so that the adoption of disorder would follow as a measure of personal security. He thought that his sayings should be dark, as becometh the words of the wise; and that it would be quite time enough, should they grow clear when fulfilled to a reader, who would take sufficient trouble to elucidate them and bring out their meaning.

 Century I.--Quatrain 44. [I. 194.]

	 
		En bref [*1] seront de retour sacrifices,
		 Contrevenans seront mis a martyre;
		 Plus ne seront moines, abbes, ne [*2] novices,
		 Le miel sera beaucoup plus cher que cire.
		
		 This quatrain exhibits the suppression of the Catholic

[p. 242]

worship in France, which took place November 10, 1793. What they called the worship of the goddess of Reason was set up; and a return to Paganism is what the first line means.

 Translation.

	 
		For a short time there will be a return to [Ethnic] sacrifices,
		 And those who oppose will suffer martyrdom:
		 There will be no more monks, clergy, nor novices;
		 Honey will fetch more than wax.
		
		 The last line means that wax will be cheapened, as none will be consumed in the churches. The rest explains itself. Garencieres can see the meaning of the last two lines; but the first two he considers to have been fulfilled in the time of Henry V. of France and Henry VIII. of England.

 Century II.--Quatrain 8. [I. 195.]

	 
		Temples sacres [*1] prime [*2] facon Romaine,
		 Rejetterons les gofres [*3] fondements,
		 Prennant leurs loix premieres et humaines,
		 Chassant non tons des saincts les cultements. [*4]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The temples consecrated in the fashion of early Rome,
		 They will reject the deep foundations [of Christianity].
		 Returning to their first and human laws,
		 They will not entirely abolish all saint-worship.
		
		 This A le Pelletier explains to be a forecast of the Fete de l'Etre Supreme, which was appointed by decree of the Convention May 7, 1794, and celebrated on the 8th of June of the same year with great pomp.

[p. 243]

 Century V.--Quatrain 33. [I. 196.]

	 
		Des principaux de cite rebellee.
		 Qui tiendront [*1] fort pour liberte r'avoir,
		 Detranches [*2] masles, infelice [*3], meslee,
		 Cris, hurlements, a Nantes piteux voir!
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The chief citizens of the revolted city,
		 Who will struggle hard to recover liberty.
		 The men beheaded, an unhappy mixture,
		 Cries, howlings, at Nantes piteous to see.
		
		 This was realized at Nantes, in Britany, under the Proconsulate of De Carrier. The town had, in 1793, become the focus of the Vendean reaction against the National Convention. The men were beheaded generally, but many men and women were stripped naked. They were then tied together, a man to a woman, in couples, or pairs, which their fiendish tormentors styled "republican marriages." In this diabolic connection (infelice meslee) they were precipitated helplessly into the Loire, amidst heartrending cries and howlings. No viler crime was ever committed on this earth, nor can ever be; the infamy of man and the revengeful filth of lust can no further go. From that extraordinary coinage and coupling of words, infelice meslee, you know, or seem to know, that Nostradamus beheld the horrid spectacle in vision--

	 
		Estant assis de nuict secret estude (Century I. 1).
		
		 Those who believe this to be a recital at haphazard are of a brain-formation singularly constituted.

[p. 244]

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 88.

	 
		Dans la Sardeigne un noble Roy viendra,
		 Qui ne tiendra que trois ans le royaume.
		 Plusieurs couleurs avec soy conjoindra, [*1]
		 Luy mesme apres soin sommeil marrit [*2] scome. [*3]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		In Sardinia a noble King shall come,
		 Who will only hold the kingdom during three years.
		 The tricolour will annex him [the King] to itself;
		 He after much pains will sleep afflicted and ridiculed.
		
		 This is Charles Emmanuel IV. The Republic of the tricolour, "le drapeau tricolor," will despoil him of his continental estate; and he will withdraw to his island, ruling for three years, 1798-1802. He then abdicates to his brother, Victor Emmanuel I., and, apres soin much care, will sleep [as regards governing], and, residing at Rome. sad and humiliated, will assume the Jesuit robe, and die in 1819.

Footnotes

^238:1 Subit stands for subito, suddenly.

^239:1 Tiers = third.

^239:2 Vuidez = Latin, videte, see.

^239:3 Que = how much.

^239:4 Forneron = Latin, fornax, furnace.

^239:5 A is the Latin a, privative.

^239:6 Cappe, is put for Capet.

^241:1 En bref, temps, understood.

^241:2 Ne, again used for ni.

^242:1 Sacres, for consacres.

^242:2 Prime, Latin, prima, first.

^242:3 Gofres is deep, profound.

^242:4 Cultements, Latin, cultus, worship.

^243:1 Tiendront fort, will struggle hard.

^243:2 Detranches, Romance for tranches, tete understood.

^243:3 Infelice, Latin, unhappy.

^244:1 Le to be understood before conjoindra.

^244:2 Marrit, afflicted.

^244:3 Scome, Latin, scomme, gibe, taunt.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 245]

 

Pius VI

THE next four quatrains refer to Rome and Pope Pius VI.

 Century V.--Quatrain 57. [I. 199.]

	 
		Istra [*1] de mont Gaulfier [*2] et Aventin,
		 Qui [*3] par le trou advertira l'armee.
		 Entre deux rocs sera prins [*4] le butin,
		 De SEXT [*5] mansol [*6] faillir la renommee.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When a [French] army shall go from Mont Gaulfier to the Aventine,
		 There will be a man advising them from under the hole.
		 The booty shall be seized between the two rocks,
		 And the glory of the sixth celibate shall wither.
		
		 This is a very curious stanza. The name of Montgolfier, the aeronaut, is visible enough in the two separate words, mont Gaulfier. M. le Pelletier calls it the grammatical figure of metaplasm; but it is not strictly so. Metaplasm is the forming of cases from a non-existent nominative. This is making two words for things non-existent to represent a proper name. But there is a still greater singularity in the employment of it here. For Nostradamus, as I understand him, makes this fictitious mountain contrast with the real Mount Aventine. He makes it stand, as I think, for one of the two rocks between which the booty is secured. The brothers

[p. 246]

[paragraph continues] Montgolfier were paper-makers at Annonay Ardeche, and they gave their own name to their discovery, which dates June 5, 1783. Their balloons opened at the bottom to be filled, so that a man placed in them was under the hole, par le trou. I do not know at what point the Montgolfier was floated to furnish military information to the French, but I suppose on the Italian side of the Alps, so that from that rock or mountain to the Aventine rock would be the points between which the booty was seized. But the former of these Nostradamus seems to me to designate by the man's name, which lends itself to a play upon the word, rather than by a peak of the Alps. M. le Pelletier says that the two rocks refer to Peter, pierre being rock. One is Avignon, in France, and the other Rome, in Italy, and the booty was obtained by the treaty of Tolentino, under date of February 19, 1797. By this the Pope lost Avignon and Venaissin in France, Bolognia, Ferrara, and the Romagnia in Italy, and this he calls the two rocks. The balloon was first used to reconnoitre the position of the Austrians at the battle of Fleurus, June 16, 1794. Almost immediately after the treaty, the Pontiff was dragged from Italy to die at Valence: thus was fulfilled the prophecy of faillir la renommee. Interpret how you may, the mention of the name of Montgolfier so appropriately in this connection, must always stand as proof of the most solid kind that Nostradamus's foresight was miraculous.

 Century V.--Quatrain 30. [I. 201.]

	 
		Tout a l'entour de la grande cite
		 Seront soldats loges par champs et villes:
		 Donner Passaut Paris Rome incite, [*1]
		 Sur le pont [*2] lors sera faicte grand pille.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 247]

 Translation.

	 
		Compassing all round the great city
		 There shall be soldiers camping in the fields and towns:
		 A Frenchman [Paris will take] Rome excited;
		 There will then be perpetrated on the Pope a great pillage.
		
		 The Executive Directory, in defiance of the Constitution which formally forbade it, encamped troops around Paris, la grande cite, on September 4, 1797. This was to quell, or keep in awe, the counter revolution. A Frenchman [Paris], General Berthier, took Rome by assault, February 10, 1798. the pretext being that General Duphot had lost his life in an emeute [dans Rome incite]. Pope Pius VI. was dispossessed of his states, arrested in his palace, and subjected to general pillage.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 46. [I. 202.]

	 
		Pol [*1] mensole [*2] mourra trois lieues du Rosne;
		 Fuis [*3] les deux prochains [*4] tarasc [*5] destrois: [*6]
		 Car Mars [*7] fera le plus horrible trosne
		 De Coq, et d'Aigle, de France Freres trois.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The grand Celibate shall die three leagues from the Rhone;
		 The two dejected brothers shall fly tumult:
		 For war shall make a most horrible throne
		 For the three brothers of France by the Cock and Eagle.
		
		 The Pope, that is, shall die at Valence, a few leagues from the Rhone. The two brothers [afterwards Louis XVIII. and Charles X.], alarmed at the movement of the populace, take flight. War inflicts sad havoc on the throne of the three

[p. 248]

brothers [Louis XVI., Louis XVIII., Charles X.] by the Orleans Cock, and Napoleonic Eagle.

 Century II.--Quatrain 99. [I. 203.]

	 
		Terroir Romain qu'interpretoit Augure [*1]
		 Par gent [*2] Gauloise par trop sera vexee:
		 Mais nation Celtique craindra l'heure,
		 Boreas [*3] classe [*4] trop loing l'avoir poussee. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Roman territory that the Pope governed
		 The French will cruelly vex:
		 But that Celtic nation should fear the hour
		 When it has advanced its army too far to the north.
		
		 I render this in the main in accordance with M. le Pelletier; but perhaps some may think that the Pope cannot be called an augur without great violence. Interpretoit can hardly stand for spiritual government. It is also difficult to make classis into army. Classis represented the orders of the people of Rome; that divided them into bands and companies for governmental and electoral purposes, not for war. The only classis of war was the fleet, and Garencieres renders it by navy, although he is entirely abroad in every other respect ill his interpretation of the quatrain. Though he forces a fulfilment upon it in the time of Henry II. of France, still, evidently Rome is meant, whatever the Augur may interpret. The Roman territory was twice trampled on by the French: first by General Berthier against Plus VI, and again by General Miollis, who in 1809 removed Pope Pius VII. The closing couplet is clearly a forecast of Napoleon's defeat in Russia. That will not be affected by the manner in which we interpret classe; but I cannot imagine

[p. 249]

for a moment that Nostradamus would employ the Latin classis so erroneously for an army, which no Roman would ever use it for. Certamen classicum is a sea-fight, but never employed for engagements on land. The result of this minute verbal inquiry will, I think, end by establishing the more remarkably the prescience and forecast of this consummate seer. He uses the word classe in one of its late eighteenth, or early nineteenth century acceptions, for that body of young men, which is called out every year in France by, lot to serve in the army; or all those called to the colours, who are drawn for service in the same year. It is an administrative word, that sprang into use out of the conscription, and which will die out again when that fraud, passed upon the nations of Europe, has been detected and abolished; that institution which fosters war and makes its otherwise intermittent evils permanent and perpetual upon humanity. To enlarge the area of this view is to doom conscription to death and sure oblivion. Conscription is an invention of Beelzebub, when seeking his bath of blood, under the euphonic guise of a patriotic defence of the mother soil. Mourir pour la patrie is the glozing lie of Roget de l'Isle, that supplements, or drowns, the true cry of "Blood for Moloch." So we will read, for the first time now, the passage thus: But let the Celtic nation beware the hour when her conscript columns are pushed too far to the Boreal northeast. In brief, beware of Moscow. If this sixteenth century anticipation of a nineteenth century idiom be nothing, then let the Alps be called a molehill, and the hollow sea a cup. Here we close the prefiguration of the Papal torment appropriately enough; it closes with a terrible hint to its tormentor.

Footnotes

^245:1 Istra = ira, will go, or will go forth.

^245:2 Montgolfier, the inventor of aerostatics.

^245:3 Qui, Latin for who, a man who.

^245:4 Prins, taken.

^245:5 Sext, for sextus.

^245:6 Mansol, man, sol. Manens solus means celibate, or priest under vows.

^246:1 Latin, incitatus, agitated.

^246:2 Pont. pour Pontificat, or Pontifex.

^247:1 polus, grand, considerable.

^247:2 Man. sol., manens solus, as before.

^247:3 The ordo is, les deux prochains destrois fuiront le tarasc.

^247:4 Prochain = proche parent, who partakes in a heritage.

^247:5 taraxe = tumult.

^247:6 Romance, destrois, afflicted, dejected.

^247:7 Mars, god of war.

^248:1 Augur, for Roman priest.

^248:2 Gens is Latin for nation.

^248:3 Boreas is north wind, or north.

^248:4 Classis, Latin, is a body of men, used here as army.

^248:5 The ordo is, [ou elle] aura pousse son armee trop loin vers le nord.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

 

Napoleonic Rule

 Century III.--Quatrain 35. [I. 205.]

	 
		Du plus profond de l'Occident d'Europe,
		 De pauvres gens un jeune enfant naistra,
		 Qui par sa langue seduira grande troupe,
		 Son bruit au regne d'Orient plus croitra.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		In the Southern extremity of Western Europe
		 A child shall be born of poor parents,
		 Who by his tongue shall seduce the French army;
		 His bruit shall extend to the kingdom of the East.
		
		 IN the island of Corsica was born, of an ancient but impoverished family, a child, Napoleon Bonaparte, whose proclamations electrified the French troops. His expedition, by order of the Directory, to Egypt, which was meant to ruin his career, conferred upon him a world-wide renown. This man was not eloquent as orators are eloquent; verbosity is their gift. Even the endowment of Cicero lay much in words; and in their multitude, which wanteth not folly: Solomon says sin. A plethora of words becomes the apoplexy of reason. But this man's phrases are all portable, made for the knapsack: they fly to the lip as lightning does to metal; poetry, passion, and energy are in them, but fused to an aerolite, till they fall like a luminous bolt, only to burn in man's memory for ever after. They are not winged, but lightning-shod. Fulminants are matter etherealized to an

[p. 251]

interlinking with spirit. But this man's words are spirit itself, and burn their niche in Time, to last as long as that will. Take two of them: "Soldiers, forty centuries look down upon you!" and again, "Behold the sun of Austerlitz!" When you speak, speak thus to men; such words are deeds; and come not as from one who beateth the air to the pitchpipe of the tibicen Ciceronical, but as the bullet to its butt; speak swordpoints, that press between the joints and marrow. But I will stop here, to escape oratory. That may still fetch its price, and seduce the zebra troup in the courts of legal falsity, or in the Babel-room down by the river-Minster.

 Century I.--Quatrain 76. [I. 206.]

	 
		D'un nom farouche tel profere sera,
		 Que les trois seurs [*1] auront fato [*2] le nom;
		 Puis grand peuple par langue et faict dira, [*3]
		 Plus que nul autre aura bruit et renom.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Of a savage name there shall be such publishing
		 That the three sisters shall have by Fate the same name:
		 Then he will lead a great nation by tongue and deed,
		 And have more glory and fame than any other.
		
		 Here M. le Pelletier takes le profere for a thing placed before, and understands it as being the prenomen of Bonaparte, viz. Napoleon. But I cannot see how that is shown to be the meaning of profere. That word, if from the Latin proferre, never was used for cognomen or praenomen. One of the meanings of proferre is palam facere, to make public or publish, and I think it would be safer to render it as I have done. It will still equally draw attention to the name

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Napoleon, in contradistinction to the name of Bonaparte; because, when he mounted the throne as Emperor, he adopted the new name and abandoned the previous one. This selection of a new name seems to be a natural instinct of humanity on entering upon a new phase of life. The popes take a new name on assuming the pontifical rank; monks and nuns do so on entering the religious life; commoners leave their name behind when created peers; women do so when they marry; and here Napoleon does it. But I do not think it desirable to consider this to be indicated by the word profere. Nostradamus says that it is such a fatal name that the Parcae themselves will adopt it. He then repeats that he will lead,--I think it should be seduce (seduira),--the grande nation by speech and deeds, and raise a name unrivalled in the universe. This was certainly true, and the prefiguration of it is, beyond the denial of prejudice, marvellous.

We have now to deal with the word itself, which will furnish to investigation a few interesting hints. Of course some may think them intricate and far-fetched. There is no great importance to be attached to them perhaps, but they must interest the curious; and curiosity that is innocent has a value of its own. Who could see in Sloane's strange Chelsea gallery the shape, dimension, and value of the museum of Bloomsbury and its affiliations?

 Century IX.--Quatrain 33. [I. 208.]

	 
		Hercules Roy de Rome et D'annemarc, [*1]
		 De Gaule trois Guion [*2] surnomme,
		 Trembler l'Italie et l'unde [*3] de Sainct Marc,
		 Premier sur tons monarque renomme.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 253]

 Translation.

	 
		Hercules, King of Rome and Denmark,
		 Surnamed the triple Giant of France,
		 Shall make Italy tremble and the wave of St. Mark,
		 First in renown of all monarchs.
		
		 There was a Celtic Hercules fabled to draw men by their ears: Par langue et faict il conduira, as we have just seen, so that this Hercules means the Napoleonic dynasty. As to King of Rome, Napoleon actually assumed that title, and later on he conferred it upon his son by Marie Louise. In the "Memorial de Sainte-Helene," 1840 [i. 79], by Las Cases, it is said that during his consulate somebody published a genealogy connecting his family with the ancient kings of the north. This Napoleon ridiculed in the public journals, stating that his nobility dated only from Montenotte or the 18th Brumaire. Things were not yet ripe for royal pretensions. The Bonaparte family in Italy can trace to the thirteenth century. One branch was settled at Treviso, the other at Florence, and both held an honourable position; a third was at Sarzana, in Genoa. A Charles Bonaparte settled in Corsica in 1612, and lived in obscurity, says Le Pelletier, till this family of kings was born. Taine has discovered that the family was of condottiere stock, and De Stael and Stendal had, before that, both of them found Napoleon's character more analogous to that, than to any other type known to them. Taine finds him to be a Sforza or a Malatesta born belated by three centuries. He is as unscrupulous, searching, and ambitious as Macchiavelli; and, curiously enough, the only book [*1] he is known to have ever annotated profusely is

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] Macchiavelli's "Prince," which was found in his baggage at Waterloo, and has since been published; and an intensely interesting book it is; enormously wicked and shrewd, but diabolically wise in the Devil's gay antics. It is a scientific treatise on government without God in the world. Its moral axiom would seem to be that even murder should be directed by good sense in the hands of a craft-master. In this respect I think it is even superior to the clemency of Cesar. The "Prince" evidently fascinated him deeply. He treats his author quite imperially, as Bentley or any other great critic might do, and points out condescendingly where the priest is but a theorist and errs for want of knowledge, such as can only be gained from the practical handling of affairs by a man of the Napoleon calibre. I don't know that you can read so deep into the very spirit (for I will not mention heart in the same breath with Napoleon) of the man of blood and brain, as you may by the pencil interlineations by him jotted down in this his Italian vade mecum; from time to time as he recurs to the book, enlarging in view from general to first consul, and from first consul to emperor. You seem to sit with him, as in a magical cave, with terrible writings that come and go upon the wall before you, writings which are the words of this book, and are lit up with a lurid phosphoresence, the light of which emanates from his own putrescent brain.

[p. 255]

It is not historically true to say, as M. le Pelletier does, that the family lived in obscurity in Corsica. The house at Ajaccio was the largest in the place, a palace even as compared with the other residences. The title of King of Rome was precious to Napoleon, as it enabled him to claim succession to the Empire of Charlemagne. Although Garencieres, in his interpretation, fails of attaching any individual fulfilment to the words, he is able, from this title, to say that whoever it belongs to will attain to the Roman Empire.

 Guion is equivalent to Terraefilius or Earthborn, and means giant; in fact, it almost seems a variant of geants; but why three giants of France? I do not know that this has ever been explained. Hercules mythologically was distinguished by three symbols (Martinii, "Etymologicon," s.v. Hercules),--a lion's skin, key, and three apples. The three apples were, not to get angry, not to love money, not to love pleasure. This need only be mentioned for the sake of the double triplication and as marking so far the propriety of the term Hercules. Master of Rome, i.e. Italy; of Venice, i.e. Austria; of Paris, i.e. France; as ruled over by Napoleon as General, Consul, Emperor. That he was "the first of monarchs over all renowned" needs no elucidation.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 61. [I. 209.]

	 
		Jamais par le descouvrement du jour
		 Ne parviendra an signe [*1] sceptrifere [*2]
		 Que tout ses sieges [*3] ne soyent en sejour, [*4]
		 Portant au coq don du TAG [*5] armifere. [*6]
		
		 

[p. 256]

 Translation.

	 
		Never shall he in broad daylight
		 Reach to the symbol of sceptre-bearing rule.
		 Of all his positions none will be of a settled permanency,
		 Conferring on the Gallic cock a gift of the armed Legion.
		
		 In other words, the Emperor will never enjoy a settled seat of firmly established government, and he will confer upon France, either the ruinous legacy or bequest or gift of the legionary conscription, which converts Europe into an armed camp,--an evil gift, indeed; or those who prefer it, may render it as the gift to France of a huge burial-place in Spain and Portugal, where so many thousands of men, her best blood, fell. But conscription is of the wider issue, and the more permanent evil, as it affects Europe to this hour. It makes peace an interlude to war, and very little less costly than war.

Our next quatrain is a great rarity, for it seems to be in pure Provencal, and extremely pleasing it is, a great deal more honied, to the ear in sound than the present French language; which is excellent for conversation and the salon, where society grimaces, but where true souls are struck dumb and poetry has ceased to be possible; or only possible to rebellion, such as that of Victor Hugo.

 Century IV.--Quatrain 26. [I. 211.]

	 
		Lou grand eyssame se levera d'abelhos,
		 Que non sauran don te siegen venguddos.
		 De nuech l'embousq. Lou gach dessous les treilhos,
		 Ciutad trahido per cinq langos non nudos.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great swarm of bees shall rise,
		 That none can tell from whence they came.[p. 257]
		 Night's ambush. The jay [*1] beneath the tiles.
		 City betrayed by five tongues not naked.
		
		"A peacock moulted, and a jay
		    Assumed the feathers fine,
		 And, strutting in a peacock-way,
		    Thought 'now I look divine.'
		
		"The first who met him laughed outright;
		    Others he found to sneer;
		 The peacocks voted him a fright,
		 His brother jays all quizzed 'the sight,'
		    But none would have him near.
		
		"Of biped jays like this, there are
		 Thousands from here to Zanzibar;
		    We call them 'plagiarist!'
		 But hush! For setting souls ajar
		    Is not my line, I wist."
		
		 The bees stand for the Bonapartist army and the Empire. The second line is understood, by M. le Pelletier, to refer to the origin of the family, and it may be so; but I think it refers to the surprising suddenness with which the rouges, sans-culottes, and republicans,--in pretended love with equality and freedom,--were found to welcome tyranny and Rule of One, that used to be spoken of as Monarchy. Guillotined in that form, Frenchmen hailed it as a sword-saviour in the new dictator. It seems to me to be the sudden conversion of such opposed principles to Bonapartism on the night of the 18th Brumaire [November 9, 1799],--De neuch l'embousq, an ambuscade of night,--that startles Nostradamus. Certainly there was no doubt whatever whence the Napoleon family sprang; a family with a history more or less traceable for five hundred years can scarcely be described with propriety as one "whose origin

[p. 258]

is lost in the night of time." Yet this is the meaning M. le Pelletier would have us put upon it.

Next, like the jay in the fable, tricked out in pea-cock feathers and spoils of the Capetian kings, Napoleon makes their palace of the Tuileries [Treilhos] his head-quarters. The city is given over to him by cinq langos, five prodigious talkers of the long robe. Far from naked as to words or clothing were they, but as to principles very nude and bare, quite unable to cope face to face with the audacity of this unscrupulous cut-throat, this gunner of Ajaccio.

The men of no principles and no practice were simply ciphers before this man of practice, par langue et faict; this ethnic Hercules of tongue and sword; this servant, as Daniel has it, of "the God of Forces;" this fly-pest Beelzebub, man of Vespres et mouches, grown to a dynamic King. Where men have lost their virtue, the poor sceptics are given over to believe a lie of their own making; tongues have they to lie withal, but never a hand amongst them to furnish help at need.

Century VII.--Quatrain 13. [I. 213.]

	 
		De la cite marine et tributaire
		 La teste rase [*1] prendra la satrapie:
		 Chasser sordide [*2] qui puis [*3] sera contraire;
		 Par [*4] quatorze ans tiendra la tyrannie.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 259]

 Translation.

	 
		The short-haired man shall assume authority
		 In maritime Toulon tributary to the enemy:
		 He will afterwards dismiss as sordid all who oppose him;
		 And for fourteen years direct a tyranny.
		
		 The English had seized Toulon in the name of Louis XVII., and held it a few months till Bonaparte retook it. He overturned the Directory (sordide), and suppressed its partisans with the Republic, and enjoyed the tyranny for fourteen years, from 18th Brumaire, November 9, 1799, to April 13, 1814. We have already seen (<page 238>) that the cite marine is Toulon. Garencieres fancies this to have been fulfilled when Richelieu made himself governor of Havre de Grace, where he kept his treasure and tyrannized for about fourteen years.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 57. [I. 214.]

	 
		De soldat simple parviendra en empire,
		 De robbe courte parviendra a la longue:
		 Vaillant aux armes, en Eglise, ou plus pire,
		 Vexer [*1] les prestres comme l'eau fait l'esponge.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		From a simple soldier he will rise to the empire,
		 From the short robe he will attain the long:
		 Able in arms, in Church government he shows less skill;
		 He raises or depresses the priests as water a sponge.
		
		 This is a very remarkable quatrain, that Bouys and Le Pelletier, and I suppose all French commentators, pronounce to belong to Napoleon; and it certainly fits him very well. But, with almost as little injury to historical fact, it may be applied to Cromwell, and accordingly Garencieres does so apply it. He writes:

[p. 260]

"I never knew nor heard of anybody to whom this stanza might be applied, than to the late usurper Cromwell; for from a simple soldier he became to be Lord Protector, and from a student in the University he became a graduate in Oxford, he was valiant in arms, and the worst Churchman that could be found; as for vexing the priests, I mean the prelatical clergy, I believe none went beyond him."

The circumstances of the French Revolution and the English Commonwealth times are so much alike in many respects that it is not surprising that such a description as this of a soldier who seized power and afflicted the clergy should fit both the usurpers, Napoleon and Cromwell, almost equally well.

Napoleon was a plain lieutenant in 1785, Consul for life in 1799, and Emperor from 1804 to 1814. He changed the short robe for the long, is understood by M. le Pelletier as being the consular robe for the imperial. There is no need to interpret thus. The military dress or that of the civilian is the short robe. Nostradamus takes but little heed, so far as we have yet seen, of the consular dignity. In the last quatrain he designates the duration of the tyranny, not as one of ten years, which would represent the Empire, but of fourteen, which regards the consulship and empire as one period. If we take Cromwell's protectorate, however, from the death of Charles I. to the death of Cromwell, the term will correspond with Napoleon's imperial career. But the  in England was a period of twelve years, and that in France under Napoleon was of fourteen (quatorze ans); hence this quatrain must not be applied to Cromwell, though it in other respects is as true of him as of Napoleon.

Valiant in arms, but in ecclesiastical matters less successful, still he thoroughly vexes them, penetrating into every place and corner, as water does into a sponge. We cannot accept M. le Pelletier's rendering of vexare as meaning to raise and cast down. It was used in the sense of to trouble,

[p. 261]

 cruciare,--to anger, commovere; or to harass with care, curarum oestu fluctuare; but never to alternately swell and depress, as in filling or squeezing out a sponge.

 Century II.--Quatrain 69. [I. 215.]

	 
		Le Roy Gaulois par la Celtique dextre, [*1]
		 Voyant discorde [*2] de la grand Monarchie,
		 Sur les trois parts fera florir son sceptre,
		 Centre la Cappe [*3] de la grand Hierarchie.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Gallic King by means of the Celtic sword-hand,
		 Seeing the discord of the great monarchy,
		 Shall make his sceptre flourish by restoring the three parts,
		 As against the Capets, and the Popedom.
		
		 Garencieres understands as "the Cap of the great Hierarchy," Spain in the Netherlands, which was the great upholder of the Popedom. His application of this to history is of no value. But if we understand Cap as Capet, and the ancient connection of the French crown with the Papal Hierarchy, I think we elicit a better sense than that of M. le Pelletier, which makes the Capet and the Hierarchy one. The three parts restored, M. le Pelletier makes to consist of clergy, nobility, and tiers etat. I feel that the three parts under Napoleon were Emperor, Senate, and Chamber of Deputies, which would be head (or Caput instead of

[p. 262]

[paragraph continues] Capet), Senate representing the higher classes, and the Chambers the people. That would constitute les trois parts of the quatrain.

 Century I.--Quatrain 88. [I. 216.]

	 
		Le divin mal surprendra le grand Prince,
		 Un pen devant aura femme espousee: [*1]
		 Son appuy et credit a un coup [*2] viendra mince, [*3]
		 Conseil mourra pour la teste rasee.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		He shall have married a woman just before
		 The divine wrath falleth on the great Prince;
		 And his support shall dwindle in a sudden atrophy;
		 Counsel shall perish from this shaven head.
		
		 This divine evil that surprises the Prince a little after his marriage with Marie-Louise of Austria and his mean-spirited repudiation of Josephine, is most excellently rendered by Garencieres as "the falling sickness, called by the Greeks Epilepsia, and by the Latins Morbus sacer." Garencieres was a Fellow of the London College of Physicians, and a man versed in the medical nomenclature of his day; so that le mal divin should here be rendered epilepsy. It has never yet been so rendered, except by Garencieres, and he has no application to make of it whatever, though, as a mere matter of translation, he says, "the construction of the whole is easie." It strikes me that this forecast, thus interpreted, will throw light from Nostradamus on what history has heretofore overlooked, and will necessitate the re-writing of

[p. 263]

[paragraph continues] Napoleon's life from the date of his wicked prostitution of the marriage rite. Napoleon, Cromwell, Mahomet, Cesar, were all epileptic, and probably Alexander. But this particular scoundrel first committed, from the purely sordid motive of self-aggrandisement, a moral crime, and that brought on the convulsion of the brain, that practically discharged for ever the mighty Leyden jar or electric battery, with which this potent brain-fiend had dealt out merciless torpedo-shocks to Europe, and death as from the hot wind Samyel. Inflated vanity, the epileptic stroke, the reaction of external forces on the weakened centre, made the cerebral pap, still of gigantic power, entertain new Phantasms huger than ever, with a terribly diminished power of reason, to bring them to birth by the practical handling of circumjacent facts and time-tendencies. Now, said the fool of this western parable, now am I master of events, and may swim against the sea,--not with it, as I and common mortals heretofore have done, but against it, and to win. Well, he did carry the big dream into Russia, and as far as the nightmare of Borodino. He also still found a mighty utterance of lurid glory, with which to pin that evil minute in letters of fire and phosphorus upon the curtain of eternity, "Behold the sun of Austerlitz!" The looming mot d'ordre, the old work, the old guards, and the old drillings, guided once again to a Pyrrhic victory; two such will damn a kingdom. Reader, read Segur [Comte de Segur, "Napoleon et la Grande Armee," liv. vii. ch. viii. p. 179], and there perceive the giant unbrained and drivelling about his bastard boy called "King of Rome," and what else belongs to mon etoile effacee. "All the supports dwindle," says Nostradamus, "and counsel will perish from the shaven head." Garencieres is right, and the diagnosis true. It is the falling sickness. It is

[p. 264]

not Jove fulminant that strikes the reeling Pagod from without, as with Cesar 'twas, but an epiletic withdrawal of electricity from within, backwards. Emperor and empire will soon roll together in the dust; man's posthumous analysis, and that of all the evil works wrought by him, though the good live after.

Century I.--Quatrain 4. [I. 127.]

	 
		Par [*1] l'univers sera faict un monarque
		 Qu'en [*2] paix et vie ne sera longuement:
		 Lors se perdra la piscature barque,
		 Sera regie en plus grand detriment.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Throughout the universe a monarch shall arise,
		 Who will not be long in peace nor life;
		 The bark of St. Peter will then lose itself,
		 Being directed to its greatest detriment.
		
		 The Emperor Napoleon, reviving pretensions to the old Roman empire or universe, will neither enjoy peace nor life for very long. In his time the Holy Seat, la piscature barque, shall so guide itself to greatest detriment as to be cast away and lost (under Pius VII.).

Pope Plus was made a prisoner by General Miollis, July 6, 1809, and carried to Savone, then to Fontainebleau, and kept under strict guard by Napoleon till March 10, 1814, when he was set at liberty. Garencieres interprets this as being fulfilled in the time of Henri II. of France, who was slain by Montgomery in the tilt yard. Through all his reign he was at war with the Emperor Charles V. This Emperor sacked Rome, and Pope Clement VII. was made a prisoner (vide Garencieres, "Tiber," p. 77).

[p. 265]

 Century V.--Quatrain 60. [I. 218.]

	 
		Par teste rase viendra bien mal eslire,
		 Plus clue sa charge ne porte [*1] passera;
		 Si grande [*2] fureur et rage fera dire
		 Qu'a feu et sang tout sexe tranchera. [*3]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		In the shorn head France will have made so bad a choice;
		 It will be heavier than its force will enable it to endure.
		 So great fury and rage will make men say
		 That he will exterminate the male sex by fire and sword.
		
		 The period of the fulfilment of this event M. le Pelletier gives as extending from 1813 to 1815. It asks no further interpretation than that afforded by the translation.

Century IV.--Quatrain 82. [I. 219.]

	 
		Amas s'approche venant d'Esclavonie, [*4]
		 L'Olestant [*5] vieux cite ruynera,
		 Fort desolee verra sa Romanie,
		 Puis grande flamme esteindre ne scaura.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A troop approaches, coming through Sclavonia;
		 The destroyer will ruin an old city;
		 He will see all Romania desolated,
		 Nor will he know how to extinguish such a blaze.
		
		 A mass of troops is wending from Sclavonia. The destroyer, Napoleon, will ruin old Moscow altogether, and see

[p. 266]

[paragraph continues] Roumania desolated; such a conflagration he will not know how to extinguish. It was Rostopchin, in 1812, fired Moscow to prevent the French from wintering there, and it settled the fate of the campaign.

 Century II.--Quatrain 44. [I. 220.]

	 
		L'aigle poussee [*1] entour [*2] de pavillions,
		 Par autres oyseaux d'entour [*3] sera chassee,
		 Quand bruit des cymbres [*4] tube, [*5] et sonnaillons [*6]
		 Rendront le sens de la dame insensee.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The eagle, drifting in her cloud of flags,
		 By other circling birds is beaten home.
		 Till war's hoarse trumpet and the clarion shrill,
		 Recall her senses to th' insenate dame.
		
		 This is one of the few quatrains that lend themselves freely to a poetic rendering. The Napoleonic eagle driven back to France with all its retreating flags about it, or chased by a surrounding of other eagles, Austrian, Russian, Prussian. The din of cymbals, trumpets, and clarions restore France to reason, the insensate dame.

Garencieres's annotation here is extremely funny, and should not be unrecorded. He says: "It is an eagle driven from the tents by other birds, when a mad lady shall recover her senses by the noise of cymbals, trumpets, and bells."

 Century X.--Quatrain 86. [I. 221.]

	 
		Comme un gryphon viendra le Roy d'Europe,
		 Accompagne de ceux d'Aquilon, [*7][p. 267]
		 De rouges et blancs conduira grand [*1] troupe,
		 Et iront contre [*2] le Roy de Babylon.
		
		   Translation.

Like a griffin the King of Europe will come, Accompanied with those of the north. Of red and white there will be a great number, And they will go against the King of Babylon.

The King of Europe is Louis XVIII.; shall come like 2 griffin (Griffon, grux grupos, a fabulous animal, with hooked beak: v. Liddell and Scott; v. Griffe, Noel; Griffeau, Roquefort, Littre, Gwillim, Brunet, etc.), accompanied with those of the north. He will conduct grand battalions of red and white uniforms, i.e. English and Austrian, and they will march as one against the King of Babylon, which is Paris. Louis, as the descendant of Hugh Capet, may be styled the first of European Kings. The King of Paris is Napoleon, who ruled the Revolution there, and brought order to confusion or Babel. But we can bring it home to Paris even more intimately than this, for the old name of Paris was Lutetia, or mud-place, where the toads, crapauds, or Frankish frogs dwelt, and out of whose mud, or bourbe, came the Bourbon family. So that Paris, their chief city, en calembour, yields Bourbe ville, Babyl, Babel.

Garencieres thinks to see Gustavus Adolphus here as the most eminent King of Europe in his day, and he came from Aquilon, the north, and warred upon the Emperor, who was King of Babylon, from propping the popedom, or from the Babel of confusion. He had regiments red, white, blue, and yellow and green, in the hope of creating emulation amongst them. If he had only had regiments red and white we might have hesitated, and gone further to examine

[p. 268]

where the clue would lead to. But what begins by proving too much is like other overshooting, and misses the mark entirely.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 89. [I. 222.]

	 
		Entre deux cymbes [*1] pieds et mains attaches
		 De miel face oingt et de laict substante,
		 Guespes et mouches, fitine, [*2] amour, faches,
		 Poccilateur [*3] faucet [*4] Cyphe [*5] tente.
		
		 

[p. 269]

We have now rather laboriously cleared the way for a

 Translation.

	 
		Between two prisons, bound hand and foot,
		 With his face anointed with honey, and fed with milk,
		 Exposed to wasps and flies, and tormented with the love of his child,
		 His cupbearer will false the cup that aims at suicide.
		
		 M. le Pelletier renders this: Napoleon, after being consecrated by Pius VII., and anointed from the sacred ampulla with honey and milk, underwent a double imprisonment in Elba and St. Helena. The imperial bees--for so he translates the wasps and flies--are desolated as to their love for the child, and his surgeon, Yvan (pocillator), has falsified the death by poison, on the night of April 12 to 13, 1814. Now, as it was not his own soldiers that tormented him, I think we ought to read it fache: he was desolated by wasps, flies, his child, and love. His soldiers are called abeilles before, never guepes; these are the enemy tormenting, who will not let him abdicate in favour of his son (fyton). We shall do better here to follow Garencieres's example, drawn from the life of Artaxerxes, King of Persia. The Persians used to punish poisoners by laying them between two troughs, here called boats, with their face uncovered, bedaubed with honey to attract the wasps and flies, and fed them with milk to prolong the torment, which if they refused, they ran needles into their eyes most persuasively, and then left them till vermin ate them up. So that it means: he was tormented between two prisons bodily and mentally, with the ruin of his family, insomuch that he would have been glad to have escaped it all by poison. Whenever Napoleon was thoroughly frustrated in his plans, he evidently tried to fall back upon, what he had never deserved, human sympathy; which in prosperity he had never thought

[p. 270]

of nor desired. He first showed this softening, rather of the brain than heart, at Borodino, as we have said before.

We will now take the substance of what happened at the abdication, as given by M. le Pelletier from the Manuscrit de 1814, by the Baron Faim. He abdicated [here may we say, "Woe unto him that buildeth a town with blood" (Habakkuk, ii. 12)] at Fontainebleau April 4, 1814, reserving the Regency for the Empress Marie Louise, and his son. He was thrown into despair when he found the allies to be masters of Paris, and to reject any such conditions. Baron Faim was his private secretary, and describes what occurred on the night of the 12th and 13th of April, before the day of his unconditional abdication. Fontainebleau really became a prison under the surveillance of strangers. There were no terms left to him to save even his life. Still he let the day close without yielding.

For some days previously he had seemed altogether preoccupied in revolving some design. His conversation turned always upon the voluntary death that the great men of antiquity courted when in situations such as his. The Empress had reached Orleans on her way to rejoin him, but he had given orders not to allow her to do so. He dreaded such an interview as likely to unman him for the resolution he meditated.

It was a terrible night of suspense; the long corridors of the palace resounded with the footsteps of servants going and coming, the candles were burning in the private apartments. Doctor Yvan is suddenly called upon to attend, the Duc de Vincence is sent for, and they hurry to fetch the Duc de Bassano from the Chancellory; they are all taken to the bedroom as they drop in one after another. Sobs and sighs escape, but not a word is yet dropped to satisfy curiosity. On a sudden the doctor leaves the apartment, descends

[p. 271]

to the courtyard, finds a horse ready saddled, and quits the place at a hand-gallop.

All that transpires on the occasion is that, at the retreat from Moscow, Napoleon had provided himself with a means of escape, should he fall alive into the hands of the enemy. Yvan, his surgeon, had given him a packet of opium, which he had ever since carried round his neck. The valet heard him rise in the night, and saw through the half-opened door that he mixed something in a glass of water, drank it off, and returned to bed. He quickly felt that his end was approaching, and had his most trusted followers called to his bedside, Yvan amongst the rest; but, when he heard Napoleon complain that the action of the poison was too slow, he precipitately quitted Fontainebleau, as we have seen.

A very heavy slumber supervened, accompanied with profuse perspiration, and when he awoke the symptoms had disappeared, the dose having proved of insufficient quantity, or time had deprived it of its efficacy. Napoleon, astonished at the failure, simply exclaimed, "Dieu ne le veut pas!" and professing, perhaps for the first time in his life, to yield to Providence, resigned himself quietly to his new destiny, On board the Northumberland he strongly reprobated suicide. It would have been instructive to have heard the arguments employed by this intellectual giant, merely as a mental acrobat exhibiting, and as showing how far the intellect may be effective in illustrating the path of duty. But on nothing could Napoleon's opinion be worth so little as on a question of morals, where the soul's instinct is chief guide. The rats ate his heart, it is said, in an interim of the medical dissection. I doubt it; he had eaten it himself long before he left Brienne.

On the morning of the 13th, Napoleon rose and dressed

[p. 272]

as usual. His objections had vanished, and his next act was to ratify the treaty--a solemn act, which he took the earliest opportunity that offered to betray and break.

 Century X.--Quatrain 24. [I. 227.]

	 
		Le captif prince aux Itales [*1] vaincu
		 Passera Gennes par mer [*2] jusqu'a Marseille,
		 Par grand effort des forains [*3] survaincu,
		 Sauf [*4] coup de feu, [*5] barril liqueur d'abeille.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The captive prince, conquered, is sent to Elba;
		 He will sail across the Gulf of Genoa to Marseilles.
		 By a great effort of the foreign forces he is overcome,
		 Though he escapes the fire, his bees yield blood by the barrel.
		
		 He ran the blockade, March 1, 1815, and landed at Cannes, close to Marseilles, crossing the Gulf of Genoa, till defeated at Waterloo on the 18th of June, "seeking death," says Le Pelletier, "without being able to find it," (ou il sera sauf de coups de feu). When the smoke rises from the bottomless pit, "shall men seek death and not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them" (Rev. ix. 6). Napoleon comes out of the island Aethalia, or metallic smoke, and escapes the murderous artillery that kills his men, though it were far fitter he should die. His beehive is not burned with fire, but other liquor than honey flows freely,--the life-blood of his bees.

 Century II.--Quatrain 70.

	 
		Le dard du ciel [*6] fera [*7] son estandue, [*8]
		 Morts en parlant, grande execution.[p. 273]
		 La pierre en l'arbre, la fiere gent [*1] rendue,
		 Bruit humain monstre [*2] purge expiation.
		
		 The third and fourth lines will neither of them scan. La fiere genit should be written la fier' gent, fier being read as one syllable.

 Bruit, in the fourth line, is to be read as one syllable. Garencieres has Brait, which, though it have no meaning, shows perhaps that it was one syllable.

 Translation.

	 
		The thunderbolt shall strike his standard;
		 He shall die speaking proud words, great is the execution.
		 The stone is in the tree, the proud nation yields,
		 The monster purges his human fame by expiation.
		
		 The thunderbolt from heaven shall strike down his standard, and he fails or dies [*3] uttering haughty words. There is terrible execution done. The stone [*4] is in the tree. The proud nation yields. The hero purges by expiation his human renown.

In spite of all these doubts interposed, this yields us a quatrain of a sufficiently clear sense, in conveying two leading ideas; a providential and mighty overthrow of a giant leader and braggart of swelling words; and of a proud nation split in battle, as a tree is by thunder-stroke. The forcible picture is not unworthy of Waterloo or the Battle of Mont Saint-Jean, as the French call it; even though it may not be impossible to find some other battle since the death. of Nostradamus that it might represent almost as well, if not quite so fully, as the tremendous day of Waterloo, June:

[p. 274]

[paragraph continues] 18, 1815. Englishmen seem half afraid now to mention the day with pride, for fear of hurting French susceptibilities. To mention it insultingly, or in a hostile spirit, is unpardonable; but to speak of it modestly and thankfully, and of Wellington as a great soldier and benefactor to us, is only manly and proper. The man who has not the courage to do this firmly and inoffensively in the company of Frenchmen is only one of the many cowards amongst us, who lead the French to think that, however great things our fathers may have done in the past, the spirit has fled from us that would repeat them in the future.

 Century IX.--Quatrain 86. [I. 230.]

	 
		Du Bourg la reyne parviedront droit a Chartres,
		 Et feront pres du pont Anthoni pause:
		 Sept pour la paix cauteleux comme martres,
		 Feront entree [*1] d'armee a Paris clause. [*2]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		From Bourg la Reine they shall march on Chartres,
		 They shall camp close to Pont Anthony:
		 Seven chiefs for peace, cautious as martens,
		 Shall enter Paris cut off from its army.
		
		 The generals of the seven nations coalesced shall, under pretext of peace, but really out of jealousy of France, says M. le Pelletier, and in virtue of the capitulation of the 3rd of July, enter Paris; now cut off from her army (clos d'armee), which retreats upon Chartres, passing by Bourg la Reine and Pont d'Anthony, where it camps. The quatrain does not at all obviously read so, but we must suppose that it is the French army which goes to Chartres. We are not, however, bound to believe that the marten-like and cunning seven only pretended to establish peace out of jealousy to France. All Europe and France herself sighed for peace;

[p. 275]

and if, when victorious, the enemies were inclined to take back what France had robbed them of severally, that would not be very wonderful. The seven nations signatory to the treaties of 1815 were England, Austria, Prussia, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and Portugal.

This is a very remarkable forecast, and shows that although Nostradamus is a national prophet of France, and nearly all his one thousand quatrains turn upon her and her interests, he seldom exhibits a particle of partisanship, and you would not know he was a Frenchman from any word that he lets fall. He strictly limits himself to the utterance of his vision in the tersest phrase, and the most forcible words that he can bring to bear for that purpose. I think there is no other instance known of such inviolable temperance. A man sits down in his study and prophecies; commits his visions to paper in prose; turns them deliberately afterwards, and in cold blood, into the pithiest poetry he knows how; shakes up in a hat, as we have previously remarked, all the quatrains together, and, when he has effectually destroyed all sequence and order, counts them out into even hundreds; then, without a word of note or comment, he sends them forth in type into the world to sink or swim; be ridiculed or admired, be understood or mistaken, perish or endure; until such period as their fulfilment in the centuries of time is realized, and the sleeping world awakens to the miracle, that has slept also, beside the sleeping world, till light arose to make both clear qt once.

 Century II.--Quatrain 67. [I. 232.]

Le blonde au nez forche [*1] viendra commettre [*2]
 Par [*3] la duelle [*4] et chassera dehors:[p. 276]
 Les exiles dedans fera remettre,
 Aux lieux marins commettant [*1] les plus fors. [*2]

 Translation.

	 
		The light-haired one will come to blows with the hooked nose
		 For the second time, and chase him out:
		 The exiled will replace him within,
		 Consigning the strongest of the party to a fortress in the sea.
		
		 Louis XVIII. is designated Le blond au nez fourchu according to Le Pelletier. Le blond is, no doubt, the sign of the Capets, as shown by several other stanzas in Nostradamus, but not the aquiline nose, I think; that, I believe, is intended for Napoleon. So that Louis XVIII. comes to blows with the hooked nose, or Napoleon, for the second time and drives him out; he who was exiled before now replacing him within. The strongest, that is Napoleon and his officers, are committed aux lieux marins; which either means to the English, who go down to the sea in ships, or else to St. Helena, a prison in the sea.

 Century X.--Quatrain 90. [I. 233.]

	 
		Cent fois mourra le tyran inhumain;
		 Mis a son lieu scavant et debonnaire:
		 Tout le senat sera dessous sa main,
		 Fasche sera par malin [*3] temeraire.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The inhuman tyrant shall die a hundred times;
		 A learned and debonnaire King shall take his place:
		 All the senate shall be under his control,
		 And he shall be grieved by a bold criminal.
		
		 Napoleon is the inhuman tyrant to die a hundred deaths: one his suicidal attempt; another Elba, with its cinerary and fuliginous ashes; another Waterloo; and lastly St. Helena, with its ten times ten remorseful hours, regrets, and studious

[p. 277]

falsifications of the history of his life. Debonnaire is, with Nostradamus, an epithet of the Capet family, and stands doubtless for Louis XVIII. put into his place. The King finds the Senate quite submissive to his will, but he is cut to the heart by the daring attempt of the criminal Louvel upon the Duc de Berri, February 13, 1820.

This is the excellent interpretation of M. le Pelletier. Bouys (p. 80), writing in 1806 under the full influence of the demon of Napoleon, gives it a very different reading. The inhuman tyrant with him can be nobody but Robes pierre, who, with a pistol shot, endeavoured to put an end to himself ineffectually, but blew away half his face, suffering thirty hours of fearful torment, and finally was dragged to the place of execution amidst the maledictions of the populace. The scavant et debonnaire to Bouys is, of course, Napoleon. The malin temeraire is a forgotten Georges, whose conspiracy gave a little momentary anxiety to Napoleon. Here terminate the oracles assigned to Napoleon by A le Pelletier. But Bouys adduces several others, which sufficiently relate to the Emperor to be enumerated here. It is painful to see how men manipulate these things to suit their theories. We will give now a quatrain that Bouys cites, as he thinks it favourable to Napoleon; but he carefully omits the one next to it in the same Century, purely, as it seems, because it is unfavourable to Napoleon,

 Century II.--Quatrain 29. [Bouys, 82.]

	 
		L'oriental sortira de son siege,
		 Passer les monts Apennons voir la Gaule:
		 Transpercera le ciel, les eaux et neige,
		 Et un chacun frappera de sa gaule.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The oriental will quit his post,
		 To cross the Apennines and see after Gaul: [p. 278]
		 He will transfix the heaven, the mountain ice and snows,
		 Striking each of them with his magic wand.
		
		 The Oriental, i.e. Napoleon in Egypt, will leave his army behind there, after almost turning Mahometan; return and cross the Apennines and Alps to look after the Directory and their doings in France. He will soon even subdue the elements and Nature by his marvellous roads over the mountains of ice and snow, and will strike each as with the rod of Moses, or the wand of a magician; for the archaic and unusual word gaule may mean that, as well as a riding switch. Bouys misses the plainer meaning of the first line, but is determined it shall represent Napoleon, so he takes Oriental to be Corsica, as being east of Toulon. The passage of Mont St. Bernard with cavalry and artillery he gives rightly enough; the Alps have to be introduced for the Apennines. The quatrain following next to this he passes sub silentio, for the reason above assigned, though it is pregnant with meaning; and how this should have been over. looked by M. le Pelletier, I cannot quite understand; but so it is.

 Century II.--Quatrain 30. [II. 45.]

	 
		On qui les dieux d'Annibal infernaux,
		 Fera [*1] renaistre, effrayeur des humains.
		 Oncq' plus d'horreur ne plus pire journaux,
		 Qu'avint [*2] viendra [*3] par Babel aux Romains.
		
		   Translation.

One whom the gods of Hannibal from the lower regions
 Shall cause to be born again [shall be], a terror to mankind.
 Never will more horror, nor more evil days,
 Come upon the Romans. The confusion will be like that before from Babel.

Hannibal and Napoleon are the only great generals who

[p. 279]

ever forced their military way over the Alps successfully; Hannibal, with his acetum, vinegar, or hatchet, as some have interpreted Livy; and Napoleon for cavalry and heavy pieces of artillery. He seemed to be the marvellous Carthaginian born again out of the shades of Hades, a scourge and flail of men: Babel itself not worse in the confusion that fell upon Rome, and the Church of Rome through him. We have given this before, at <page 199>, but repeat it here with further enlargement, as it belongs more to Napoleon than to the Revolution. Garencieres thinks it was fulfilled when Charles V. sacked Rome. If we consider, as I do, that the two stanzas are inseparable, they will fit only Napoleon.

We come now to a quatrain that M. le Pelletier has overlooked, but which Bouys (p. 83) with some reason attributes to Napoleon.

 Century IV.--Quatrain 54.

	 
		Du nom qui onque [*1] ne fut un Roi Gaulois
		 Jamais ne fut un foudre si crantif.
		 Tremblant l'Italie, [*2] l'Espagne et les Anglois,
		 De femme estrangiers [*3] grandement attentif.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Of a name that never belonged to Gallic king,
		 Never was there so terrible a thunderbolt.
		 He made Italy tremble, Spain and the English.
		 He wooed a foreign lady with assiduity.
		
		 Bouys introduces into his interpretation of this a good deal of foolish adulation of Napoleon; pretending that he was not only crantif towards his enemies, which we must render a cause of terror, but also that he was himself crantif,

[p. 280]

very tender of the lives of his troops. To prove this monstrous proposition, he quotes the claptrap uttered by him before the battle of Austerlitz: "I regret to think how many of these brave fellows I shall lose. I feel for them as if veritably they were my own children. Indeed I sometimes reproach myself for this sentiment of tenderness; I sometimes fear it may end in rendering me unfit to carry on war." This was, indeed, an heroic fear, says Bouys. We are content to let its heroism wrestle with its hypocrisy; we foresee which will come by the first fall.

Garencieres translates that the warrior, whoever he may be, will follow after strange women; and that would fit Napoleon, though not specially. But we think it better to render it with Bouys as indicating the Empress Josephine, who was of Creole blood, and therefore foreign; or Marie Louise, equally foreign. If the latter, Estrange would stand for Austrian (v. Century I., Quatrain 83).

Century VIII.--Quatrain 53. [I. 269.]

	 
		Dedans Bolongne voudra laver ses fautes, [*1]
		 Il ne pourra au temple du soleil
		 Il volera faisant choses si [*2] hautes,
		 En hierarchie n'en fut oncq un pareil.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		In Boulogne he would make up for his shortcomings,
		 But cannot penetrate the temple of the sun.
		 He hastens away to perform the very highest things.
		 In the hierarchy he never had an equal.
		
		 This is a singularly interesting quatrain. It has received three different interpretations; all three somewhat curious, Garencieres opens the ball. He says there are two towns called Bolloin, one in Italy, one in France; that is, Bologna

[p. 281]

in Italy, and Boulogne in France. He thinks Boulogne is intended, and that Richelieu, a man of high things, and beyond the hierarchy, vowed, a little before his death, that if he recovered he would make a pilgrimage to Boulogne; to the Temple of Miracles there, dedicated to the Virgin, here described as the Sun, from that passage in the Revelation, "And there appeared a woman clothed with the sun;" but the cardinal took the road of death, which led, not through Boulogne, to the shades below, and certainly not to the Temple of the Sun. This has an interest of its own, but, as an interpretation, is utterly wide of the mark. Richelieu on a repentant pilgrimage to the Temple of the Sun would have been admirable as a caricature in Rabelais; but, would be no fitter subject for Nostradamus's pen, than if a lady of title went to Aix-les-Bains to take the waters there. And observe, he had to invent a Temple of the Sun to send him to, for never was there such a temple at Boulogne.

We have also Le Pelletier trying his hand, and he realizes it in Louis Napoleon, in his escapade of 1840. When he was made Emperor, his Italian exploit is represented as a flight to the Temple of the Sun. But how he could suppose that inferior mortal, to be referred to in n'en fut oncq un pareil, I cannot divine.

Bouys and others attribute it to Napoleon, and his intention to descend upon England from Boulogne in the flotilla. Is there not a column there, ridiculously built to commemorate the failure? Is there not also a Boulogne medal struck (Ford's "Spain," i. 272) with one of the Napoleonic falsehoods (an endless series) imprinted on its face, which runs, "Descente en Angleterre frappe a Londres"? These are the ridiculous touches; but now let us enter on the serious interpretation and see what that will yield us.

[p. 282]

At Boulogne the Emperor will endeavour to blot England from the map of Europe, and so redeem all his previous shortcomings in that direction. He promises himself the satisfaction of dictating his terms in London, and possibly entertained, in that strange brain of his, some dream that he would be crowned on that royalty-confirming stone of Scone in Westminster Abbey; where, tradition tells, the Temple of Apollo was shaken down by earthquake, A.D. 154, the Temple of the Sun. But Il ne pourra au temple du soleil, says Nostradamus: and history has thought fit in this as on so many other occasions to endorse the forecast of the prophet. Bouys adds, "Napoleon finira par faire la conquete de l'Angleterre;" but Bouys is not Nostradamus; and Napoleon, like Richelieu, went to the shades below from St. Helena, and did not go to the Temple of the Sun nor to the Stone of Scone. He went away, however, from Boulogne to very great things, as men count greatness; and was quite without an equal in the hierarchy of kings.

Footnotes

^251:1 Seur = soeur.

^251:2 Fatum, Latin, fate, destiny.

^251:3 Duira, for conduira.

^252:1 Dan-arxe, Princedom of Dan. The old Kings of Denmark pretended to derive from Dan, seventh son of Jacob, it is said.

^252:2 Geis yios, son of earth. Terraefilius, giant.

^252:3 Unda, wave, onde.

^253:1 The title of this book is "Machiavel Commente par Non Buonaparte," 1816, published by H. Nicolle, 12, Rue de Seine. I have a copy, but there is none in the British Museum. The Preface and the Introductory Discourse on Macchiavelli are full of ability. The translation of the "Prince" in French occupies the left-hand column of each page, and seems well done; on the right-hand column are given the emperor's annotations, [p. 254] where they occur, otherwise it stands blank. They are severally initialled G., R. C., or E--General, Republican Consul, Emperor,--according to the period at which Napoleon may be supposed to have written them. Some of the remarks are clever, but perhaps scarcely show the grip of Napoleon; which, whether right or wrong, was always that of an iron vice. I now imagine it to be an ingenious forgery, but it is quite curious enough to merit further inquiry. This footnote, it will be seen, does not correspond with what I have said in the text. I wrote that under the impression that the document was genuine, and it would be just, if the book were true. But I leave it as it is, though it tells slightly against myself, as the contrast, between the first and second thoughts seems to me instructive. It shows that, let a man walk by right faith or by wrong, he must steer by the belief that is present with him.

^255:1 Signum, ensign, standard, or perhaps symbol of rule or domination.

^255:2 Sceptrum ferre, sceptre-bearing, reigning.

^255:3 Siege, position, situation.

^255:4 En sejour, permanent, durable.

^255:5 Coq, the Gallic cock.

^255:6 Tago, or tango, to touch or take, le Pelletier says; but it does not yield very good sense. Perhaps tagma, a regular body of soldiers, in Dion Cassius it stands for the Roman legion. Garencieres reads here TAG a misere, "The tag to misery," and says it is wretchedness to come from [p. 256] Portugal to France, Tag being the Tagus, on which Lisbon is situated. This might be interpreted well to mean the mischief arising to the empire from the successes of Wellington in the Peninsular war.

^257:1 The jay, of course, is Esop's Fable of that bird, tricked out in finer feathers than its own. The elegant rendering by La Fontaine [iv. 9, Ed., 1838] of Le Geai pare des plumes du Paon had, when Nostradamus wrote, not then taken shape. The original is so accessible, that it may suffice to give here the English version.

^258:1 This curious phrase manifestly points to Napoleon wearing short hair, in military fashion, as distinguished from the flowing locks of the line of Capet,--shaven as contrasted with bewigged. This is one of the many coincidences that connect the Commonwealth of England with the French repetition of it at the Revolution. Croppies, or Roundheads, distinguished the sanctimonious insurgents of the Commonwealth from the cavaliers with their flowing locks. The Tory cavaliers wore wigs; the Whigs undermined the bewigged.

^258:2 Sordide should be written sordid', and teste, test', if we wish the line to scan.

^258:3 Puis, for depuis.

^258:4 Latin, per, pendant.

^259:1 Latin, vexare, raise, inflate, according to Le Pelletier; but Facciolati gives no such meaning. "Vexed Bermoothes" gives it.

^261:1 Dextera, Latin, right hand, or sword hand.

^261:2 Discorde should be discord', or the line will not scan. These may be minor matters, but those who think them unimportant are not wise. It is an excellent rule in literature to let nothing remain wrong that can be set right by a little scholarship and industry. In the world it is very different; there you should never put anything right, for everything wrong has a host of latent friends, that will fight very savagely in its defence.

^261:3 Cappe, for Capet, says M. le Pelletier. The texte-type gives a variation here as la Chappe. This yields no help at all, except as showing by the variant that there is something wants altering. The line will not scan as it s. I think it should be altered to le Cap. If it stands for Capet it is Masculine, and when it occurred before, in Quatrain 20 of Century IX, it was given as Esleu Cap.

^262:1 These two lines furnish an hyperbaton and will be best transposed, that the great Prince will have married a woman before the divine wrath falls upon him.

^262:2 This is equivalent to tout d'un coup, suddenly.

^262:3 This line is too long by a foot; appuy et credit mean the same thing, and one should be omitted. The line should be corrected thus:

	 
		Et son appuy a un coup viendra mince.
		
		 

^264:1 Par is Latin, per, throughout.

^264:2 Equals qui en.

^265:1 The texte-type furnishes porter, with porte as a variant. M. le Pelletier embodies this in his text. I should replace the word that he excludes. Further, I should regard passera as being a form of the Latin patior, and the French patir, and therefore read patira. Porter patira will then mean suffer it to bear. Charge, for the scansion, should be charg'.

^265:2 Grande should be grand', for the scansion.

^265:3 Tranchera should read il tranchena.

^265:4 Esclavonie is put for modern Hungary

^265:5 Olestant is another variation of the nom fatidique de Napoleon, <page 150>, from ollymi, to destroy, ollesthai.

^266:1 Poussee, for repousse.

^266:2 Entour should be entour', for entoure.

^266:3 Entour here is for entourage.

^266:4 Cymbres, kumbe, cymbals.

^266:5 Tube, tuba, trumpet.

^266:6 Sonnaillons, literally, bell-ringing, but perhaps clarion may serve.

^266:7 This line cannot be scanned; we must read de l'Aquillon.

^267:1 This requires, for both grammar and scansion, grande.

^267:2 The E in contre must suffer elision, thus: contr'. It is right in Garencieres's.

^268:1 kumbe, is a cup, usually, in Greek. M. le Pelletier gives kumbos as a cavity or precipice. I find no such meaning as precipice. There is a great difficulty to settle the meaning here. Kumbe means a cup, a boat, a wallet, and also, is like kube, the head. We should perhaps simplify the issue by confining ourselves strictly to the Latin word, Cymba, which is boat or skiff. Always a light boat, as in the Georgics, i. 136, where the little boats were made of alnos cavatas, the riverside alders hollowed out. It is rather a craft for a small lake than for the sea; as Ovid charmingly puts it:

	 
		"Non ideo debet pelago se credere, signa
		 Audet in exiguo ludere cymba lacu."
		
		 But, then, what sense would it yield, "a man being between two boats, tied hand and foot?" Between two abysses, M. le Pelletier interprets; but, then, we do not find that, either in Greek or Latin, the word yields that meaning. He interprets it of Elba and St. Helena. But was an island ever called an abyss; I think as seldom as ever kumbe meant one. Hesychius gives koilos myxos, a hollow recess, the penetralia of the women's apartments, and he adds also bmthos, the depth of the sea, to explain kumbos. In Martinius's "Lexicon Etymol.," there is a very curious quotation from Isidore, Bk. 19., which makes the cymba to be the space occupied by a ship in the displacement of the water beneath it. I think out of all this we may extract a meaning for the deux cymbes. As two places, or recessed prisons, hollowed out of the sea, he shall be put, bound hand and foot. The line, to scan correctly, should have the word et left out.

^268:2 Fitine, fyton, plant, scion, child.

^268:3 Pocillator is cupbearer.

^268:4 Faucer is fauser, to trick.

^268:5 Scyphus, cup. There is a singular appropriateness in this word, whether intended or not by Nostradamus, for Athenaeus describes the Boeotians as first using huge silver drinking-cups, or scyphi, which were denominated Herculean, because Hercules, who was very fond of feasting, used such, and first invented the cry of "no heel taps!" ut libantes nihil in calice vini relinquerent. The reader will bear in mind the Hercules de Gaule of a former quatrain.

^272:1 Itales, Aetalia, Elba.

^272:2 Par mer, Gulf of Genoa.

^272:3 Forains, Latin, foris, strangers.

^272:4 Sauf, Latin, sabous, English, safe.

^272:5 Sauf de coup de feu.

^272:6 Le dard du ceil is the thunderbolt.

^272:7 Latin, ferire, to strike.

^272:8 Estandue is standard.

^273:1 Latin, gens, nation.

^273:2 Latin, monstrum, prodigy.

^273:3 Morts should be read Meurt, perhaps, as referring to Napoleon, who, showed great delight, it is said, when he found that Wellington intended. to fight him. It cannot refer, as Le Pelletier would have it to do, to, the celebrated mot of Cambronne or General Michel, as it has been proved that it was never uttered at all, but manufactured by a wit apres coup.

^273:4 The stone is in the tree. Le Pelletier would here understand silex, the flint axe of primitive ages. This seems to me to be very far fetched., and I would rather read, with Garencieres, the stone into thunderstone or aerolite, which seems to be far less forced.

^274:1 Hyperbaton. the construction is feront entree a Paris clos d'armee.

^274:2 Latin, clausus, shut, cut off from the French army.

^275:1 Forche, fourchu, or forked. Latin, furca, hooked.

^275:2 Commettre, ellipsis for se commettre, to come to blows with any one.

^275:3 Latin, per, through, or by means of.

^275:4 Latin, duo, a second repetition.

^276:1 Consigning.

^276:2 Plus fors, read plus forts.

^276:3 Malignus, Latin, a criminal.

^278:1 Fera should be feront, I think.

^278:2 Avint I take to mean avant.

^278:3 Viendra for viendront.

^279:1 Onque should be oncq', to scan.

^279:2 Italie is the reading of the texte-type. Bouys reads Itale, and then this line will scan.

^279:3 Estrangiers was probably pronounced as of two syllables only, but it is difficult to make this line scan.

^280:1 Fautes, to be taken as shortcomings.

^280:2 Si--very.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 283]

 

Louis XVIII and Louis Philippe

WE now come to the Restoration of Louis XVIII.

 Presage 38. [I. 235.]

	 
		Roy salue Victeur, [*1] Impereateur, [*2]
		 La foy faussee. Le Royal fait [*3] congnu: [*4]
		 Sang [*5] Mathien [*6] Roy fait [*7] supereateur, [*8]
		 De gent [*9] superbe humble [*10] par [*11] pleurs venu. [*12]
		
		 This is a very crabbed quatrain.

 Translation.

	 
		The King is saluted victor and dominator,
		 The oath falsified: The King makes himself known again:
		 Grandson of Louis XIV. becomes King,
		 Is called back by the proud people humiliated to tears.
		
		 Louis XVIII. is proclaimed King, May 3, 1814, but the people take up Napoleon from Elba, March 1, 1815, thus breaking faith. Louis XVIII. (Le Royal) is again recognized, July 8, 1815; the grandson of Louis XIV. (sang Aemathien), a name conferred by Nostradamus on Louis

[p. 284]

[paragraph continues] XIV., who assumed the emblem of the Sun, Aemathien being son of Aurora, who opens the gates of the morning sun. This grandson becomes now undisputed King, the humiliated French nation recalling him with tears.

 Century X.--Quatrain 16. [I. 236.]

	 
		Heureux au regne de France, heureux de vie,
		 Ignorant sang, mort fureur et rapine,
		 Par nom flateur [*1] sera mis en envie:
		 Roy desrobe, [*2] trop de foye en cuisine.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Happy in the kingdom of France, happy in life,
		 Free from blood, violent death and angry rapine,
		 He will have a flattering name, and be an object of desire:
		 A King retired, with too much faith in the kitchen.
		
		 Here we are to take Louis XVIII. as restored to the throne of France: his life passes happily, without violent experiences of blood, death, rage, or rapine. The flattering name was given to him of Desire that is prophetically hinted in the words "il sera mis en envie." He will not devote sufficient attention to his public duties, so that he may be described as desrobe, retired or retained at home; and he will be too much addicted to enjoyments of the table,--trop defoye en cuisine. The gastronomy was proverbial; the obesity consequent upon it made him grow inert, so that he gradually let the affairs of State drift without giving them due attention.

 Century III.--Quatrain 96. [I. 238.]

	 
		Chef de Fossan [*3] aura gorge couppee
		 Par le ducteur [*4] du limier et levrier;[p. 285]
		 Le faict patre [*1] par ceux du mont Tarpee, [*2]
		 Saturne en Leo  [*3] 13 de Fevrier.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A prince of Fossano shall have his throat cut
		 By the keeper of his hounds and greyhounds:
		 The attempt will be made by those of the Tarpeian rock,
		 Saturn being in Leo on 13th February.
		
		 Fossana is put, by synecdoche, for Sardinia. A prince, therefore, of Sardinia shall be stabbed by the Keeper of the Kennel, instigated by Republicans, when Saturn is in opposition to the sign of the Lion, on February 13, 1820. M. le Pelletier, who seems somewhat learned in the houses of the stars, says that Saturn was in opposition to, and not in conjunction with, Leo on this occasion. But Nostradamus leaves it open. The Tarpeian rock is figuratively employed to signify the Mountain, or the demagogues and the Republicans generally. The Mons Tarpeius was first named from murder, and was for ages a scene of murder. Tarpeia, who betrayed the Capitol to the Sabines, was crushed by their shields at the gate, and her father, Spurius Tarpeius, was thrown over the battlements by order of Romulus. Children ill-formed at birth were flung from its heights. It was better known as Capitolinus, so called (caput Toli) from the head of Tolus, found there when digging foundations for the Temple of Jupiter: thus the place of the skull, a Golgotha from the beginning of Rome. Later on criminals were sentenced to be thrown from it. Many of these deadly associations were, no doubt, present to the mind of Nostradamus, and made this mountain of death seem to him fit to foreshadow the death that should emanate from the French

[p. 286]

mountain. To dwell upon this is of physiological interest, as showing how very closely the natures of the poet and the prophet overlap each other; so that, as in the rainbow colours, there is no line to be drawn as to where one begins or another ends:--they may be seen, but not severed.

The Duc de Berri was the son of Marie Therese of Savoy, married to the Comte d'Artois, she being the daughter of Victor-Amedee III., King of Sardinia. This Sardinian was to have ruled France, and, with but one intervening, to have followed the Corsican in the occupation of the throne. Louvel, the murderer, stabbed him coming from the opera, and wore the King's livery at the moment of the attempt. The forecast is again wonderful in prefiguring every particular short of the names of the two individuals. The nationalities are given, the calling of Louvel, and the day of the month. If all this be Chance, some hare-brained few would prefer it to what they know of Certainty.

 Century V.--Quatrain 4. [I. 240.]

	 
		Le gros mastin de cite dechasse, [*1]
		 Sera fasche de l'estrange [*2] alliance:
		 Apres aux champs avoir le cerf chasse, [*3]
		 Le loup et l'ours se donront [*4] defiance.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The great mastiff chased from the city
		 Will be afflicted by the strange alliance:
		 When the stag is driven to the fields,
		 The wolf and bear will commence to mistrust each other.
		
		 The Duc de Bordeaux is the great mastiff, dethroned August 9, 1830, by Louis Philippe, in the dog-days, when the star Sirius is in opposition. Le Grand Chien burning in

[p. 287]

the horizon is a synonym for the gros mastin; the city, of course, is Paris. Charles X., who was fond of the chase, is turned from the great huntsman to the stag. The wolf is Louis Philippe, a name which lends itself to Lou. P. The bear represents, according to M. le Pelletier, la Montagne, in the assembly, because bears make their lair in the highest situations. We need not insist on this resemblance or characteristic pointed out by Le Pelletier.

There are six quatrains devoted by Le Pelletier to the Duc de Bordeaux,--the Henri Cinq that was never to be,--that Royal Prince whom all the Princes should see to be heaven-descended. But as we, who are not royal, have seen that nothing came of him; and that, being now dead, nothing can come of him, we shall pass over the six quatrains in silence. The quatrains of Nostradamus lend themselves most kindly to elucidation once you find the clue, but they most persistently refuse to have a meaning read into them from without.

M. le Pelletier has elaborated the meaning of the six quatrains, about Louis Philippe with so much ingenious learning that we must give the whole of them, and let the reader take them at his own valuation.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 84.

	 
		Celuy qu'en [*1] Sparte Claude [*2] ne peut regner,
		 Il fera tant par voye seductive,
		 Que du court, long le fera araigner, [*3]
		 Que contre Roy fera sa perspective. [*4]
		
		 

[p. 288]

 Translation.

	 
		He who will cause that the lame cannot reign in Paris, [*1]
		 He will effect so much in his seductive way
		 That from the short to long he will attain,
		 Who has brought to bear his deception against the King.
		
		 The meaning of this is that Louis Philippe d'Orleans will cause the Duc de Bordeaux to be unable to hold the reins of government in Paris. The anagrammatic substitution of Sparte for Paris is doubly ingenious, inasmuch as Lycurgus at Sparta established a double kingship so-called. Of course the office could not be that of king at all, but there was the name if not the fact, and that suffices for this prince of dexterous analogists, Nostradamus. Louis Philippe will achieve this by the byeways of seduction, and will usurp successfully his nephew's throne (araigner), putting himself in opposition, says Le Pelletier, to his lawful King. Faire sa perspective he renders opposition. I do not think this is the meaning of the phrase. There is an extract from Fontenelle (I cannot refer to it in his works at present), in which he speaks of a perspective that will make an emperor or a beggar out of the same figure, according to the point of view from which you regard it. That is an optical illusion. Descartes, in his "L'Homme," mentions the pictures placed at the end of corridors to cheat the eye agreeably, and adds, "L'exemple des tableaux de perspective montre combien il est facile de s'y tromper." And then there were those perspectives that Holbein and his contemporaries used to introduce into their pictures, of a skull, or death's head, so painted that you could not quite tell what it was till you reached the right point of view, when it would suddenly contract and draw its elongated self together to a true skull

[p. 289]

by a process the reverse of foreshortening. By the words sa perspective, I conceive that Nostradamus meant that Louis Philippe brought his deception to bear against the King.

 Century V.--Quatrain 69. [I. 250.]

	 
		Plus ne sera le Grand en faux sommeil,
		 L'inquietude viendra prendre repos:
		 Dresser phalange [*1] d'or, azur, et vermeil,
		 Subjuger Afrique, la ronger jusques os.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Le Grand will pretend no longer a false sleep;
		 His disquietude will now lull itself in security,
		 Arrange his army under gold, blue, and red,
		 Subjugate Africa, gnawing it to the very bone.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 290]

Louis Philippe, now King, and so become le Grand, says M. le Pelletier (though, as applied to the individual, it looks quite like a misnomer), will now unmask his designs, and take his repose in security. He will adopt the tricolour of the Revolution and complete the conquest of Algeria; Pelissier roasting the refugees in caves, to the very bone. Everything but the word Grand justifies the interpretation to a nicety.

 Century I.--Quatrain 39. [I. 251.]

	 
		De nuict dans lict le supresme [*1] estrangle,
		 Pour avoir trop sejourne blond esleu,
		 Par trois [*2] l'Empire subroge [*3] exancle [*4]
		 A mort mettra carte [*5] et pacquet ne leu. [*6]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		When France shall be dominated by three parties,
		 The last of the family shall be strangled at night in bed,
		 For having lent too much to the fair Capet.
		 Put to death because a paper and packet were not read.
		
		 When France is dominated by three alternately (Orleanists, Republicans, Bonapartists), the Prince de Bourbon, Conde, last of his race, shall be strangled, at night in his bed, for desiring to follow in the suite of the Duc de Bordeaux. A new will, duly sealed up, in favor of the Bourbon, but not read, is the cause of his death. The "not read" means, not read by the Duc de Bordeaux, in whose favour it was drawn. The Baronne de Feucheres, whose interests were allied to those of Louis Philippe, defeated this by the murder. M. le Pelletier acquits Louis Philippe of complicity in the crime, but he remarks that the interest of the baronne

[p. 291]

was incidentally that of the King. Her crime was incited by the desire to do away with the new will, by which she would be a heavy loser. It is curious that Garencieres considers this quatrain to have been fulfilled in Philip II. of Spain, who had his own son, Don Carlos, strangled in bed. The coincidence of the name Philip is singular, but the remaining two lines he does not attempt to interpret.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 42. [I. 253.]

	 
		Par avarice, par force et violence
		 Viendra vexer les siens chef d'Orleans;
		 Pres Sainct Memire [*1] assaut et resistance,
		 Mort dans sa tante, [*2] diront qu'il dort leans. [*3]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		By cupidity and abuse of power, force, and violence,
		 The chief of Orleans will come to vex his own;
		 Near St. Memire resistance will be made;
		 Dead in his palace he will ever after sleep.
		
		 Avarice was always the fault of Louis Philippe. By extortion and abuse he raised resistance at Saint Meri; in and near the church he forced the republicans to submission, dort leans a play upon the name, never again showed energy, but slept a sleep as of death in his palace (dans sa tente). The insurrection that was quelled took place on June 5 and 6, 1832.

 Century IX.--Quatrain 89. [I. 254.]

	 
		Sept ans sera Philipp; fortune prospere:
		 Rabaissera des Arabes effort;
		 Puis son midy perplex [*4] rebors [*5] affaire,
		 Jeune Ognion [*6] abismera son fort.
		
		 

[p. 292]

 Translation.

	 
		Seven years will Philip's fortune prosper well;
		 He will defeat every effort of the Arabs;
		 In his embarrassed middle period all goes against the grain,
		 Young Ogmion will overwhelm his fort.
		
		 Fortune will favour Louis Philippe for the first seven years. He will repress the Arabs. But in the middle of his reign the Eastern question will spring up, and cover him with disgrace (this culminated July 15, 1840). For the next seven years all will go against the grain, and the new Republic (jeune Ogmion) will overturn his throne and his Bastille; the Paris he thought he had so strongly fortified.

Garencieres again introduces Philip II. of Spain, and there seems to exist some analogy between these two kings. The Spaniard also was prosperous for some seven years, and in the person of his brother, Don Juan of Austria, beat the Turks in the Battle of Lepanto. Garencieres reads Barbares for Arabs. Later on he had to put his son to death, and was opposed by young Ogmion; the King, Henri Quatre, of France and Navarre.

 Century V.--Quatrain 92. [I. 255.]

	 
		Apres le siege tenu dix-sept ans,
		 Cinq changeront en tel revolu terme:
		 Puis sera l'un esleu de mesme temps,
		 Qui les Romains ne sera trop conforme.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		After the throne has been held for seventeen years,
		 Five shall change when that term has run out:
		 Then, at the same time, one shall be elected,
		 Who will not be very conformable to the wishes of the Romanists.
		
		 [p. 293]

After the reign of Louis Philippe, during seventeen years, five of his sons lost the throne with himself; and with much manoeuvring have never been able to reapproach it. They were the Comte de Paris, representative of Chartres, Duc de Nemours, Joinville, Montpensier, and Due d'Aumale. The election that followed was that of Louis Napoleon, whose mixed, or no policy, suited neither the Revolutionary party nor the Roman Catholics. There is nothing here but the seventeen years to connect this with Louis Philippe. For the five who changed with the revolt would be six if Louis Philippe himself were counted, and he certainly ought to be. The concluding two lines are very vague, and may or may not belong to Louis Napoleon. I merely cite it, as one of the ingenuities of M. le Pelletier.

There are three prophecies cited relating to the Due de Chartres, which seem fairly well interpreted; and very wonderful they would be if they stood alone or related to any one whose fate was of any importance in the opening scroll of history. All the little interest of Louis Philippe is centred in himself, and therefore I omit the three quatrains relating to his son, not because they are not curious, if rightly interpreted of the son, but that, even supposing them to be so, the Due de Chartres is a person and a character not deserving of serious mention in history. The gossip of a barber's shop in Nostradamus's own day would be even more interesting to any rational investigator of human affairs.

Footnotes

^283:1 Latin, victor, conqueror.

^283:2 Latin, Imperator.

^283:3 Latin, factum, action, act.

^283:4 Congnu = connu, known.

^283:5 Sang, son or grandson.

^283:6 Mathien, Aemathien.

^283:7 Latinism, factus, made, become.

^283:8 Latin, superator, rule, dominator.

^283:9 Latin, gens, nation.

^283:10 Humble = humiliated, perhaps humblee.

^283:11 Latin, per, by reason of.

^283:12 The order is, "venu a cause des pleurs de la superbe nation humiliee."

^284:1 The original text is corrupt here, but this yields the best sense.

^284:2 Desrobe, withdrawn, or shut up.

^284:3 Fossano is the alternative reading, a town in the Sardinian States.

^284:4 Keeper of the hounds and greyhounds.

^285:1 Latin, patratus, done, committed.

^285:2 The Tarpeian rock at Rome.

^285:3 Latin, Leo, the astronomical sign of the Lion.

^286:1 Dechasse = chasse, chased away.

^286:2 Estrange has again the meaning of foreign, or out of the family.

^286:3 The order is apres avoir chasse le cerf aux champs.

^286:4 Donront = donneront.

^287:1 Celuy qu'en = Celuy qui fera qu'en.

^287:2 Latin, Claudus, lame. This Le Pelletier has before endeavoured, with surprising dexterity, to show to be the Due de Bordeaux.

^287:3 This whole line is difficult. Araigner, in the Romance language, is said to mean to plead and gain a cause against another. The court and long we had before, in Century VIII., 57, applied to Napoleon, as rising from a soldier to the long-robed Emperor; here he had to refer to Talma to teach him how to carry it. Now, again, it means the rise from a mere dignitary to Kingship.

^287:4 Latin, qui.

^288:1 Sparte = Paris. The letters te may be considered as one letter, the v being mute. It will then convert, according to the rule of the anagram.

^289:1 Phalange, flag, standard, writes M. le Pelletier. As far as I can discover anything, this statement appears to be entirely erroneous. The word "phalanx," as connected with matters military, always signifies a body of men in military order. It may in the plural even stand indefinitely for armies. In the singular it is very confusing. It may stand for a party of twenty-eight men or eight thousand (Potter's "Antiquities," ii. 56). Danet says six thousand men. Gibbon introduces one of his constantly recurring slovenly phrases about it,--absurd in fact, but philosophic in form. He is comparing the legion with the phalanx (i. 22), and tells us, "It was soon discovered by reflection, as well as by the event," that it could not contend with the legion. It is obvious here, that if it had been discovered by reflection it would never have been tried by the event. This somewhat justifies the sarcasm of Porson, that schoolboys ought to be set to translate Gibbon into English. As a pleasing variety, Smith sets the number when complete at about sixteen thousand men. One feels inclined to say that these classical guides are conveying us to that ditch, which is never far to seek, when the blind are leading the blind. Martinius, in his curious "Lex. Phil.," cites Pliny to show that the Africans first fought the Egyptians fustibus, with staves, which they called phalanges in the plural, or phalanx in the singular, so that it is an African word. w p?L?G, in Hebrew phalag, is a staff. Also there is a spider called phalangion; and as the pikes of the first five ranks in a phalanx were interlaced, they were somewhat like a web of staves. Many may regard all this as extremely useless; perhaps they will concede that it is curious; if so, I shall consider it to be useful. I have long found that whatever is very curious is useful. It sets the mind agreeably in movement, and often throws a new light on things that previously had no interest and seemed obscure. At any rate, we have now established that phalange is not to be rendered standard, but troops, army.

^290:1 Latin, supremus, the last.

^290:2 The order is, "Quand l'Empire sera exancle par trois subroges."

^290:3 Latin, subrogatus, substituted; read subroges.

^290:4 Exancillatus, subdued to, under the yoke of.

^290:5 Latin, charta, paper

^290:6 Romance, ne leu, not read.

^291:1 Sainct Memire is the anagram of S'Meri. To make this pass, M. le Pelletier drops one m and one e.

^291:2 Tante is to be read tente.

^291:3 Leans is an old word for la dedans.

^291:4 Latin, perplexus, troubled.

^291:5 Rebors = rebours; a rebours is against the grain.

^291:6 Ognion is Ogmius, the Celtic Mercury or Gallic Hercules. It has [p. 292] figured in 1792, 1848, and again after the German war, 872. At the two first periods they put the figure of this Hercules on their five franc pieces, with that idle exergue, Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite. This vocable, Ogmion, is equivalent to Oignon, onion, or bulbous root of the lily. If there could be any doubt at all about this, Nostradamus has taken care to remove it, calling it le grand mercure d'Hercule fleur de lys, in Century X. 79.

     
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294]

 

Republic, 1848, and Napoleon III

 Century IX.--Quatrain 5. [I. 261.]

	 
		Tiers [*1] doigt du pied au premier semblera,
		 A un nouveau monarque de bas haut: [*2]
		 Qui [*3] Pyse et Luques tyran occupera,
		 Du precedent coriger le deffaut.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The third [*4] shall be a stepping-stone to the throne,
		 To a new monarch from low position to the top;
		 He will as tyrant have taken a military post in Tuscany, [*5]
		 And will seek to correct the defects of his predecessor.
		
		 THE National Assembly of 1848 shall serve as a foot to Louis Napoleon to step from private life into a conspicuous position. He had in his youth been concerned in the Revolution of Tuscany, and purposed correcting the defect of his predecessor.

This might mean that he purposed to guide France better than Louis Philippe had done, or than in four years the Republic had done, or, which is most probable from his Idees Napoleoniennes, to carry to completion the policy of

[p. 295]

his uncle Napoleon I. I cannot think it refers to Napoleon II., Duc de Reichstadt. The entire application of the quatrain is neither very clear nor very important.

The quatrain on Cavaignac, I think, is hardly made out satisfactorily, so I omit it.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 43. [I. 265.]

	 
		Par le decide [*1] dc deux choses bastards,
		 Nepveu du sang [*2] occupera le regne: [*3]
		 Dedans Lectoyre [*4] seront les coups de dards,
		 Nepveu par peur pliera l'enseigne.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		By the fall or ruin of two bastard things
		 The nephew by blood will occupy the empire;
		 In Lectoyre there will be deaths by arrow,
		 The nephew will fold up his standard for very fear.
		
		 By the overthrow of Louis Philippe and the Republic two bastard governments, Louis Napoleon will now succeed to the throne, a nephew by blood of Napoleon Bonaparte; and, what is not generally known, he was the only one of the Bonaparte family born in the Palace of the Tuileries. In battle afterwards at Lectoyre (coups de dards must be taken simply as battle) the nephew will furl his standard through fear.

Writing in 1866, M. le Pelletier particularly remarks that the epoch is left undetermined, and, as to the enigma of Lectoyre, nothing can be known till the event has transpired.

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] It may then be interpreted, he thinks, in some of the idioms known to Nostradamus--Greek, Hebrew, Latin, Celtic, Languedoc, etc. He considers the standard to present a further enigma, and asks "What standard?" This difficulty I do not quite recognize. The imperial standard that is adopted by him, whatever it may be. To furl a standard is to close and shut it up, so that no one will rally to it any more. It symbolizes that the cause it represents is brought to the ground finally, and that it is no longer flying.

As to the word Lectoyre, we now know that, if it is to be interpreted at all, it will have to be found in connection with Sedan,--the noblest reminiscence connected with which is that it was the birthplace of that great soldier and greater man, Marshal Turenne. He may well be called La gloire de Sedan, whilst as appropriately may Napoleon the Little be designated as Cedant de la gloire, with that furled ensign, qu'il par peur pliera. [*1]

After much difficulty and searching I have at last come upon two old maps, printed at Amsterdam by Blaeuw; the one dated 1620 and the other 1650, styled "Les Soverainetez de Sedan." In both of these the embattled town of Sedan is given, as seated on the right bank of the river Meuse, whilst on the left bank is shown an extensive territory named Grand Torcy and Petit Torcy. In another map it is given as Torsy. These maps give no indication of the points of the compass. But from another map, indicating them, the river-bend on which the town is seated appears to run from east to west; and, if so, Torcy lies south or south-west of Sedan. In a more modern map it appears as Le Grand Torcy and is described as lying "sur la route imperiale de

[p. 297]

[paragraph continues] Mezieres a Sedan." Evidently therefore we are entitled to place Le Torcy at Sedan. The French must determine for themselves, by their military bureau, whether the French camp was pitched in the meadows of Le Torcy; but nothing can alter the great fact, as now for the first time made plain, that the Nepveu du sang furled his standard for ever at Sedan or Lectoyre, as the oracle gives it. Now Lectoyre is the precise anagram, letter for letter, of Le Torcey, though the commoner spelling is without the second e, Le Torcy. If we are to reckon this as being a chance coincidence, my only further comment will be, that such chance as this is quite as miraculous as any miracle in the world could be.

As regards the words "nepveu du sang," there was a caricature very popular in France at the time of the candidature for the French presidency, consisting of two pictures. In one the Prince de Joinville was commending himself to the French people for election, having the young Comte de Paris by the hand, and saying, "I am the uncle of my nephew." On the other side Louis Napoleon presses his suit by pointing to a statuette of Napoleon Bonaparte and uttering the words, "I am the nephew of my uncle;" showing how characteristically nepveu du sang designates Prince Louis Napoleon. He may almost be said to have chosen it himself as a cognomen.

 Century VIII.--Quatrain 44. [I. 267.]

	 
		Le procree naturel d'Ogmion [*1]
		 De sept a neuf du chemin destorner:
		 A roy de longue amy et [*2] au my hom [*3]
		 Doit a Navarre fort de Pau prosterner.
		
		 

[p. 298]

I propose here to make the meaning as clear as I can without a translation.

Napoleon III. (le procree), the natural offspring of the French Republic (Ogmion), will turn from the right road for seven or nine years before his fall. Le Pelletier interprets otherwise. He says that the war in Italy began in the seventh year of the Empire, 1869, and from that date throughout the nine following years he changed his policy. I think the line means that from seven to nine years before the end of his reign he changed his policy. That is to say, from seven years previous to the close of his reign, when Charles August Louis, Duc de Morny, died, i.e. in 1865; and even for two years previously to that, things took a different turn. De Morny no longer exercised active control, and his was the head that had guided I all along. When he died, all ran to destruction. The roi de longue and his friend my hom, Le Pelletier states to be Victor Emmanuel and Garibaldi; one of long race and one of low birth, the tallow-smelter. I think it is Frederic William, de longue vie, and Bismarck, the bi-valve man, which it becomes, if we read it as my-homme. I have a great idea that a Navarre is a misprint for le nepveu. Whether fort de Pau may mean with his health re-established by staying at Pau or not, I cannot say. But, anyhow, I think that the two last lines are to be read together, and that he is to prostrate himself to the King and his friend. Louis Napoleon's whole reign must be represented as a failure, if you read it with Le Pelletier; mine makes it a failure during the last seven to nine years. My King and friend bring about the catastrophe far below the date that his will do. My emendation to le nepveu certainly clarifies the meaning. The explanation of Pau is not quite so comprehensible as I could wish; had Ham been a variant it would have spoken for itself.

[p. 299]

The Quatrain 53 of Century VIII., which I have already explained as the flotilla of Napoleon Bonaparte, M. le Pelletier fixes as the ludicrous Boulogne expedition of Louis Napoleon, and the Italian campaign after he became Emperor; but I think he entirely fails in reading the symbols.

 Century V.--Quatrain 8. [I. 270.]

	 
		Sera laisse feu vif, mort cache,
		 Dedans les globes, horrible espouvantable,
		 De nuict a classe [*1] cite en poudre lasche,
		 La cite a feu, l'ennemy favourable.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Live fire, hidden death, shall be left
		 In bombs, a horrible and frightful thing:
		 By a band at night the city shall be fired with powder;
		 The city seems on fire, it helps though intended to destroy.
		
		 Fulminating mercury (feu vif) in bombs in terrible explosion contains death hidden. The city, Paris, will be startled with powder liberated (lasche, loosed) by assassins by night. The city will seem on fire. But the enemy (in spite of himself) will prove favourable to Napoleon. This, of course, is Orsini's attempt of January 14, 1858.

The next verse follows up the thread.

 Century V.--Quatrain 9. [I. 271.]

	 
		Jusques au fond la grand arq [*2] demolue [*3]
		 Par chef captif l'amy anticipe, [*4]
		 Naistra de dame front, face chevelue,
		 Lors par astuce duc [*5] mort atrape.
		
		 

[p. 300]

 Translation.

	 
		When the peristyle is thoroughly demolished
		 By the chief prisoner, the friend being taken before,
		 A plot born of the woman, long beard and hairy face;
		 Then by cunning the leader caught will be executed.
		
		 The peristyle (la grand arq') of the opera shall be completely shattered. Pieri, the friend of Orsini, the chief captive, is seized beforehand by Hebert, head of the detective service, who recognized him in the crowd. The plot was conceived in the secret lodges of the Demagoguy [de Dame], whose members wear the beard and hair long. Orsini, the leader of the whole, will be surprised astutely by the confessions of Gomez at the restaurant Broggi, whither he had fled, and, being taken, will be sentenced to death.

I do not feel very confident as to this interpretation, but give it much as I find it in M. le Pelletier.

Century V.--Quatrain 10. [I. 272.]

	 
		Un [*1] chef Celtique dans le conflict blesse,
		 Aupres de cave [*2] voyant siens mort abbatre,
		 De sang et playes et d'ennemis presse,
		 Et secours par incogneus [*3] de quatre.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		The Celtic chief is wounded in the strife,
		 Seeing death strike down his friends near the theatre,
		 Surrounded with blood and wounds and pressed by enemies,
		 He escapes the four [*4] assassins, by unknown aid.
		
		 The Emperor, slightly struck in the eye by a fragment of glass, shall see his people strewn in death about the entrance of the Grand Opera. Pressed by the conspirators, four in number, he will receive unknown help; whether of

[p. 301]

angels or pure spirits, M. le Pelletier cannot quite say. We now know that he had still to see Sedan; but it would be curious if pure spirits had interested themselves greatly to protect the cold-blooded murderer of the Champs de Mars. and Coup d'Etat.

 Century VI.--Quatrain 4. [I. 273.]

	 
		Le second chef du regne D'annemarc, [*1]
		 Par ceux de Frize [*2] et l'Isle Britannique,
		 Fera despendre [*3] plus de cent mille marc, [*4]
		 Vain exploicter voyage en Italique.
		
		 The second of the Napoleonic race in power will cause England and Hanover to expend 100,000 marks in fortifications and war material. Fearing invasion after the Orsini effort, he will then exploit the Italian campaign, though vainly, as he will not reap the results he looks for.

This corresponds so clearly with what happened that probably most will agree that it is a very remarkable forecast.

 Century III.--Quatrain 37. [I. 274.]

	 
		Avant l'assaut l'oraison [*5] prononcee,
		 Milan prins [*6] d'Aigle par embusches deceus, [*7]
		 Muraille antique par canons enfoncee,
		 Par feu et sang a mercy pen receus.
		
		   Translation.

	 
		Before assault a harangue is pronounced;
		 Lombardy is taken by the eagle, being cut off by ambuscade.
		 An ancient wall driven in by cannon,
		 Fire and blood, but little mercy shown.
		
		 
		
		 

[p. 302]

Before the declaration of war, the Emperor will pronounce (January 1, 1859), in the presence of the diplomatic corps, a threatening discourse against Austria. Lombardy (Milan, part for the whole) will be ceded by Austria at the Treaty of Zurich (October 17, 1859); Austria, an old wall, will yield to cannon, fire, and blood.

 Century V.--Quatrain 20. [I. 275.]

	 
		De la [*1] les Alpes grande armee passera
		 Un peu devant naistra monstre vapin, [*2]
		 Prodigieux et subit [*3] tournera [*4]
		 Le grand Tosquan a son lieu plus propin. [*5]
		
		   Translation.

	 
		A great army will pass beyond the Alps,
		 A little before a prodigious scamp will come to power;
		 He will drive the grand Duke of Tuscany
		 To his nearer home with astounding suddenness.
		
		 In 1859 Napoleon III.'s army will pass the Alps. A little before a prominent scamp will have come to the front, who will suddenly and in a most startling fashion drive the Grand Duke of Tuscany to seek refuge in Austria (son lieu le plus propin).

We have to note here that Nostradamus, whenever he emerges from the impassibility of the secret estude, it is to exhibit a profound hostility to the genius of Democracy and Revolution. There is therefore little doubt but that the powerful epithet here employed of the monstre vapin relates to the red-shirted Garibaldi.

We have now reached the point which covers the last of the Oracles of Nostradamus that commentary has yet been

[p. 303]

able to lay before the world with its meaning rendered transparent by the correspondence of interpretation with an event in history. The number of such correlations of occurrence with forecast falls immensely short of the number of the quatrains themselves. In fact, only about one hundred and fifty-one, out of a thousand. The rest give no scintillation as yet, but lie without sign of existence traceable, dead as a flint, till the iron stroke of Time's heel shall develop the spark. Lateat scintillula forsan. One or two Presages and two or three Sixains have been also resolved, Enough, we trust, has been opened up to show what a treasure-house it is that we have entered into, how rich in curiosity, if in nothing more. What may still lie perdu in the bulky remainder of eight hundred and fifty it is impossible to say; whether, though unidentified, they have been realized already, or are yet to bud in the future. If nothing more be ever done with Nostradamus than this book gives, still the work must for one reason or other hereafter stand out as the most wonderful book of its kind that was ever written or printed in this world. It has now to go forth and take its chance, good or evil, of notice or of neglect amongst the mass of printed matter, largely rubbish, that deluges our life. It is certainly calculated, so far as it can secure any attention whatever, to severely shock the prejudices now prevalent amongst mankind. The half-educated will find it troublesome to read, and disturbing, perhaps, to think about; whilst the scientific may even denounce it as a locust-cloud of darkness mediaeval in its tendency. Undoubtedly it must have the effect that Nostradamus in his preface to his son (see <page 45>) says very graphically it will have, "que possible fera retirer le front a quelques uns." Although, as he says again, the forecasts may be

[p. 304]

clouded, they will be understood by men of sense, and they will grow clearer as ignorance dies out (see <page 49>); which should be our care now.

To all objectors I rejoin, gentlemen, investigate, please, all the points in question as searchingly as you can; find every fault in my work, and in that of the other Nostradamic commentators, that you can; expose all that is weak or illusive, wherever you find it to be so. Let us see, then, how far all the learning and acuteness you can bring to bear, coupled with whatever established prejudice, and its rancour at being disturbed in comfortable somnolency, can suggest, to overthrow what other men heretofore, and I now, have taken so much pains to bring together and give shape to. Consciously I have not set down a single word with any other desire than that the truth should prevail; and if your criticism can establish the opposite, I shall still repeat, "Let truth prevail." But I do not think you can do this: and if not, there is only one other thing, open to the learned and the wise that can be done,--that is, to rewrite their philosophies, so as to make room for the reception of this rather awkward piece of truth that has here got in the way of our old theories, and cannot be got out of the way again. To the really competent and candid reader I have nothing whatever to add beyond begging him to refer back to the closing words of my preface, as to him they will he found to contain my whole and entire message.

Footnotes

^294:1 Tiers, pour le tiers Etat. The third order now claiming to govern itself.

^294:2 De bas haut, for de bas en haut elevated from a low to a higher and conspicuous position.

^294:3 Latin, qui, he, who.

^294:4 The third estate will serve, as a toe of the foot to the first rank, a stepping-stone to place.

^294:5 Lucca and Pisa stand for all Tuscany, where, in 1831, Louis Napoleon and Charles Bonaparte, his elder brother, had, with one cannon served by himself and a few Italian partisans, possessed himself of Civita-Castellana, in the Pontifical States.

^295:1 Latin, decidium, a word not of classical usage, signifying ruin, or a fall.

^295:2 Romance sang, family.

^295:3 Latin, regnum, empire.

^295:4 Lectoyre, a town in France, in the department of Gers. Garencieres adopts the variant Lectoure, which he says is a town in Gascony. The word occurs again, Century VII. 12, and there he says it is a city of Guyenne. Lectora was the Latin name. It was a place of great strength, and picturesque; but, unless we can find it to be an anagram, there is nothing to connect the town in any way with the fortunes of Louis Napoleon.

^296:1 The word pliera, is of course, only an archaic transposition of pleira. The line here can in no way be made to scan, being two syllables or one whole foot short. I would suggest it be read Nepveu (du sang) par peur pleira l'enseigne.

^297:1 Ogmion has been explained already to be the symbol of the French Republic.

^297:2 The texte-type reads et amy au.

^297:3 My-hom, Le Pelletier says, is demy-homme, a man of low birth, and Roy de longue = de vieille race. I prefer to read de longue vie, and understand the King of Prussia; and my-hom I take to be the bivalve-man, or Bismarck.

^299:1 Latin, classis, band; a classe, by a band [sic?]. It might be better here to render classe as "crash," klasis, brisure. De nuict la classe, a crash by night.

^299:2 Latin, arca, chest, or dam.

^299:3 Latin, demolitus, demolished.

^299:4 Latin, antecaptus, seized beforehand.

^299:5 Latin, dux, leader.

^300:1 Latin, unus, the first.

^300:2 Latin, cavea, theatre.

^300:3 Romance, incogneus, unknown.

^300:4 The four were Orsini, Pieri, de Rudio, and Gomez.

^301:1 Greek, Dan-arxe, as we had it before (v. <page 252>).

^301:2 Frise, Hanover.

^301:3 Latin, dependere, to weigh out, spend.

^301:4 M. le Pelletier calculates that the golden mark was equal to 250 grammes, or 100,000 marks = 10,000,000 francs.

^301:5 Latin, oratio, harangue.

^301:6 Romance, prins, pris, taken.

^301:7 Latin, decisus, cut off.

^302:1 Dela, for au dela.

^302:2 Italian, vappa, scamp.

^302:3 Latin, subito, suddenly.

^302:4 Il tournera, for il fera tourner.

^302:5 Latin, propinque, at hand, near.

    
Oracles of Nostradamus, by Charles A. Ward, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

 

Appendix

 Referred to at p. 157.

THE genuine and spurious portraits of Cromwell are numerous to such a degree, that they may almost be called innumerable; for they can never be counted, as no one man can get at them all to reckon them up. Their main authority is said to depend upon the works of four artists, Lely, Cooper, Walker, Faithorne. Samuel Butler, the author of the ever-marvelous "Hudibras," is thought to have painted a likeness, but it counts for nothing, as it is not now to be identified as existing in any collection. The first-named three are painters, the fourth is a great engraver.

In all these, Mr. Frederic Harrison professes to discover "singular resemblance" ["Cromwell," p. 32,] but considers that Cooper's is the most successful of them all. I find the first to be a most misleading statement. and one that may be disproved by anybody who will compare Cooper's likeness, as given in Carlyle's "Cromwell Letters" with the picture by Walker in the National Portrait Gallery. They differ in every particular,--in character, feature, temperament, and conformation. Scarcely do they agree even in the wart. There is nothing to identify them as representing the same individual. Either Lely copied Cooper, or Cooper copied Lely, and they accordingly, of course, correspond with each other; but truth is too much sacrificed to flattery by both these courtly painters, for us to suppose that their work corresponds very accurately with the sitter. Such examples of Faithorne as are readily accessible in the Print Room at the Museum convey no adequate idea of the man. Neither do they resemble Cooper, Lely, nor Walker's work. There is a profile print by Houbraken, an excellent performance, which is interesting as showing that both the chin and forehead receded greatly. There is also a very peculiar engraving of Thomas Simon's medal, which is very beautiful as a work of art. But here again the facial angle is simply villainous, with very mean diminutive eyes, and the dress almost clerical. The engraving from the Cooper at Sidney College gives the wart on the left brow instead of the right.

From such discrepant things it seems to me next to impossible to derive any correct notion regarding the face of Cromwell, except that the facial angle of the side face must have been unusually bad. Yet Mr. Harrison is able to express himself as follows:--

[p. 306]

"No human countenance recorded is more familiar to us than that broad, solid face with the thick and prominent red nose; the heavy gnarled brow, with its historic wart; eyes firm, penetrating, sad; square jaw, and close-set mouth; scanty tufts of hair on lip and chin; long loose brown locks flowing down in waves on to the shoulder. His whole air breathing energy, firmness, passion, pity, and sorrow." Carlyle's fancy version is given below. [*1]

This being derived from a falsity, must itself be false. But is it not somewhat curious that friends and foes of Cromwell should alike sit down contentedly before this admirably executed miniature of Cooper's without devoting a second thought to its representative value as a portrait of the man in question? Its artistic felicity should be as nothing to the historical inquirer. Taken as a mere portrait, this Cooper is as valueless as Veronese's presentment of Alexander the Great; or as any fancy portrait of Oliver would be, if sent in by some skilled modern hand to the next May show at Burlington House.

Our sense of surprise increases, when we come to remember that we possess an authentic original to go by, in the shape of a mask still extant that was taken at death. Historians draw up rigmarole pen-and-ink portraits of their own, but are all silent about this, or make only casual mention of it as "the mask at the Statuaries," just as though it corresponded in every particular with Samuel Cooper's exquisite pigment-figment. Romancists delight in coloured detail gathered from history; and historians revel in romance when it saves them from searching into dry detail. In this case historical gossip slips in to illustrate the stringent veracity of Cromwell. When Lely was to take his portrait, he is said to have ordered him to be faithful in representing every blemish and defect, to paint warts and all, or he would not be paid. Lely knew what this meant, and acted accordingly. All portrait-painters flatter, they must to secure a practice; but, they ought to select the best aspect possible, for so far

[p. 307]

it is what it professes to be, a likeness. Now the strong point with your court painter is, to throw in skillfully what is not there. In this Lely and Cooper have succeeded to admiration.

Walker, in his several portraits, gives us another set of varieties. His picture in the Portrait Gallery [Granger, "Biog. Hist.," iii. p. 290.] with Cromwell's son Richard as page tying on the father's scarf, has been finely engraved by Pierre Lombart. In this picture, which is a little wooden, we get an average-looking gentleman going to battle. A man we should have to look at three or four times before we should individualize him at all in the memory. Mr. Nobody riding to nowhere particular is the impression derived. Of the engraving, however, Evelyn says, and he knew Cromwell perfectly well, "that it gives the strongest resemblance of him." He therein physiognomically discovers "characters of the greatest dissimulation, boldness, cruelty, and ambition, in every stroke and touch." I can say nothing of this, for I have not seen the Lombart engraving. The picture does not convey the idea.

How pliantly subservient art was in those days, is well illustrated in another Cromwell engraving by the same Lombart. This artist had done, after Vandyke, a "Charles on horseback," from which he erased the face, and substituted that of Cromwell. The slender figure of the king had to do duty for the heavy-built brewer of Huntingdon. But times change, and we with them. So Peter reinstated the king. There must be impressions of this turn-face print in its three states; for no doubt copies were sold at every stage. The King is dead. God save the Protector! The Protector is dead. God save the King! The dead lion is never so good for the crowd as the live ass; irrespective of the latter creature being far more representative. A quality much sought after in modern governors.

There is a portrait of Cromwell affixed to Isaac Kimber's "Life of Oliver Cromwell," which he published anonymously [Granger, iii. 297]. This is pronounced in the "Letters of Mr. Hughes" to be most like the authentic family pictures of Cromwell. Vertue engraved it in 1724 for Rapin's "History of England," and when Granger wrote the picture was in the possession of Sir Thomas Frankland of Old Bond Street. I suppose this to be still in the hands of the Frankland-Russells of Chequers Court, who also possess a plaster cast of Cromwell's face. By the courtesy of the family I have been permitted to examine this; but it seems to me of ne value, and it has no history.

We come now to the terra-cotta bust by Edward Pierce, which is in the National Portrait Gallery, said to be taken from life. Pierce was an artist in the second generation. His father, of the same Christian name, was a painter, and assistant of Vandyke. Our Edward was trained for a statuary, and because the pupil of Edward Bird: he also acted as assistant to Sir Christopher Wren, and is said to have built St. Clement Danes under him. He did a bust of Wren, for the theatre at Oxford, and also

[p. 308]

one of Newton, He died at Surrey street in the Strand, and was buried at the old Savoy. This bust of Cromwell was, to all appearance, modelled by him from a cast taken from life, and must therefore, as to measurement and bulk, be of life size.

I was kindly permitted by Mr. George Scharf, of the National Portrait Gallery, to take the dimensions of this bust by measurement, but practically they are not very useful, inasmuch as the head has a great abundance of short curly hair which of course in terra-cotta becomes perfectly solid, and thereby increases the circumference of the head by many inches.

The circumference, hair and all, at his brow is 28 2/8 inches.

Nape of neck to frontal bone, where it unites with nose 15 4/8 "

Breadth from car to ear at level of the central hole of each ear as near as can be approximated 6 2/8 "

This last measurement is, I believe, correct, but it is a dimension that only a large forceps could take with perfect certainty. It is so small, however, that I feel sure that the other two dimensions must be very far from giving the true osseous formation, so that several inches will have to be allowed off them for the hair. Again, the measurement between the tip of nose and back of head (9 5/8 inches) would also require that deductions be made for a wad of hair at the back. This measurement when reduced, and coupled with the third measurement given, indicates an undersized skull for a broad-built man of five feet eleven in stature.

As for the physiognomy, the nose, though far from fine, is somewhat aquiline, and the best of all the features of the face. The forehead is low, ill-formed, and mean. The mouth firm, cruel, deceitful. The jowl and chin sensual and gross almost to brutality. It is the face of a man of low passions, possibly ambitious, but of great duplicity, of a low-bred type, the type as of one sprung from a lower stratum of society than his history indicates him to have sprung from; and you may readily suppose that in exchanges of coarse buffoonery with the roughest trooper of his corps, he would have been quite within his own province and at home. His mother's portrait shows her also to have been a very masculine coarse-featured woman.

It is well perhaps to mention here a bust that Grose in a letter to Granger in 1774, calls "a masterly and spirited bust of Oliver Cromwell by one Bannier." It was then in Mr. Gostling's collection. He says it is like that engraving given in Rapin's "History." I imagine it therefore to be a fancy rendering, and of very small historic value.

The expert historians, and of course the general public together with them, are perfectly satisfied with the Cromwell presented to them by Samuel Cooper. I confess that I think it a most laughable presentment, and of quite impossible credence. I do not think Pierce's bust to be satisfactory, but I most certainly consider that it is the only likeness I have

[p. 309]

had the opportunity of examining that conveys even a hint of what can be supposed to be the real appearance of the man. There is but one way now remaining to settle this question. It is very much to be regretted that, with so much pretence of a desire for historical accuracy, we should have allowed two hundred and fifty years to elapse without making the least attempt to settle this question.

We learn from Breval's "Travels" that at the Old Palace at Florence there is a cast preserved of Oliver Cromwell. The mould was obtained from Cromwell's face a few minutes after his decease, "through the dexterous management of the Tuscan resident in London." This, or a cast from it, ought immediately to be secured for our National Portrait Gallery. A copy of it would cost very little in either time, money, or trouble to secure; and when secured three or four should be cast in bronze, and placed in different museums so that one fire could not destroy all of them at once.

I feel almost sure that it will be found to confirm the bust of Pierce,, as being more like Cromwell than anything else that we possess. And further, as Pierce's work is by no means a grand achievement in the sculptor's art, I should hope to find in the Florence cast characteristic indications that are absent from Pierce's work. Grandeur of soul is incompatible with such a face as Pierce gives us. But I confess that I see no grandeur whatever that could be expressed by a man whose history it that of Oliver. His base success the world may worship if it will. I despise success if it must be obtained by Cromwell's methods. I observe that the great in history are always mean in fact; and I well know that you must say to all the men who have been triumphant, let no probing moralist come near you. Pitiable and contemptible is the man who can envy the great in the greatness of their crimes. I do not expect that the cast, if procured, will make the reading any better for Cromwell; but, if it should, I am quite ready to give him all the advantage of it. At present I hold that the face is villainous, like the man.

	 
		                         ". . . ducitur unco,
		 Spectandus: gaudent omnes. Quae labra? Quis illi
		 Vultus erat? Nunquam, si quid mihi credis, amavi
		 Hunc hominem."
		                          JUVENAL, x. 66.
		
		 Still, love or no love, we have reached the end; and if we should confirm Pierce, the flesh and bones of the man thus revived will also confirm the epithets of Nostradamus, which first induced me to enter upon this investigation.

[p. 310]

"Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet."--John iv. 19.

"Quod est ante pedes, nemo spectat: coeli scrutantur plagas."--Cic., Divin., ii. 13.

This granted, a pig is nearest wisdom.

Mantis aristos, ostis eikazei kalus.--WITSIUS, Miscel., p. 14.

The best analogist is the best prophet.

"L'observation des analogies universelles a ete negligee, et c'est pour cela qu'on ne croit plus a la divination."--LEVI, Clef des Mysteres, p. 216.

Manteion, epi xeilesi basileus, en de krisei oy me planethei to stoma aytou.--Prov. xvi. 10, LXX.

There is divination on a king's lips, and judgment fails not in his mouth.

ENVOY

Footnotes

^306:1 "Stands some five feet ten or more; a man of strong solid stature, and dignified, now partly military carriage: the expression of him valour and devout intelligence,---energy and delicacy on a basis of simplicity. Fifty-four years old, gone April last; ruddy-fair complexion, bronzed by toil and age; light brown hair and moustache are getting streaked with grey. A figure of sufficient impressiveness;--not lovely to the man--milliner species, nor pretending to be so. Massive stature; big massive head, of somewhat leonine aspect, 'evident workshop and storehouse of a vast treasury of natural parts.' Wart above the right eyebrow; nose of considerable blunt aquiline proportions; strict yet copious lips, full of all tremulous sensibilities, and also, if need were, of all fierceness and rigours; deep loving eyes, call them grave, call them stern, looking from under those craggy brows, as if in life-long sorrow, and yet not thinking it sorrow, thinking it only labour, and endeavour:--on the whole. a right noble lion-face, and hero-face." (Carlyle, "Cromwell Letters," ii. p. 435).

"He that knows anything worth communicating and does not communicate it, let him be hanged by the neck."--Talmud, Sucah, p. 58.




===== BOOK: oprt.txt =====


    
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
They sailed away once more over the blue sea.

   

OLD PETER'S
 RUSSIAN TALES

 

 

 

BY

 

ARTHUR RANSOME

 

 

 

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS, COVER
 DESIGN, AND DECORATIONS
 BY DMITRI MITROKHIN

 

 

 

NEW YORK

 

FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

 

PUBLISHERS

 

[1916]

Formattted at sacred-texts.com, July 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

 

 

 

 

   

TO

 

MISS BARBARA COLLINGWOOD

 

 

 

 

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

 

NOTE

The stories in this book are those that Russian peasants tell their children and each other. In Russia hardly anybody is too old for fairy stories, and I have even heard soldiers on their way to the war talking of very wise and very beautiful princesses as they drank their tea by the side of the road. I think there must be more fairy stories told in Russia than anywhere else in the world. In this book are a few of those I like best. I have taken my own way with them more or less, writing them mostly from memory. They, or versions like them, are to be found in the coloured chap-books, in Afanasiev's great collection, or in solemn, serious volumes of folklorists writing for the learned. My book is not for the learned, or indeed for grown-up people at all. No people who really like fairy stories ever grow up altogether. This is a book written far away in Russia, for English children who play in deep lanes with wild roses above them in the high hedges, or by the

[p. vi]

small singing becks that dance down the gray fells at home. Russian fairyland is quite different. Under my windows the wavelets of the Volkhov (which has its part in one of the stories) are beating quietly in the dusk. A gold light burns on a timber raft floating down the river. Beyond the river in the blue midsummer twilight are the broad Russian plain and the distant forest. Somewhere in that forest of great trees--a forest so big that the forests of England are little woods beside it--is the hut where old Peter sits at night and tells these stories to his grandchildren.

A.R.

VERGEZHA.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

 

CONTENTS

               THE HUT IN THE FOREST                    <page 11>   
         THE TALE OF THE SILVER SAUCER AND THE TRANSPARENT APPLE                    <page 18>   
         SADKO                    <page 40>   
         FROST                    <page 54>   
         THE FOOL OF THE WORLD AND THE FLYING SHIP                    <page 70>   
         BABA YAGA                    <page 88>   
         THE CAT WHO BECAME HEAD-FORESTER                    <page 106>   
         SPRING IN THE FOREST                    <page 120>   
         THE LITTLE DAUGHTER OF THE SNOW                    <page 122>   
         PRINCE IVAN, THE WITCH BABY, AND THE LITTLE SISTER OF THE SUN                    <page 136>   
         THE STOLEN TURNIPS, THE MAGIC TABLECLOTH, THE SNEEZING GOAT, AND THE WOODEN WHISTLE                    <page 155>   
         LITTLE MASTER MISERY                    <page 184>   
         A CHAPTER OF FISH                    <page 206>   
         THE GOLDEN FISH                    <page 212>   
         WHO LIVED IN THE SKULL?                    <page 228>   
         ALENOUSHKA AND HER BROTHER                    <page 231>   
         THE FIRE-BIRD, THE HORSE OF POWER, AND THE PRINCESS VASILISSA                    <page 242>   
         THE HUNTER AND HIS WIFE                    <page 260>   
         THE THREE MEN OF POWER--EVENING, MIDNIGHT, AND SUNRISE                    <page 269>   
         SALT                    <page 294>   
         THE CHRISTENING IN THE VILLAGE                    <page 316>   
        

LIST OF COLOUR PLATES

            They sailed away once more over the blue sea      Frontispiece   
         There she was, a good fur cloak about her shoulders and costly blankets round her feet      64   
          There she was, beating with the pestle and sweeping with the besom      96   
         Misery seated himself firmly on his shoulders and pulled out handfuls of his hair      192   
         "Head in air and tail in sea,
Fish, fish, listen to me"      208   
         He stepped on one of its fiery wings and pressed it to the ground      240   
         It caught up the three lovely princesses and carried them up into the air      272   
    
     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

  

OLD PETER'S RUSSIAN TALES.

[p. 11]

 

THE HUT IN THE FOREST.

Outside in the forest there was deep snow. The white snow had crusted the branches of the pine trees, and piled itself up them till they bent under its weight. Now and then a snow-laden branch would bend too far, and huge lumps of snow fell crashing to the ground under the trees. Then the branch would swing up, and the snow covered it again with a cold white burden. Sitting in the hut you could hear the crashing again and again out in the forest, as the tired branches flung down their loads of snow. Yes, and now and then there was the howling of wolves far away.

[p. 12]

Little Maroosia heard them, and thought of them out there in the dark as they galloped over the snow. She sat closer to Vanya, her brother, and they were both as near as they could get to the door of the stove, where they could see the red fire burning busily, keeping the whole hut warm. The stove filled a quarter of the hut, but that was because it was a bed as well. There were blankets on it, and in those blankets Vanya and Maroosia rolled up and went to sleep at night, as warm as little baking cakes.

The hut was made of pine logs cut from the forest. You could see the marks of the axe. Old Peter was the grandfather of Maroosia and Vanya. He lived alone with them in the hut in the forest, because their father and mother were both dead. Maroosia and Vanya could hardly remember them, and they were very happy with old Peter, who was very kind to them and did all he could to keep them warm and well fed. He let them help him in everything, even in stuffing the windows with moss to keep the cold out when winter began. The moss kept the light out too, but that did not matter. It would be all the jollier in the spring when the sun came pouring in.

Besides old Peter and Maroosia and Vanya there were Vladimir and Bayan. Vladimir was a cat, a big black cat, as stately as an emperor, and just now he was lying in Vanya's arms fast asleep. Bayan was a

[p. 13]

dog, a tall gray wolf-dog. He could jump over the table with a single bound. When he was in the hut he usually lay underneath the table, because that was the only place where he could lie without being in the way. And, of course at meal times he was in the way even there. Just now he was out with old Peter.

"I wonder what story it will be to-night?" said Maroosia.

"So do I," said Vanya. "I wish they'd be quick and come back."

Vladimir stirred suddenly in Vanya's lap, and a minute later they heard the scrunch of boots in the snow, and the stamping of old Peter's feet trying to get the snow off his boots. Then the door opened, and Bayan pushed his way in and shook himself, and licked Maroosia and Vanya and startled Vladimir, and lay down under the table and came out again, because he was so pleased to be home. And old Peter came in after him, with his gun on his back and a hare in his hand. He shook himself just like Bayan, and the snow flew off like spray. He hung up his gun, flung the hare into a corner of the hut, and laughed.

"You are snug in here, little pigeons," he said.

[p. 14]

Vanya and Maroosia had jumped up to welcome him, and when he opened his big sheepskin coat, they tumbled into it together and clung to his belt. Then he closed the big woolly coat over the top of them and they squealed; and he opened it a little way and looked down at them over his beard, and then closed it again for a moment before letting them out. He did this every night, and Bayan always barked when they were shut up inside.

Then old Peter took his big coat off and lifted down the samovar from the shelf. The samovar is like a big tea-urn, with a red-hot fire in the middle of it keeping the water boiling. It hums like a bee on the tea-table, and the steam rises in a little jet from a tiny hole in the top. The boiling water comes out of a tap at the bottom. Old Peter threw in the lighted sticks and charcoal, and made a draught to draw the heat, and then set the samovar on the table with the little fire crackling in its inside. Then he cut some big lumps of black bread. Then he took a great saucepan full of soup, that was simmering on the stove, and emptied it into a big wooden bowl. Then he went to the wall where, on three nails, hung three wooden spoons, deep like ladles. There were one big spoon, for old Peter; and two little spoons, one for Vanya and one for Maroosia.

[p. 15]

And all the time that old Peter was getting supper ready he was answering questions and making jokes--old ones, of course, that he made every day--about how plump the children were, and how fat was better to eat than butter, and what the Man in the Moon said when he fell out, and what the wolf said who caught his own tail and ate himself up before he found out his mistake.

And Vanya and Maroosia danced about the hut and chuckled.

Then they had supper, all three dipping their wooden spoons in the big bowl together, and eating a tremendous lot of black bread. And, of course, there were scraps for Vladimir and a bone for Bayan.

After that they had tea with sugar but no milk, because they were Russians and liked it that way.

Then came the stories. Old Peter made another glass of tea for himself, not for the children. His throat was old, he said, and took a lot of keeping wet; and they were young, and would not sleep if they drank tea too near bedtime. Then he threw a log of wood into the stove. Then he lit a short little pipe, full of very strong tobacco,

[p. 16]

called Mahorka, which has a smell like hot tin. And he puffed, and the smoke got in his eyes, and he wiped them with the back of his big hand.

All the time he was doing this Vanya and Maroosia were snuggling together close by the stove, thinking what story they would ask for, and listening to the crashing of the snow as it fell from the trees outside. Now that old Peter was at home, the noise made them feel comfortable and warm. Before, perhaps, it made them feel a little frightened.

"Well, little pigeons, little hawks, little bear cubs, what is it to be?" said old Peter.

"We don't know," said Maroosia.

"Long hair, short sense, little she-pigeon," said old Peter. "All this time and not thought of a story? Would you like the tale of the little Snow Girl who was not loved so much as a hen?"

"Not to-night, grandfather," said Vanya.

"We'd like that tale when the snow melts," said Maroosia.

"To-night we'd like a story we've never heard before," said Vanya.

"Well, well," said old Peter, combing his great gray beard with his fingers, and looking out at them with twinkling eyes from under his big bushy eyebrows. "Have I ever told you the story of 'The Silver

[p. 17]

[paragraph continues] Saucer and the Transparent Apple'?"

"No, no, never," cried Vanya and Maroosia at once.

Old Peter took a last pull at his pipe, and Vanya and Maroosia wriggled with excitement. Then he drank a sip of tea. Then he began.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

 

THE TALE OF THE SILVER SAUCER AND THE TRANSPARENT APPLE.

There was once an old peasant, and he must have had more brains under his hair than ever I had, for he was a merchant, and used to take things every year to sell at the big fair of Nijni Novgorod. Well, I could never do that. I could never be anything better than an old forester.

"Never mind, grandfather," said Maroosia.

God knows best, and He makes some merchants and some foresters, and some good and some bad, all in His own way. Anyhow this one was a merchant, and he had three daughters. They were none of them so bad to look at, but one of them was as pretty as Maroosia. And she was the best of them too. The others put all the hard work on her, while they

[p. 19]

did nothing but look at themselves in the looking-glass and complain of what they had to eat. They called the pretty one "Little Stupid," because she was so good and did all their work for them. Oh, they were real bad ones, those two. We wouldn't have them in here for a minute.

Well, the time came round for the merchant to pack up and go to the big fair. He called his daughters, and said, "Little pigeons," just as I say to you. "Little pigeons," says he, "what would you like me to bring you from the fair?"

Says the eldest, "I'd like a necklace, but it must be a rich one."

Says the second, "I want a new dress with gold hems."

But the youngest, the good one, Little Stupid, said nothing at all.

"Now little one," says her father, "what is it you want? I must bring something for you too."

Says the little one, "Could I have a silver saucer and a transparent

[p. 20]

apple? But never mind if there are none."

The old merchant says, "Long hair, short sense," just as I say to Maroosia; but he promised the little pretty one, who was so good that her sisters called her stupid, that if he could get her a silver saucer and a transparent apple she should have them.

Then they all kissed each other, and he cracked his whip, and off he went, with the little bells jingling on the horses' harness.

The three sisters waited till he came back. The two elder ones looked in the looking-glass, and thought how fine they would look in the new necklace and the new dress; but the little pretty one took care of her old mother, and scrubbed and dusted and swept and cooked, and every day the other two said that the soup was burnt or the bread not properly baked.

Then one day there were a jingling of bells and a clattering of horses' hoofs, and the old merchant came driving back from the fair.

The sisters ran out.

"Where is the necklace?" asked the first.

"You haven't forgotten the dress?" asked the second.

But the little one, Little Stupid, helped her old father off with his coat, and asked him if he was tired.

"Well, little one," says the old merchant, "and don't you want your fairing too? I went from one end of the market to the other before I could get what you wanted. I bought the silver saucer from an old Jew, and the transparent apple from a Finnish hag."

[p. 21]

"Oh, thank you, father," says the little one.

"And what will you do with them?" says he.

"I shall spin the apple in the saucer," says the little pretty one, and at that the old merchant burst out laughing.

"They don't call you 'Little Stupid' for nothing," says he.

Well, they all had their fairings, and the two elder sisters, the bad ones, they ran off and put on the new dress and the new necklace, and came out and strutted about, preening themselves like herons, now on one leg and now on the other, to see how they looked. But Little Stupid, she just sat herself down beside the stove, and took the transparent apple and set it in the silver saucer, and she laughed softly to herself. And then she began spinning the apple in the saucer.

Round and round the apple spun in the saucer, faster and faster, till you couldn't see the apple at all, nothing but a mist like a little whirlpool in the silver saucer. And the little good one looked at it, and her eyes shone like yours.

Her sisters laughed at her.

"Spinning an apple in a saucer and staring at it, the little stupid," they said, as they strutted about the room, listening to the rustle of the new dress and fingering the bright round stones of the necklace.

[p. 22]

But the little pretty one did not mind them. She sat in the corner watching the spinning apple. And as it spun she talked to it.

"Spin, spin, apple in the silver saucer." This is what she said. "Spin so that I may see the world. Let me have a peep at the little father Tzar on his high throne. Let me see the rivers and the ships and the great towns far away."

And as she looked at the little glass whirlpool in the saucer, there was the Tzar, the little father--God preserve him!--sitting on his high throne. Ships sailed on the seas, their white sails swelling in the wind. There was Moscow with its white stone walls and painted churches. Why, there were the market at Nijni Novgorod, and the Arab merchants with their camels, and the Chinese with their blue trousers and bamboo staves. And then there was the great river Volga, with men on the banks towing ships against the stream. Yes, and she saw a sturgeon asleep in a deep pool.

"Oh! oh! oh!" says the little pretty one, as she saw all these things.

And the bad ones, they saw how her eyes shone, and they came and

[p. 23]

looked over her shoulder, and saw how all the world was there, in the spinning apple and the silver saucer. And the old father came and looked over her shoulder too, and he saw the market at Nijni Novgorod.

"Why, there is the inn where I put up the horses," says he. "You haven't done so badly after all, Little Stupid."

And the little pretty one, Little Stupid, went on staring into the glass whirlpool in the saucer, spinning the apple, and seeing all the world she had never seen before, floating there before her in the saucer, brighter than leaves in sunlight.

The bad ones, the elder sisters, were sick with envy.

"Little Stupid," says the first, "if you will give me your silver saucer and your transparent apple, I will give you my fine new necklace."

"Little Stupid," says the second, "I will give you my new dress with gold hems if you will give me your transparent apple and your silver saucer."

"Oh, I couldn't do that," says the Little Stupid, and she goes on spinning the apple in the saucer and seeing what was happening all over the world.

So the bad ones put their wicked heads together and thought of a plan.

[p. 24]

And they took their father's axe, and went into the deep forest and hid it under a bush.

The next day they waited till afternoon, when work was done, and the little pretty one was spinning her apple in the saucer. Then they said,--

"Come along, Little Stupid; we are all going to gather berries in the forest."

"Do you really want me to come too?" says the little one. She would rather have played with her apple and saucer.

But they said, "Why, of course. You don't think we can carry all the berries ourselves!"

So the little one jumped up, and found the baskets, and went with them to the forest. But before she started she ran to her father, who was counting his money, and was not too pleased to be interrupted, for figures go quickly out of your head when you have a lot of them to remember. She asked him to take care of the silver saucer and the transparent apple for fear she would lose them in the forest.

"Very well, little bird," says the old man, and he put the things in a

[p. 25]

box with a lock and key to it. He was a merchant, you know, and that sort are always careful about things, and go clattering about with a lot of keys at their belt. I've nothing to lock up, and never had, and perhaps it is just as well, for I could never be bothered with keys.

So the little one picks up all three baskets and runs off after the others, the bad ones, with black hearts under their necklaces and new dresses.

They went deep into the forest, picking berries, and the little one picked so fast that she soon had a basket full. She was picking and picking, and did not see what the bad ones were doing. They were fetching the axe.

The little one stood up to straighten her back, which ached after so much stooping, and she saw her two sisters standing in front of her, looking at her cruelly. Their baskets lay on the ground quite empty. They had not picked a berry. The eldest had the axe in her hand.

The little one was frightened.

"What is it, sisters?" says she; "and why do you look at me with cruel eyes? And what is the axe for? You are not going to cut berries with an axe."

"No, Little Stupid," says the first, "we are not going to cut berries with the axe."

"No, Little Stupid," says the second; "the axe is here for something else."

The little one begged them not to frighten her.

[p. 26]

Says the first, "Give me your transparent apple."

Says the second, "Give me your silver saucer."

"If you don't give them up at once, we shall kill you." That is what the bad ones said.

The poor little one begged them. "O darling sisters, do not kill me! I haven't got the saucer or the apple with me at all."

"What a lie!" say the bad ones. "You never would leave it behind."

And one caught her by the hair, and the other swung the axe, and between them they killed the little pretty one, who was called Little Stupid because she was so good.

Then they looked for the saucer and the apple, and could not find them. But it was too late now. So they made a hole in the ground, and buried the little one under a birch tree.

When the sun went down the bad ones came home, and they wailed with false voices, and rubbed their eyes to make the tears come. They made their eyes red and their noses too, and they did not look any prettier for that.

"What is the matter with you, little pigeons?" said the old merchant and his wife. I would not say "little pigeons" to such bad ones. Black-hearted crows is what I would call them.

[p. 27]

And they wail and lament aloud,--

"We are miserable for ever. Our poor little sister is lost. We looked for her everywhere. We heard the wolves howling. They must have eaten her."

The old mother and father cried like rivers in springtime, because they loved the little pretty one, who was called Little Stupid because she was so good.

But before their tears were dry the bad ones began to ask for the silver saucer and the transparent apple.

"No, no," says the old man; "I shall keep them for ever, in memory of my poor little daughter whom God has taken away."

So the bad ones did not gain by killing their little sister.

"That is one good thing," said Vanya.

"But is that all, grandfather?" said Maroosia.

"Wait a bit, little pigeons. Too much haste set his shoes on fire. You listen, and you will hear what happened," said old Peter. He took a pinch of snuff from a little wooden box, and then he went on with his tale.

Time did not stop with the death of the little girl. Winter came, and the snow with it. Everything was all white, just as it is now. And the

[p. 28]

wolves came to the doors of the huts, even into the villages, and no one stirred farther than he need. And then the snow melted, and the buds broke on the trees, and the birds began singing, and the sun shone warmer every dry. The old people had almost forgotten the little pretty one who lay dead in the forest. The bad ones had not forgotten, because now they had to do the work, and they did not like that at all.

And then one day some lambs strayed away into the forest, and a young shepherd went after them to bring them safely back to their mothers. And as he wandered this way and that through the forest, following their light tracks, he came to a little birch tree, bright with new leaves, waving over a little mound of earth. And there was a reed growing in the mound, and that, you know as well as I, is a strange thing, one reed all by itself under a birch tree in the forest. But it was no stranger than the flowers, for there were flowers round it, some red as the sun at dawn and others blue as the summer sky.

Well, the shepherd looks at the reed, and he looks at those flowers, and he thinks, "I've never seen anything like that before. I'll make a whistle-pipe of that reed, and keep it for a memory till I grow old."

[p. 29]

So he did. He cut the reed, and sat himself down on the mound, and carved away at the reed with his knife, and got the pith out of it by pushing a twig through it, and beating it gently till the bark swelled, made holes in it, and there was his whistle-pipe. And then he put it to his lips to see what sort of music he could make on it. But that he never knew, for before his lips touched it the whistle-pipe began playing by itself and reciting in a girl's sweet voice. This is what it sang:--

"Play, play, whistle-pipe. Bring happiness to my dear father and to my little mother. I was killed--yes, my life was taken from me in the deep forest for the sake of a silver saucer, for the sake of a transparent apple."

When he heard that the shepherd went back quickly to the village to show it to the people. And all the way the whistle-pipe went on playing and reciting, singing its little song. And everyone who heard it said, "What a strange song! But who is it who was killed?"

"I know nothing about it," says the shepherd, and he tells them about the mound and the reed and the flowers, and how he cut the reed and made the whistle-pipe, and how the whistle-pipe does its playing by itself.

[p. 30]

And as he was going through the village, with all the people crowding about him, the old merchant, that one who was the father of the two bad ones and of the little pretty one, came along and listened with the rest. And when he heard the words about the silver saucer and the transparent apple, he snatched the whistle-pipe from the shepherd boy. And still it sang:--

"Play, play, whistle-pipe! Bring happiness to my dear father and to my little mother. I was killed--yes, my life was taken from me in the deep forest for the sake of a silver saucer, for the sake of a transparent apple."

And the old merchant remembered the little good one, and his tears trickled over his cheeks and down his old beard. Old men love little pigeons, you know. And he said to the shepherd,--

"Take me at once to the mound, where you say you cut the reed."

The shepherd led the way, and the old man walked beside him, crying, while the whistle-pipe in his hand went on singing and reciting its little song over and over again.

They came to the mound under the birch tree, and there were the flowers, shining red and blue, and there in the middle of the mound was the Stump of the reed which the shepherd had cut.

[p. 31]

The whistle-pipe sang on and on.

Well, there and then they dug up the mound, and there was the little girl lying under the dark earth as if she were asleep.

"O God of mine," says the old merchant, "this is my daughter, my little pretty one, whom we called Little Stupid." He began to weep loudly and wring his hands; but the whistle-pipe, playing and reciting, changed its song. This is what it sang:--

"My sisters took me into the forest to look for the red berries. In the deep forest they killed poor me for the sake of a silver saucer, for the sake of a transparent apple. Wake me, dear father, from a bitter dream, by fetching water from the well of the Tzar."

How the people scowled at the two sisters! They scowled, they cursed them for the bad ones they were. And the bad ones, the two sisters, wept, and fell on their knees, and confessed everything. They were taken, and their hands were tied, and they were shut up in prison.

"Do not kill them," begged the old merchant, "for then I should have no daughters at all, and when there are no fish in the river we make shift with crays. Besides, let me go to the Tzar and beg water from his well. Perhaps my little daughter will wake up, as the whistle-pipe tells us."

[p. 32]

And the whistle-pipe sang again:--

"Wake me, wake me, dear father, from a bitter dream, by fetching water from the well of the Tzar. Till then, dear father, a blanket of black earth and the shade of the green birch tree."

So they covered the little girl with her blanket of earth, and the shepherd with his dogs watched the mound night and day. He begged for the whistle-pipe to keep him company, poor lad, and all the days and nights he thought of the sweet face of the little pretty one he had seen there under the birch tree.

The old merchant harnessed his horse, as if he were going to the town; and he drove off through the forest, along the roads, till he came to the palace of the Tzar, the little father of all good Russians. And then he left his horse and cart and waited on the steps of the palace.

The Tzar, the little father, with rings on his fingers and a gold crown on his head, came out on the steps in the morning sunshine; and as for the old merchant, he fell on his knees and kissed the feet of the Tzar, and begged,--

"O little father, Tzar, give me leave to take water--just a little drop of water--from your holy well."

[p. 33]

"And what will you do with it?" says the Tzar.

"I will wake my daughter from a bitter dream," says the old merchant. "She was murdered by her sisters--killed in the deep forest--for the sake of a silver saucer, for the sake of a transparent apple."

"A silver saucer?" says the Tzar--"a transparent apple? Tell me about that."

And the old merchant told the Tzar everything, just as I have told it to you.

And the Tzar, the little father, he gave the old merchant a glass of water from his holy well. "But," says he, "when your daughterkin wakes, bring her to me, and her sisters with her, and also the silver saucer and the transparent apple."

The old man kissed the ground before the Tzar, and took the glass of water and drove home with it, and I can tell you he was careful not to spill a drop. He carried it all the way in one hand as he drove.

He came to the forest and to the flowering mound under the little birch tree, and there was the shepherd watching with his dogs. The old merchant and the shepherd took away the blanket of black earth.

[p. 34]

Tenderly, tenderly the shepherd used his fingers, until the little girl, the pretty one, the good one, lay there as sweet as if she were not dead.

Then the merchant scattered the holy water from the glass over the little girl. And his daughterkin blushed as she lay there, and opened her eyes, and passed a hand across them, as if she were waking from a dream. And then she leapt up, crying and laughing, and clung about her old father's neck. And there they stood, the two of them, laughing and crying with joy. And the shepherd could not take his eyes from her, and in his eyes, too, there were tears.

[p. 35]

But the old father did not forget what he had promised the Tzar. He set the little pretty one, who had been so good that her wicked sisters had called her Stupid, to sit beside him on the cart. And he brought something from the house in a coffer of wood, and kept it under his coat. And they brought out the two sisters, the bad ones, from their dark prison, and set them in the cart. And the Little Stupid kissed them and cried over them, and wanted to loose their hands, but the old merchant would not let her. And they all drove together till they came to the palace of the Tzar. The shepherd boy could not take his eyes from the little pretty one, and he ran all the way behind the cart.

Well, they came to the palace, and waited on the steps; and the Tzar came out to take the morning air, and he saw the old merchant, and the two sisters with their hands tied, and the little pretty, one, as lovely as a spring day. And the Tzar saw her, and could not take his eyes from her. He did not see the shepherd boy, who hid away among the crowd.

Says the great Tzar to his soldiers, pointing to the bad sisters, "These two are to be put to death at sunset. When the sun goes down their heads must come off, for they are not fit to see another day."

Then he turns to the little pretty one, and he says: "Little sweet pigeon, where is your silver saucer, and where is your transparent apple?"

The old merchant took the wooden box from under his coat, and opened it with a key at his belt, and gave it to the little one, and she took out the silver saucer and the transparent apple and gave them to the Tzar.

"O lord Tzar," says she, "O little father, spin the apple in the saucer, and you will see whatever you wish to see--your soldiers, your high hills, your forests, your plains, your rivers, and Everything in all Russia."

[p. 36]

And the Tzar, the little father, spun the apple in the saucer till it seemed a little whirlpool of white mist, and there he saw glittering towns, and regiments of soldiers marching to war, and ships, and day and night, and the clear stars above the trees. He looked at these things and thought much of them.

Then the little good one threw herself on her knees before him, weeping.

"O little father, Tzar," she says, "take my transparent apple and my silver saucer; only forgive my sisters. Do not kill them because of me. If their heads are cut off when the sun goes down, it would have been better for me to lie under the blanket of black earth in the shade of the birch tree in the forest."

The Tzar was pleased with the kind heart of the little pretty one, and he forgave the bad ones, and their hands were untied, and the little pretty one kissed them, and they kissed her again and said they were sorry.

The old merchant looked up at the sun, and saw how the time was going.

"Well, well," says he, "it's time we were getting ready to go home."

They all fell on their knees before the Tzar and thanked him. But the Tzar could not take his eyes from the little pretty one, and would not let her go.

[p. 37]

"Little sweet pigeon," says he, "will you be my Tzaritza, and a kind mother to Holy Russia?"

And the little good one did not know what to say. She blushed and answered, very rightly, "As my father orders, and as my little mother wishes, so shall it be."

The Tzar was pleased with her answer, and he sent a messenger on a galloping horse to ask leave from the little pretty one's old mother. And of course the old mother said that she was more than willing. So that was all right. Then there was a wedding--such a wedding!--and every city in Russia sent a silver plate of bread, and a golden salt-cellar, with their good wishes to the Tzar and Tzaritza.

Only the shepherd boy, when he heard that the little pretty one was to marry the Tzar, turned sadly away and went off into the forest.

"Are you happy, little sweet pigeon?" says the Tzar.

"Oh yes," says the Little Stupid, who was now Tzaritza and mother of Holy Russia; "but there is one thing that would make me happier."

"And what is that?" says the lord Tzar.

[p. 38]

"I cannot bear to lose my old father and my little mother and my dear sisters. Let them be with me here in the palace, as they were in my father's house."

The Tzar laughed at the little pretty one, but he agreed, and the little pretty one ran to tell them the good news. She said to her sisters, "Let all be forgotten, and all be forgiven, and may the evil eye fall on the one who first speaks of what has been!"

For a long time the Tzar lived, and the little pretty one the Tzaritza, and they had many children, and were very happy together. And ever since then the Tzars of Russia have kept the silver saucer and the transparent apple, so that, whenever they wish, they can see everything that is going on all over Russia. Perhaps even now the Tzar, the little father--God preserve him!--is spinning the apple in the saucer, and looking at us, and thinking it is time that two little pigeons were in bed.

"Is that the end?" said Vanya.

"That is the end," said old Peter.

"Poor shepherd boy!" said Maroosia.

"I don't know about that," said old Peter. "You see, if he had married

[p. 39]

the little pretty one, and had to have all the family to live with him, he would have had them in a hut like ours instead of in a great palace, and so he would never have had room to get away from them. And now, little pigeons, who is going to be first into bed?"

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

 

SADKO.

In Novgorod in the old days there was a young man--just a boy he was--the son of a rich merchant who had lost all his money and died. So Sadko was very poor. He had not a kopeck in the world, except what the people gave him when he played his dulcimer for their dancing. He had blue eyes and curling hair, and he was strong, and would have been merry; but it is dull work playing for other folk to dance, and Sadko dared not dance with any young girl, for he had no money to marry on, and he did not want to be chased away as a beggar. And the young women of Novgorod, they never looked at the handsome Sadko. No; they smiled with their bright eyes at the young men who danced with them, and if they ever spoke to Sadko, it was just to tell him sharply to keep the music going or to play faster.

[p. 41]

So Sadko lived alone with his dulcimer, and made do with half a loaf when he could not get a whole, and with crust when he had no crumb. He did not mind so very much what came to him, so long as he could play his dulcimer and walk along the banks of the little [*1] river Volkhov that flows by Novgorod, or on the shores of the lake, making music for himself, and seeing the pale mists rise over the water, and dawn or sunset across the shining river.

"There is no girl in all Novgorod as pretty as my little river," he used to say, and night after night he would sit by the banks of the river or on the shores of the lake, playing the dulcimer and singing to himself.

Sometimes he helped the fishermen on the lake, and they would give him a little fish for his supper in payment for his strong young arms.

And it happened that one evening the fishermen asked him to watch their nets for them on the shore, while they went off to take their fish to sell them in the square at Novgorod.

[p. 42]

Sadko sat on the shore, on a rock, and played his dulcimer and sang. Very sweetly he sang of the fair lake and the lovely river--the little river that he thought prettier than all the girls of Novgorod. And while he was singing he saw a whirlpool in the lake, little waves flying from it across the water, and in the middle a hollow down into the water. And in the hollow he saw the head of a great man with blue hair and a gold crown. He knew that the huge man was the Tzar of the Sea. And the man came nearer, walking up out of the depths of the lake--a huge, great man, a very giant, with blue hair falling to his waist over his broad shoulders. The little waves ran from him in all directions as he came striding up out of the water.

Sadko did not know whether to run or stay; but the Tzar of the Sea called out to him in a great voice like wind and water in a storm,--

"Sadko of Novgorod, you have played and sung many days by the side of this lake and on the banks of the little river Volkhov. My daughters love your music, and it has pleased me too. Throw out a net into the water, and draw it in, and the waters will pay you for your singing. And if you are satisfied with the payment, you must come and play to us down in the green palace of the sea."

[p. 43]

With that the Tzar of the Sea went down again into the waters of the lake. The waves closed over him with a roar, and presently the lake was as smooth and calm as it had ever been.

Sadko thought, and said to himself: "Well, there is no harm done in casting out a net." So he threw a net out into the lake.

He sat down again and played on his dulcimer and sang, and when he had finished his singing the dusk had fallen and the moon shone over the lake. He put down his dulcimer and took hold of the ropes of the net, and began to draw it up out of the silver water. Easily the ropes came, and the net, dripping and glittering in the moonlight.

"I was dreaming," said Sadko; "I was asleep when I saw the Tzar of the Sea, and there is nothing in the net at all."

And then, just as the last of the net was coming ashore, he saw something in it, square and dark. He dragged it out, and found it was a coffer. He opened the coffer, and it was full of precious stones--green, red, gold--gleaming in the light of the moon. Diamonds shone there like little bundles of sharp knives.

"There can be no harm in taking these stones," says Sadko, "whether I dreamed or not."

[p. 44]

He took the coffer on his shoulder, and bent under the weight of it, strong though he was. He put it in a safe place. All night he sat and watched by the nets, and played and sang, and planned what he would do.

In the morning the fishermen came, laughing and merry after their night in Novgorod, and they gave him a little fish for watching their nets; and he made a fire on the shore, and cooked it and ate it as he used to do.

"And that is my last meal as a poor man," says Sadko. "Ah me! who knows if I shall be happier?"

Then he set the coffer on his shoulder and tramped away for Novgorod.

"Who is that?" they asked at the gates.

"Only Sadko the dulcimer player," he replied.

"Turned porter?" said they.

"One trade is as good as another," said Sadko, and he walked into the city. He sold a few of the stones, two at a time, and with what he got for them he set up a booth in the market. Small things led to great, and he was soon one of the richest traders in Novgorod.

[p. 45]

And now there was not a girl in the town who could look too sweetly at Sadko. "He has golden hair," says one. "Blue eyes like the sea," says another. "He could lift the world on his shoulders," says a third. A little money, you see, opens everybody's eyes.

But Sadko was not changed by his good fortune. Still he walked and played by the little river Volkhov. When work was done and the traders gone, Sadko would take his dulcimer and play and sing on the banks of the river. And still he said, "There is no girl in all Novgorod as pretty as my little river." Every time he came back from his long voyages--for he was trading far and near, like the greatest of merchants--he went at once to the banks of the river to see how his sweetheart fared. And always he brought some little present for her and threw it into the waves.

For twelve years he lived unmarried in Novgorod, and every year made voyages, buying and selling, and always growing richer and richer. Many were the mothers in Novgorod who would have liked to see him married to their daughters. Many were the pillows that were wet with the tears of the young girls, as they thought of the blue eyes of Sadko and his golden hair.

And then, in the twelfth year since he walked into Novgorod with the coffer on his shoulder, he was sailing in a ship on the Caspian Sea,

[p. 46]

far, far away. For many days the ship sailed on, and Sadko sat on deck and played his dulcimer and sang of Novgorod and of the little river Volkhov that flows under the walls of the town. Blue was the Caspian Sea, and the waves were like furrows in a field, long lines of white under the steady wind, while the sails swelled and the ship shot over the water.

And suddenly the ship stopped.

In the middle of the sea, far from land, the ship stopped and trembled in the waves, as if she were held by a big hand.

"We are aground!" cry the sailors; and the captain, the great one, tells them to take soundings. Seventy fathoms by the bow it was, and seventy fathoms by the stern.

"We are not aground," says the captain, "unless there is a rock sticking up like a needle in the middle of the Caspian Sea!"

"There is magic in this," say the sailors.

"Hoist more sail," says the captain; and up go the white sails,

[p. 47]

swelling out in the wind, while the masts bend and creak. But still the ship lay shivering and did not move, out there in the middle of the sea.

"Hoist more sail yet," says the captain; and up go the white sails, swelling and tugging, while the masts creak and groan. But still the ship lay there shivering and did not move.

"There is an unlucky one aboard," says an old sailor. "We must draw lots and find him, and throw him overboard into the sea."

The other sailors agreed to this. And still Sadko sat, and played his dulcimer and sang.

The sailors cut pieces of string, all of a length, as many as there were souls in the ship, and one of those strings they cut in half. Then they made them into a bundle, and each man plucked one string. And Sadko stopped his playing for a moment to pluck a string, and his was the string that had been cut in half.

"Magician, sorcerer, unclean one!" shouted the sailors.

"Not so," said Sadko. "I remember now an old promise I made, and I keep it willingly."

He took his dulcimer in his hand, and leapt from the ship into the blue Caspian Sea. The waves had scarcely closed over his head before the ship shot forward again, and flew over the waves like a swan's feather, and came in the end safely to her harbour.

"And what happened to Sadko?" asked Maroosia.

[p. 48]

"You shall hear, little pigeon," said old Peter, and he took a pinch of snuff. Then he went on.

Sadko dropped into the waves, and the waves closed over him. Down he sank, like a pebble thrown into a pool, down and down. First the water was blue, then green, and strange fish with goggle eyes and golden fins swam round him as he sank. He came at last to the bottom of the sea.

And there, on the bottom of the sea, was a palace built of green wood. Yes, all the timbers of all the ships that have been wrecked in all the seas of the world are in that palace, and they are all green, and cunningly fitted together, so that the palace is worth a ten days' journey only to see it. And in front of the palace Sadko saw two big kobbly sturgeons, each a hundred and fifty feet long, lashing their tails and guarding the gates. Now, sturgeons are the oldest of all fish, and these were the oldest of all sturgeons.

Sadko walked between the sturgeons and through the gates of the palace. Inside there was a great hall, and the Tzar of the Sea lay resting in the hall, with his gold crown on his head and his blue hair floating round him in the water, and his great body covered with scales lying along the hall. The Tzar of the Sea filled the hall--and there is room in that hall for a village. And there were fish swimming

[p. 49]

this way and that in and out of the windows.

"Ah, Sadko," says the Tzar of the Sea, "you took what the sea gave you, but you have been a long time in coming to sing in the palaces of the sea. Twelve years I have lain here waiting for you."

"Great Tzar, forgive," says Sadko.

"Sing now," says the Tzar of the Sea, and his voice was like the beating of waves.

And Sadko played on his dulcimer and sang.

He sang of Novgorod and of the little river Volkhov which he loved. It was in his song that none of the girls of Novgorod were as pretty as the little river. And there was the sound of wind over the lake in his song, the sound of ripples under the prow of a boat, the sound of ripples on the shore, the sound of the river flowing past the tall reeds, the whispering sound of the river at night. And all the time he played cunningly on the dulcimer. The girls of Novgorod had never danced to so sweet a tune when in the old days Sadko played his dulcimer to earn kopecks and crusts of bread.

Never had the Tzar of the Sea heard such music.

"I would dance," said the Tzar of the Sea, and he stood up like a tall tree in the hall.

[p. 50]

"Play on," said the Tzar of the Sea, and he strode through the gates. The sturgeons guarding the gates stirred the water with their tails.

And if the Tzar of the Sea was huge in the hall, he was huger still when he stood outside on the bottom of the sea. He grew taller and taller, towering like a mountain. His feet were like small hills. His blue hair hung down to his waist, and he was covered with green scales. And he began to dance on the bottom of the sea.

Great was that dancing. The sea boiled, and ships went down. The waves rolled as big as houses. The sea overflowed its shores, and whole towns were under water as the Tzar danced mightily on the bottom of the sea. Hither and thither rushed the waves, and the very earth shook at the dancing of that tremendous Tzar.

He danced till he was tired, and then he came back to the palace of green wood, and passed the sturgeons, and shrank into himself and came through the gates into the hall, where Sadko still played on his dulcimer and sang.

"You have played well and given me pleasure," says the Tzar of the Sea. "I have thirty daughters, and you shall choose one and marry her, and be a Prince of the Sea."

[p. 51]

"Better than all maidens I love my little river," says Sadko; and the Tzar of the Sea laughed and threw his head back, with his blue hair floating all over the hall.

And then there came in the thirty daughters of the Tzar of the Sea. Beautiful they were, lovely, and graceful; but twenty-nine of them passed by, and Sadko fingered his dulcimer and thought of his little river.

There came in the thirtieth, and Sadko cried out aloud. "Here is the only maiden in the world as pretty as my little river!" says he. And she looked at him with eyes that shone like stars reflected in the river. Her hair was dark, like the river at night. She laughed, and her voice was like the flowing of the river.

"And what is the name of your little river?" says the Tzar.

"It is the little river Volkhov that flows by Novgorod," says Sadko; "but your daughter is as fair as the little river, and I would gladly marry her if she will have me."

"It is a strange thing," says the Tzar, "but Volkhov is the name of my youngest daughter."

He put Sadko's hand in the hand of his youngest daughter, and they kissed each other. And as they kissed, Sadko saw a necklace round her

[p. 52]

neck, and knew it for one he had thrown into the river as a present for his sweetheart.

She smiled, and "Come!" says she, and took him away to a palace of her own, and showed him a coffer; and in that coffer were bracelets and rings and earrings--all the gifts that he had thrown into the river.

And Sadko laughed for joy, and kissed the youngest daughter of the Tzar of the Sea, and she kissed him back.

"O my little river!" says he; "there is no girl in all the world but thou as pretty as my little river."

Well, they were married, and the Tzar of the Sea laughed at the wedding feast till the palace shook and the fish swam off in all directions.

And after the feast Sadko and his bride went off together to her palace. And before they slept she kissed him very tenderly, and she said,--

"O Sadko, you will not forget me? You will play to me sometimes, and sing?"

"I shall never lose sight of you, my pretty one," says he; "and as for music, I will sing and play all the day long."

"That's as may be," says she, and they fell asleep.

[p. 53]

And in the middle of the night Sadko happened to turn in bed, and he touched the Princess with his left foot, and she was cold, cold, cold as ice in January. And with that touch of cold he woke, and he was lying under the walls of Novgorod, with his dulcimer in his hand, and one of his feet was in the little river Volkhov, and the moon was shining.

"O grandfather! And what happened to him after that?" asked Maroosia.

"There are many tales," said old Peter. "Some say he went into the town, and lived on alone until he died. But I think with those who say that he took his dulcimer and swam out into the middle of the river, and sank under water again, looking for his little Princess. They say he found her, and lives still in the green palaces of the bottom of the sea; and when there is a big storm, you may know that Sadko is playing on his dulcimer and singing, and that the Tzar of the Sea is dancing his tremendous dance down there, on the bottom, under the waves."

"Yes, I expect that's what happened," said Ivan. "He'd have found it very dull in Novgorod, even though it is a big town."

Footnotes

^41:1 The Volkhov would be a big river if it were in England, and Sadko and old Peter called it little only because they loved it.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

 

FROST.

The children, in their little sheepskin coats and high felt boots and fur hats, trudged along the forest path in the snow. Vanya went first, then Maroosia, and then old Peter. The ground was white and the snow was hard and crisp, and all over the forest could be heard the crackling of the frost. And as they walked, old Peter told them the story of the old woman who wanted Frost to marry her daughters.

Once upon a time there were an old man and an old woman. Now the old woman was the old man's second wife. His first wife had died, and had left him with a little daughter: Martha she was called. Then he married again, and God gave him a cross wife, and with her two more daughters, and they were very different from the first.

[p. 55]

The old woman loved her own daughters, and gave them red kisel jelly every day, and honey too, as much as they could put into their greedy little mouths. But poor little Martha, the eldest, she got only what the others left. When they were cross they threw away what they left, and then she got nothing at all.

The children grew older, and the stepmother made Martha do all the work of the house. She had to fetch the wood for the stove, and light it and keep it burning. She had to draw the water for her sisters to wash their hands in. She had to make the clothes, and wash them and mend them. She had to cook the dinner, and clean the dishes after the others had done before having a bite for herself.

For all that the stepmother was never satisfied, and was for ever shouting at her: "Look, the kettle is in the wrong place;" "There is dust on the floor;" "There is a spot on the tablecloth;" or, "The spoons are not clean, you stupid, ugly, idle hussy." But Martha was not idle. She worked all day long, and got up before the sun, while her sisters never stirred from their beds till it was time for dinner. And she was not stupid. She always had a song on her lips, except when

[p. 56]

her stepmother had beaten her. And as for being ugly, she was the prettiest little girl in the village.

Her father saw all this, but he could not do anything, for the old woman was mistress at home, and he was terribly afraid of her. And as for the daughters, they saw how their mother treated Martha, and they did the same. They were always complaining and getting her into trouble. It was a pleasure to them to see the tears on her pretty cheeks.

Well, time went on, and the little girl grew up, and the daughters of the stepmother were as ugly as could be. Their eyes were always cross, and their mouths were always complaining. Their mother saw that no one would want to marry either of them while there was Martha about the house, with her bright eyes and her songs and her kindness to everybody.

So she thought of a way to get rid of her stepdaughter, and a cruel way it was.

"See here, old man," says she, "it is high time Martha was married, and I have a bridegroom in mind for her. To-morrow morning you must harness the old mare to the sledge, and put a bit of food together and be ready to start early, as I'd like to see you back before night."

[p. 57]

To Martha she said: "To-morrow you must pack your things in a box, and put on your best dress to show yourself to your betrothed."

"Who is he?" asked Martha with red cheeks.

"You will know when you see him," said the stepmother.

All that night Martha hardly slept. She could hardly believe that she was really going to escape from the old woman at last, and have a hut of her own, where there would be no one to scold her. She wondered who the young man was. She hoped he was Fedor Ivanovitch, who had such kind eyes, and such nimble fingers on the balalaika, and such a merry way of flinging out his heels when he danced the Russian dance. But although he always smiled at her when they met, she felt she hardly dared to hope that it was he. Early in the morning she got up and said her prayers to God, put the whole hut in order, and packed her things into a little box. That was easy, because she had such few things. It was the other daughters who had new dresses. Any old thing was good enough for Martha. But she put on her best blue dress, and there she was, as pretty a little maid as ever walked under the birch trees in spring.

[p. 58]

The old man harnessed the mare to the sledge and brought it to the door. The snow was very deep and frozen hard, and the wind peeled the skin from his ears before he covered them with the flaps of his fur hat.

"Sit down at the table and have a bite before you go," says the old woman.

The old man sat down, and his daughter with him, and drank a glass of tea and ate some black bread. And the old woman put some cabbage soup, left from the day before, in a saucer, and said to Martha, "Eat this, my little pigeon, and get ready for the road." But when she said "my little pigeon," she did not smile with her eyes, but only with her cruel mouth, and Martha was afraid. The old woman whispered to the old man: "I have a word for you, old fellow. You will take Martha to her betrothed, and I'll tell you the way. You go straight along, and then take the road to the right into the forest ... you know ... straight to the big fir tree that stands on a hillock, and there you will give Martha to her betrothed and leave her. He will be waiting for her, and his name is Frost."

The old man stared, opened his mouth, and stopped eating. The little maid, who had heard the last words, began to cry,

[p. 59]

"Now, what are you whimpering about?" screamed the old woman. "Frost is a rich bridegroom and a handsome one. See how much he owns. All the pines and firs are his, and the birch trees. Any one would envy his possessions, and he himself is a very bogatir, [*2] a man of strength and power."

The old man trembled, and said nothing in reply. And Martha went on crying quietly, though she tried to stop her tears. The old man packed up what was left of the black bread, told Martha to put on her sheepskin coat, set her in the sledge and climbed in, and drove off along the white, frozen road.

The road was long and the country open, and the wind grew colder and colder, while the frozen snow blew up from under the hoofs of the mare and spattered the sledge with white patches. The tale is soon told, but it takes time to happen, and the sledge was white all over long before they turned off into the forest.

They came in the end deep into the forest, and left the road, and over the deep snow through the trees to the great fir. There the old man stopped, told his daughter to get out of the sledge, set her little box under the fir, and said, "Wait here for your bridegroom, and when

[p. 60]

he comes be sure to receive him with kind words." Then he turned the mare round and drove home, with the tears running from his eyes and freezing on his cheeks before they had had time to reach his beard.

The little maid sat and trembled. Her sheepskin coat was worn through, and in her blue bridal dress she sat, while fits of shivering shook her whole body. She wanted to run away; but she had not strength to move, or even to keep her little white teeth from chattering between her frozen lips.

Suddenly, not far away, she heard Frost crackling among the fir trees, just as he is crackling now. He was leaping from tree to tree, crackling as he came.

He leapt at last into the great fir tree, under which the little maid was sitting. He crackled in the top of the tree, and then called; down out of the topmost branches,--

"Are you warm, little maid?"

"Warm, warm, little Father Frost."

Frost laughed, and came a little lower in the tree and crackled and crackled louder than before. Then he asked,--

"Are you still warm, little maid? Are you warm, little red cheeks?"

[p. 61]

The little maid could hardly speak. She was nearly dead, but she answered,--

"Warm, dear Frost; warm, little father."

Frost climbed lower in the tree, and crackled louder than ever, and asked,--

"Are you still warm, little maid? Are you warm, little red cheeks? Are you warm, little paws?"

The little maid was benumbed all over, but she whispered so that Frost could just hear her,--

"Warm, little pigeon, warm, dear Frost,"

And Frost was sorry for her, leapt down with a tremendous crackle and a scattering of frozen snow, wrapped the little maid up in rich furs, and covered her with warm blankets.

In the morning the old woman said to her husband, "Drive off now to the forest, and wake the young couple."

The old man wept when he thought of his little daughter, for he was sure that he would find her dead. He harnessed the mare, and drove off through the snow. He came to the tree, and heard his little daughter singing merrily, while Frost crackled and laughed. There she was, alive and warm, with a good fur cloak about her shoulders, a rich veil, costly blankets round her feet, and a box full of splendid presents.

[p. 62]

The old man did not say a word. He was too surprised. He just sat in the sledge staring, while the little maid lifted her box and the box of presents, set them in the sledge, climbed in, and sat down beside him.

They came home, and the little maid, Martha, fell at the feet of her stepmother. The old woman nearly went off her head with rage when she saw her alive, with her fur cloak and rich veil, and the box of splendid presents fit for the daughter of a prince.

"Ah, you slut," she cried, "you won't get round me like that!"

And she would not say another word to the little maid, but went about all day long biting her nails and thinking what to do.

At night she said to the old man,--

"You must take my daughters, too, to that bridegroom in the forest. He will give them better gifts than these."

Things take time to happen, but the tale is quickly told. Early next morning the old woman woke her daughters, fed them with good food, dressed them like brides, hustled the old man, made him put clean hay in the sledge and warm blankets, and sent them off to the forest.

[p. 63]

The old man did as he was bid--drove to the big fir tree, set the boxes under the tree, lifted out the stepdaughters and set them on the boxes side by side, and drove back home.

They were warmly dressed, these two, and well fed, and at first, as they sat there, they did not think about the cold.

"I can't think what put it into mother's head to marry us both at once," said the first, "and to send us here to be married. As if there were not enough young men in the village. Who can tell what sort of fellows we shall meet here!"

Then they began to quarrel.

"Well," says one of them, "I'm beginning to get the cold shivers. If our fated ones do not come soon, we shall perish of cold."

"It's a flat lie to say that bridegrooms get ready early. It's already dinner-time."

"What if only one comes?"

"You'll have to come another time."

"You think he'll look at you?"

"Well, he won't take you, anyhow."

"Of course he'll take me."

"Take you first! It's enough to make any one laugh!"

They began to fight and scratch each other, so that their cloaks fell open and the cold entered their bosoms.

[p. 64]

Click to enlarge
There she was, a good fur cloak about her shoulders and costly blankets round her feet.

Frost, crackling among the trees, laughing to himself, froze the hands of the two quarrelling girls, and they hid their hands in the sleeves of their fur coats and shivered, and went on scolding and jeering at each other.

"Oh, you ugly mug, dirty nose! What sort of a housekeeper will you make?"

"And what about you, boasting one? You know nothing but how to gad about and lick your own face. We'll soon see which of us he'll take."

And the two girls went on wrangling and wrangling till they began to freeze in good earnest.

Suddenly they cried out together,--

"Devil take these bridegrooms for being so long in coming! You have turned blue all over."

And together they replied, shivering,--

"No bluer than yourself, tooth-chatterer."

And Frost, not so far away, crackled and laughed, and leapt from fir tree to fir tree, crackling as he came.

The girls heard that some one was coming through the forest.

"Listen! there's some one coming. Yes, and with bells on his sledge!"

[p. 65]

"Shut up, you slut! I can't hear, and the frost is taking the skin off me."

They began blowing on their fingers.

And Frost came nearer and nearer, crackling, laughing, talking to himself, just as he is doing to-day. Nearer and nearer he came, leaping from tree-top to tree-top, till at last he leapt into the great fir under which the two girls were sitting and quarrelling.

He leant down, looking through the branches, and asked,--

"Are you warm, maidens? Are you warm, little red cheeks? Are you warm, little pigeons?"

"Ugh, Frost, the cold is hurting us. We are frozen. We are waiting for our bridegrooms, but the cursed fellows have not turned up."

Frost came a little lower in the tree, and crackled louder and swifter.

"Are you warm, maidens? Are you warm, my little red cheeks?"

"Go to the devil!" they cried out. "Are you blind? Our hands and feet are frozen!"

Frost came still lower in the branches, and cracked and crackled louder than ever.

"Are you warm, maidens?" he asked.

"Into the pit with you, with all the fiends," the girls screamed at

[p. 66]

him, "you ugly, wretched fellow!"... And as they were cursing at him their bad words died on their lips, for the two girls, the cross children of the cruel stepmother, were frozen stiff where they sat.

Frost hung from the lowest branches of the tree, swaying and crackling while he looked at the anger frozen on their faces. Then he climbed swiftly up again, and crackling and cracking, chuckling to himself, he went off, leaping from fir tree to fir tree, this way and that through the white, frozen forest.

In the morning the old woman says to her husband,--

"Now then, old man, harness the mare to the sledge, and put new hay in the sledge to be warm for my little ones, and lay fresh rushes on the hay to be soft for them; and take warm rugs with you, for maybe they will be cold, even in their furs. And look sharp about it, and don't keep them waiting. The frost is hard this morning, and it was harder in the night."

The old man had not time to eat even a mouthful of black bread before she had driven him out into the snow. He put hay and rushes and soft blankets in the sledge, and harnessed the mare, and went off to the forest. He came to the great fir, and found the two girls sitting

[p. 67]

under it dead, with their anger still to be seen on their frozen, ugly faces.

He picked them up, first one and then the other, and put them in the rushes and the warm hay, covered them with the blankets, and drove home.

The old woman saw him coming, far away, over the shining snow. She ran to meet him, and shouted out,--

"Where are the little ones?"

"In the sledge."

She snatched off the blankets and pulled aside the rushes, and found the bodies of her two cross daughters.

Instantly she flew at the old man in a storm of rage. "What have you done to my children, my little red cherries, my little pigeons? I will kill you with the oven fork! I will break your head with the poker!"

The old man listened till she was out of breath and could not say another word. That, my dears, is the only wise thing to do when a woman is in a scolding rage. And as soon as she had no breath left with which to answer him, he said,--

"My little daughter got riches for soft words, but yours were always

[p. 68]

rough of the tongue. And it's not my fault, anyhow, for you yourself sent them into the forest."

Well, at last the old woman got her breath again, and scolded away till she was tired out. But in the end she made her peace with the old man, and they lived together as quietly as could be expected.

As for Martha, Fedor Ivanovitch sought her in marriage, as he had meant to do all along--yes, and married her; and pretty she looked in the furs that Frost had given her. I was at the feast, and drank beer and mead with the rest. And she had the prettiest children that ever were seen--yes, and the best behaved. For if ever they thought of being naughty, the old grandfather told them the story of crackling Frost, and how kind words won kindness, and cross words cold treatment. And now, listen to Frost. Hear how he crackles away! And mind, if ever he asks you if you are warm, be as polite to him as you can. And to do that, the best way is to be good always, like little Martha. Then it comes easy.

The children listened, and laughed quietly, because they knew they were good. Away in the forest they heard Frost, and thought of him crackling and leaping from one tree to another. And just then they

[p. 69]

came home. It was dusk, for dusk comes early in winter, and a little way through the trees before them they saw the lamp of their hut glittering on the snow. The big dog barked and ran forward, and the children with him. The soup was warm on the stove, and in a few minutes they were sitting at the table, Vanya, Maroosia, and old Peter, blowing at their steaming spoons.

Footnotes

^59:2 The bogatirs were strong men, heroes of old Russia.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

 

THE FOOL OF THE WORLD AND THE FLYING SHIP.

There were once upon a time an old peasant and his wife, and they had three sons. Two of them were clever young men who could borrow money without being cheated, but the third was the Fool of the World. He was as simple as a child, simpler than some children, and he never did any one a harm in his life.

Well, it always happens like that. The father and mother thought a lot of the two smart young men; but the Fool of the World was lucky if he got enough to eat, because they always forgot him unless they happened to be looking at him, and sometimes even then.

But however it was with his father and mother, this is a story that shows that God loves simple folk, and turns things to their advantage in the end.

[p. 71]

For it happened that the Tzar of that country sent out messengers along the highroads and the rivers, even to huts in the forest like ours, to say that he would give his daughter, the Princess, in marriage to any one who could bring him a flying ship--ay, a ship with wings, that should sail this way and that through the blue sky, like a ship sailing on the sea.

"This is a chance for us," said the two clever brothers; and that same day they set off together, to see if one of them could not build the flying ship and marry the Tzar's daughter, and so be a great man indeed.

And their father blessed them, and gave them finer clothes than ever he wore himself. And their mother made them up hampers of food for the road, soft white rolls, and several kinds of cooked meats, and bottles of corn brandy. She went with them as far as the highroad, and waved her hand to them till they were out of sight. And so the two clever brothers set merrily off on their adventure, to see what could be done with their cleverness. And what happened to them I do not know, for they were never heard of again.

The Fool of the World saw them set off, with their fine parcels of food, and their fine clothes, and their bottles of corn brandy.

[p. 72]

"I'd like to go too," says he, "and eat good meat, with soft white rolls, and drink corn brandy, and marry the Tzar's daughter."

"Stupid fellow," says his mother, "what's the good of your going? Why, if you were to stir from the house you would walk into the arms of a bear; and if not that, then the wolves would eat you before you had finished staring at them."

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

 

BABA YAGA.

"Tell us about Baba Yaga," begged Maroosia.

"Yes," said Vanya, "please, grandfather, and about the little hut on hen's legs."

"Baba Yaga is a witch," said old Peter; "a terrible old woman she is, but sometimes kind enough. You know it was she who told Prince Ivan how to win one of the daughters of the Tzar of the Sea, and that was the best daughter of the bunch, Vasilissa the Very Wise. But then Baba Yaga is usually bad, as in the case of Vasilissa the Very Beautiful, who was only saved from her iron teeth by the cleverness of her Magic Doll."

"Tell us the story of the Magic Doll," begged Maroosia.

"I will some day," said old Peter.

[p. 89]

"And has Baba Yaga really got iron teeth?" asked Vanya.

"Iron, like the poker and tongs," said old Peter.

"What for?" said Maroosia.

"To eat up little Russian children," said old Peter, "when she can get them. She usually only eats bad ones, because the good ones get away. She is bony all over, and her eyes flash, and she drives about in a mortar, beating it with a pestle, and sweeping up her tracks with a besom, so that you cannot tell which way she has gone."

"And her hut?" said Vanya. He had often heard about it before, but he wanted to hear about it again.

"She lives in a little hut which stands on hen's legs. Sometimes it faces the forest, sometimes it faces the path, and sometimes it walks solemnly about. But in some of the stories she lives in another kind of hut, with a railing of tall sticks, and a skull on each stick. And all night long fire glows in the skulls and fades as the dawn rises."

"Now tell us one of the Baba Yaga stories," said Maroosia.

"Please," said Vanya.

[p. 90]

"I will tell you how one little girl got away from her, and then, if ever she catches you, you will know exactly what to do."

And old Peter put down his pipe and began:--

   

BABA YAGA AND THE LITTLE GIRL WITH THE KIND HEART.

Once upon a time there was a widowed old man who lived alone in a hut with his little daughter. Very merry they were together, and they used to smile at each other over a table just piled with bread and jam. Everything went well, until the old man took it into his head to marry again.

Yes, the old man became foolish in the years of his old age, and he took another wife. And so the poor little girl had a stepmother. And after that everything changed. There was no more bread and jam on the table, and no more playing bo-peep, first this side of the samovar and then that, as she sat with her father at tea. It was worse than that, for she never did sit at tea. The stepmother said that everything that went wrong was the little girl's fault. And the old man believed his new wife, and so there were no more kind words for his little daughter. Day after day the stepmother used to say that the little

[p. 91]

girl was too naughty to sit at table. And then she would throw her a crust and tell her to get out of the hut and go and eat it somewhere else.

And the poor little girl used to go away by herself into the shed in the yard, and wet the dry crust with her tears, and eat it all alone. Ah me! she often wept for the old days, and she often wept at the thought of the days that were to come.

Mostly she wept because she was all alone, until one day she found a little friend in the shed. She was hunched up in a corner of the shed, eating her crust and crying bitterly, when she heard a little noise. It was like this: scratch--scratch. It was just that, a little gray mouse who lived in a hole.

Out he came, his little pointed nose and his long whiskers, his little round ears and his bright eyes. Out came his little humpy body and his long tail. And then he sat up on his hind legs, and curled his tail twice round himself and looked at the little girl.

The little girl, who had a kind heart, forgot all her sorrows, and took a scrap of her crust and threw it to the little mouse. The mouseykin nibbled and nibbled, and there, it was gone, and he was looking for another. She gave him another bit, and presently that was

[p. 92]

gone, and another and another, until there was no crust left for the little girl. Well, she didn't mind that. You see, she was so happy seeing the little mouse nibbling and nibbling.

When the crust was done the mouseykin looks up at her with his little bright eyes, and "Thank you," he says, in a little squeaky voice. "Thank you," he says; "you are a kind little girl, and I am only a mouse, and I've eaten all your crust. But there is one thing I can do for you, and that is to tell you to take care. The old woman in the hut (and that was the cruel stepmother) is own sister to Baba Yaga, the bony-legged, the witch. So if ever she sends you on a message to your aunt, you come and tell me. For Baba Yaga would eat you soon enough with her iron teeth if you did not know what to do."

"Oh, thank you," said the little girl; and just then she heard the stepmother calling to her to come in and clean up the tea things, and tidy the house, and brush out the floor, and clean everybody's boots.

So off she had to go.

When she went in she had a good look at her stepmother, and sure enough she had a long nose, and she was as bony as a fish with all the flesh picked off, and the little girl thought of Baba Yaga and

[p. 93]

shivered, though she did not feel so bad when she remembered the mouseykin out there in the shed in the yard.

The very next morning it happened. The old man went off to pay a visit to some friends of his in the next village, just as I go off sometimes to see old Fedor, God be with him. And as soon as the old man was out of sight the wicked stepmother called the little girl.

"You are to go to-day to your dear little aunt in the forest," says she, "and ask her for a needle and thread to mend a shirt."

"But here is a needle and thread," says the little girl.

"Hold your tongue," says the stepmother, and she gnashes her teeth, and they make a noise like clattering tongs. "Hold your tongue," she says. "Didn't I tell you you are to go to-day to your dear little aunt to ask for a needle and thread to mend a shirt?"

"How shall I find her?" says the little girl, nearly ready to cry, for she knew that her aunt was Baba Yaga, the bony-legged, the witch.

The stepmother took hold of the little girl's nose and pinched it.

"That is your nose," she says. "Can you feel it?"

[p. 94]

"Yes," says the poor little girl.

"You must go along the road into the forest till you come to a fallen tree; then you must turn to your left, and then follow your nose and you will find her," says the stepmother. "Now, be off with you, lazy one. Here is some food for you to eat by the way." She gave the little girl a bundle wrapped up in a towel.

The little girl wanted to go into the shed to tell the mouseykin she was going to Baba Yaga, and to ask what she should do. But she looked back, and there was the stepmother at the door watching her. So she had to go straight on.

She walked along the road through the forest till she came to the fallen tree. Then she turned to the left. Her nose was still hurting where the stepmother had pinched it, so she knew she had to go straight ahead. She was just setting out when she heard a little noise under the fallen tree. "Scratch--scratch."

And out jumped the little mouse, and sat up in the road in front of her.

"O mouseykin, mouseykin," says the little girl, "my stepmother has sent me to her sister. And that is Baba Yaga, the bony-legged, the witch, and I do not know what to do."

"It will not be difficult," says the little mouse, "because of your

[p. 95]

kind heart. Take all the things you find in the road, and do with them what you like. Then you will escape from Baba Yaga, and everything will be well."

"Are you hungry, mouseykin?" said the little girl

"I could nibble, I think," says the little mouse.

The little girl unfastened the towel, and there was nothing in it but stones. That was what the stepmother had given the little girl to eat by the way.

"Oh, I'm so sorry," says the little girl. "There's nothing for you to eat."

"Isn't there?" said mouseykin, and as she looked at them the little girl saw the stones turn to bread and jam. The little girl sat down on the fallen tree, and the little mouse sat beside her, and they ate bread and jam until they were not hungry any more.

"Keep the towel," says the little mouse; "I think it will be useful. And remember what I said about the things you find on the way. And now good-bye," says he.

"Good-bye," says the little girl, and runs along.

As she was running along she found a nice new handkerchief lying in the road. She picked it up and took it with her. Then she found a

[p. 96]

little bottle of oil. She picked it up and took it with her. Then she found some scraps of meat.

Click to enlarge
There she was, beating with the pestle and sweeping with the besom.

"Perhaps I'd better take them too," she said; and she took them.

Then she found a gay blue ribbon, and she took that. Then she found a little loaf of good bread, and she took that too.

"I daresay somebody will like it," she said.

And then she came to the hut of Baba Yaga, the bony-legged, the witch. There was a high fence round it with big gates. When she pushed them open they squeaked miserably, as if it hurt them to move. The little girl was sorry for them.

"How lucky," she says, "that I picked up the bottle of oil!" and she poured the oil into the hinges of the gates.

Inside the railing was Baba Yaga's hut, and it stood on hen's legs and walked about the yard. And in the yard there was standing Baba Yaga's servant, and she was crying bitterly because of the tasks Baba Yaga set her to do. She was crying bitterly and wiping her eyes on her petticoat.

"How lucky," says the little girl, "that I picked up a handkerchief!" And she gave the handkerchief to Baba Yaga's servant, who wiped her eyes on it and smiled through her tears.

[p. 97]

Close by the hut was a huge dog, very thin, gnawing a dry crust.

"How lucky," says the little girl, "that I picked up a loaf!" And she gave the loaf to the dog, and he gobbled it up and licked his lips.

The little girl went bravely up to the hut and knocked on the door.

"Come in," says Baba Yaga.

The little girl went in, and there was Baba Yaga, the bony-legged, the witch, sitting weaving at a loom. In a corner of the hut was a thin black cat watching a mouse-hole.

"Good-day to you, auntie," says the little girl, trying not to tremble.

"Good-day to you, niece," says Baba Yaga.

"My stepmother has sent me to you to ask for a needle and thread to mend a shirt."

"Very well," says Baba Yaga, smiling, and showing her iron teeth. "You sit down here at the loom, and go on with my weaving, while I go and get you the needle and thread."

The little girl sat down at the loom and began to weave.

Baba Yaga went out and called to her servant, "Go, make the bath hot and scrub my niece. Scrub her clean. I'll make a dainty meal of her."

[p. 98]

The servant came in for the jug. The little girl begged her, "Be not too quick in making the fire, and carry the water in a sieve." The servant smiled, but said nothing, because she was afraid of Baba Yaga. But she took a very long time about getting the bath ready.

Baba Yaga came to the window and asked,--

"Are you weaving, little niece? Are you weaving, my pretty?"

"I am weaving, auntie," says the little girl.

When Baba Yaga went away from the window, the little girl spoke to the thin black cat who was watching the mouse-hole.

"What are you doing, thin black cat?"

"Watching for a mouse," says the thin black cat. "I haven't had any dinner for three days."

"How lucky," says the little girl, "that I picked up the scraps of meat!" And she gave them to the thin black cat. The thin black cat gobbled them up, and said to the little girl,--

"Little girl, do you want to get out of this?"

"Catkin dear," says the little girl, "I do want to get out of this, for Baba Yaga is going to eat me with her iron teeth."

"Well," says the cat, "I will help you."

Just then Baba Yaga came to the window.

"Are you weaving, little niece?" she asked. "Are you weaving, my pretty?"

[p. 99]

"I am weaving, auntie," says the little girl, working away, while the loom went clickety clack, clickety clack.

Baba Yaga went away.

Says the thin black cat to the little girl: "You have a comb in your hair, and you have a towel. Take them and run for it while Baba Yaga is in the bath-house. When Baba Yaga chases after you, you must listen; and when she is close to you, throw away the towel, and it will turn into a big, wide river. It will take her a little time to get over that. But when she does, you must listen; and as soon as she is close to you throw away the comb, and it will sprout up into such a forest that she will never get through it at all."

"But she'll hear the loom stop," says the little girl.

"I'll see to that," says the thin black cat.

The cat took the little girl's place at the loom.

Clickety clack, clickety clack; the loom never stopped for a moment.

The little girl looked to see that Baba Yaga was in the bath-house, and then she jumped down from the little hut on hen's legs, and ran to the gates as fast as her legs could flicker.

The big dog leapt up to tear her to pieces. Just as he was going to spring on her he saw who she was.

[p. 100]

"Why, this is the little girl who gave me the loaf," says he. "A good journey to you, little girl;" and he lay down again with his head between his paws.

When she came to the gates they opened quietly, quietly, without making any noise at all, because of the oil she had poured into their hinges.

Outside the gates there was a little birch tree that beat her in the eyes so that she could not go by.

"How lucky," says the little girl, "that I picked up the ribbon!" And she tied up the birch tree with the pretty blue ribbon. And the birch tree was so pleased with the ribbon that it stood still, admiring itself, and let the little girl go by.

How she did run!

Meanwhile the thin black cat sat at the loom. Clickety clack, clickety clack, sang the loom; but you never saw such a tangle as the tangle made by the thin black cat.

And presently Baba Yaga came to the window.

"Are you weaving, little niece?" she asked. "Are you weaving, my pretty?"

[p. 101]

"I am weaving, auntie," says the thin black cat, tangling and tangling, while the loom went clickety clack, clickety clack.

"That's not the voice of my little dinner," says Baba Yaga, and she jumped into the hut, gnashing her iron teeth; and there was no little girl, but only the thin black cat, sitting at the loom, tangling and tangling the threads.

"Grr," says Baba Yaga, and jumps for the cat, and begins banging it about. "Why didn't you tear the little girl's eyes out?"

"In all the years I have served you," says the cat, "you have only given me one little bone; but the kind little girl gave me scraps of meat."

Baba Yaga threw the cat into a corner, and went out into the yard.

"Why didn't you squeak when she opened you?" she asked the gates.

"Why didn't you tear her to pieces?" she asked the dog.

"Why didn't you beat her in the face, and not let her go by?" she asked the birch tree.

"Why were you so long in getting the bath ready? If you had been quicker, she never would have got away," said Baba Yaga to the servant.

And she rushed about the yard, beating them all, and scolding at the top of her voice.

[p. 102]

"Ah!" said the gates, "in all the years we have served you, you never even eased us with water; but the kind little girl poured good oil into our hinges."

"Ah!" said the dog, "in all the years I've served you, you never threw me anything but burnt crusts; but the kind little girl gave me a good loaf."

"Ah!" said the little birch tree, "in all the years I've served you, you never tied me up, even with thread; but the kind little girl tied me up with a gay blue ribbon."

"Ah!" said the servant, "in all the years I've served you, you have never given me even a rag; but the kind little girl gave me a pretty handkerchief."

Baba Yaga gnashed at them with her iron teeth. Then she jumped into the mortar and sat down. She drove it along with the pestle, and swept up her tracks with a besom, and flew off in pursuit of the little girl.

The little girl ran and ran. She put her ear to the ground and listened. Bang, bang, bangety bang! she could hear Baba Yaga beating the mortar with the pestle. Baba Yaga was quite close. There she was, beating with the pestle and sweeping with the besom, coming along the road.

As quickly as she could, the little girl took out the towel and threw

[p. 103]

it on the ground. And the towel grew bigger and bigger, and wetter and wetter, and there was a deep, broad river between Baba Yaga and the little girl.

The little girl turned and ran on. How she ran!

Baba Yaga came flying up in the mortar. But the mortar could not float in the river with Baba Yaga inside. She drove it in, but only got wet for her trouble. Tongs and pokers tumbling down a chimney are nothing to the noise she made as she gnashed her iron teeth. She turned home, and went flying back to the little hut on hen's legs. Then she got together all her cattle and drove them to the river.

"Drink, drink!" she screamed at them; and the cattle drank up all the river to the last drop. And Baba Yaga, sitting in the mortar, drove it with the pestle, and swept up her tracks with the besom, and flew over the dry bed of the river and on in pursuit of the little girl.

The little girl put her ear to the ground and listened. Bang, bang, bangety bang! She could hear Baba Yaga beating the mortar with the pestle. Nearer and nearer came the noise, and there was Baba Yaga, beating with the pestle and sweeping with the besom, coming along the road close behind.

[p. 104]

The little girl threw down the comb, and grew bigger and bigger, and its teeth sprouted up into a thick forest, thicker than this forest where we live--so thick that not even Baba Yaga could force her way through. And Baba Yaga, gnashing her teeth and screaming with rage and disappointment, turned round and drove away home to her little hut on hen's legs.

The little girl ran on home. She was afraid to go in and see her stepmother, so she ran into the shed.

Scratch, scratch! Out came the little mouse.

"So you got away all right, my dear," says the little mouse. "Now run in. Don't be afraid. Your father is back, and you must tell him all about it."

The little girl went into the house.

"Where have you been?" says her father; "and why are you so out of breath?"

The stepmother turned yellow when she saw her, and her eyes glowed, and her teeth ground together until they broke.

But the little girl was not afraid, and she went to her father and climbed on his knee, and told him everything just as it had happened. And when the old man knew that the stepmother had sent his little daughter to be eaten by Baba Yaga, he was so angry that he drove her

[p. 105]

out of the hut, and ever afterwards lived alone with the little girl. Much better it was for both of them.

"And the little mouse?" said Ivan.

"The little mouse," said old Peter, "came and lived in the hut, and every day it used to sit up on the table and eat crumbs, and warm its paws on the little girl's glass of tea."

"Tell us a story about a cat, please, grandfather," said Vanya, who was sitting with Vladimir curled up in his arms.

"The story of a very happy cat," said Maroosia; and then, scratching Bayan's nose, she added, "and afterwards a story about a dog."

"I'll tell you the story of a very unhappy cat who became very happy," said old Peter. "I'll tell you the story of the Cat who became Head-forester."

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

 

THE CAT WHO BECAME HEAD-FORESTER.

If you drop Vladimir by mistake, you know he always falls on his feet. And if Vladimir tumbles off the roof of the hut, he always falls on his feet. Cats always fall on their feet, on their four paws, and never hurt themselves. And as in tumbling, so it is in life. No cat is ever unfortunate for very long. The worse things look for a cat, the better they are going to be.

Well, once upon a time, not so very long ago, an old peasant had a cat and did not like him. He was a tom-cat, always fighting; and he had lost one ear, and was not very pretty to look at. The peasant thought he would get rid of his old cat, and buy a new one from a neighbour. He did not care what became of the old tom-cat with one ear, so long as he never saw him again. It was no use thinking of killing him, for

[p. 107]

it is a life's work to kill a cat, and it's likely enough that the cat would come alive at the end.

So the old peasant he took a sack, and he bundled the tom-cat into the sack, and he sewed up the sack and slung it over his back, and walked off into the forest. Off he went, trudging along in the summer sunshine, deep into the forest. And when he had gone very many versts into the forest, he took the sack with the cat in it and threw it away among the trees.

"You stay there," says he, "and if you do get out in this desolate place, much good may it do you, old quarrelsome bundle of bones and fur!"

And with that he turned round and trudged home again, and bought a nice-looking, quiet cat from a neighbour in exchange for a little tobacco, and settled down comfortably at home with the new cat in front of the stove; and there he may be to this day, so far as I know. My story does not bother with him, but only with the old tomcat tied up in the sack away there out in the forest.

The bag flew through the air, and plumped down through a bush to the ground. And the old tom-cat landed on his feet inside it, very much frightened but not hurt. Thinks he, this bag, this flight through the

[p. 108]

air, this bump, mean that my life is going to change. Very well; there is nothing like something new now and again.

And presently he began tearing at the bag with his sharp claws. Soon there was a hole he could put a paw through. He went on, tearing and scratching, and there was a hole he could put two paws through. He went on with his work, and soon he could put his head through, all the easier because he had only one ear. A minute or two after that he had wriggled out of the bag, and stood up on his four paws and stretched himself in the forest.

"The world seems to be larger than the village," he said. "I will walk on and see what there is in it."

He washed himself all over, curled his tail proudly up in the air, cocked the only ear he had left, and set off walking under the forest trees.

"I was the head-cat in the village," says he to himself. "If all goes well, I shall be head here too." And he walked along as if he were the Tzar himself.

Well, he walked on and on, and he came to an old hut that had belonged to a forester. There was nobody there, nor had been for many years, and the old tom-cat made himself quite at home. He climbed up into

[p. 109]

the loft under the roof, and found a little rotten hay.

"A very good bed," says he, and curls up and falls asleep.

When he woke he felt hungry, so he climbed down and went off in the forest to catch little birds and mice. There were plenty of them in the forest, and when he had eaten enough he came back to the hut, climbed into the loft, and spent the night there very comfortably.

You would have thought he would be content. Not he. He was a cat. He said, "This is a good enough lodging. But I have to catch all my own food. In the village they fed me every day, and I only caught mice for fun. I ought to be able to live like that here. A person of my dignity ought not to have to do all the work for himself."

Next day he went walking in the forest. And as he was walking he met a fox, a vixen, a very pretty young thing, gay and giddy like all girls. And the fox saw the cat, and was very much astonished.

"All these years," she said--for though she was young she thought she had lived a long time--"all these years," she said, "I've lived in the forest, but I've never seen a wild beast like that before. What a

[p. 110]

strange-looking animal! And with only one ear. How handsome!"

And she came up and made her bows to the cat, and said,--

"Tell me, great lord, who you are. What fortunate chance has brought you to this forest? And by what name am I to call your Excellency?"

Oh! the fox was very polite. It is not every day that you meet a handsome stranger walking in the forest.

The cat arched his back, and set all his fur on end, and said, very slowly and quietly,--

"I have been sent from the far forests of Siberia to be Head-forester over you. And my name is Cat Ivanovitch."

"O Cat Ivanovitch!" says the pretty young fox, and she makes more bows. "I did not know. I beg your Excellency's pardon. Will your Excellency honour my humble house by visiting it as a guest?"

"I will," says the cat. "And what do they call you?"

"My name, your Excellency, is Lisabeta Ivanovna."

"I will come with you, Lisabeta," says the cat.

And they went together to the fox's earth. Very snug, very neat it was inside; and the cat curled himself up in the best place, while

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Lisabeta Ivanovna, the pretty young fox, made ready a tasty dish of game. And while she was making the meal ready, and dusting the furniture with her tail, she looked at the cat. At last she said, shyly,--

"Tell me, Cat Ivanovitch, are you married or single?"

"Single," says the cat.

"And I too am unmarried," says the pretty young fox, and goes busily on with her dusting and cooking.

Presently she looks at the cat again.

"What if we were to marry, Cat Ivanovitch? I would try to be a good wife to you."

"Very well, Lisabeta," says the cat; "I will marry you."

The fox went to her store and took out all the dainties that she had, and made a wedding feast to celebrate her marriage to the great Cat Ivanovitch, who had only one ear, and had come from the far Siberian forests to be Head-forester.

They ate up everything there was in the place.

Next morning the pretty young fox went off busily into the forest to get food for her grand husband. But the old tom-cat stayed at home,

[p. 112]

and cleaned his whiskers and slept. He was a lazy one, was that cat, and proud.

The fox was running through the forest, looking for game, when she met an old friend, the handsome young wolf, and he began making polite speeches to her.

"What had become of you, gossip?" says he. "I've been to all the best earths and not found you at all."

"Let be, fool," says the fox very shortly. "Don't talk to me like that. What are you jesting about? Formerly I was a young, unmarried fox; now I am a wedded wife."

"Whom have you married, Lisabeta Ivanovna?"

"What!" says the fox, "you have not heard that the great Cat Ivanovitch, who has only one ear, has been sent from the far Siberian forests to be Head-forester over all of us? Well, I am now the Head-forester's wife."

"No, I had not heard, Lisabeta Ivanovna. And when can I pay my respects to his Excellency?"

"Not now, not now," says the fox. "Cat Ivanovitch will be raging angry with me if I let any one come near him. Presently he will be taking his food. Look you. Get a sheep, and make it ready, and bring it as a greeting to him, to show him that he is welcome and that you know how

[p. 113]

to treat him with respect. Leave the sheep near by, and hide yourself so that he shall not see you; for, if he did, things might be awkward."

"Thank you, thank you, Lisabeta Ivanovna," says the wolf, and off he goes to look for a sheep.

The pretty young fox went idly on, taking the air, for she knew that the wolf would save her the trouble of looking for food.

Presently she met the bear.

"Good-day to you, Lisabeta Ivanovna," says the bear; "as pretty as ever, I see you are."

"Bandy-legged one," says the fox; "fool, don't come worrying me. Formerly I was a young, unmarried fox; now I am a wedded wife."

"I beg your pardon," says the bear, "whom have you married, Lisabeta Ivanovna?"

"The great Cat Ivanovitch has been sent from the far Siberian forests to be Head-forester over us all. And Cat Ivanovitch is now my husband," says the fox.

"Is it forbidden to have a look at his Excellency?"

"It is forbidden," says the fox. "Cat Ivanovitch will be raging angry with me if I let any one come near him. Presently he will be taking his food. Get along with you quickly; make ready an ox, and bring it

[p. 114]

by way of welcome to him. The wolf is bringing a sheep. And look you. Leave the ox near by, and hide yourself so that the great Cat Ivanovitch shall not see you; or else, brother, things may be awkward."

The bear shambled off as fast as he could go to get an ox.

The pretty young fox, enjoying the fresh air of the forest, went slowly home to her earth, and crept in very quietly, so as not to awake the great Head-forester, Cat Ivanovitch, who had only one ear and was sleeping in the best place.

Presently the wolf came through the forest, dragging a sheep he had killed. He did not dare to go too near the fox's earth, because of Cat Ivanovitch, the new Head-forester. So he stopped, well out of sight, and stripped off the skin of the sheep, and arranged the sheep so as to seem a nice tasty morsel. Then he stood still, thinking what to do next. He heard a noise, and looked up. There was the bear, struggling along with a dead ox.

"Good-day, brother Michael Ivanovitch," says the wolf.

"Good-day, brother Levon Ivanovitch," says the bear. "Have you seen the fox, Lisabeta Ivanovna, with her husband, the Head-forester?"

[p. 115]

"No, brother," says the wolf. "For a long time I have been waiting to see them."

"Go on and call out to them," says the bear.

"No, Michael Ivanovitch," says the wolf, "I will not go. Do you go; you are bigger and bolder than I."

"No, no, Levon Ivanovitch, I will not go. There is no use in risking one's life without need."

Suddenly, as they were talking, a little hare came running by. The bear saw him first, and roared out,--

"Hi, Squinteye! trot along here."

The hare came up, slowly, two steps at a time, trembling with fright.

"Now then, you squinting rascal," says the bear, "do you know where the fox lives, over there?"

"I know, Michael Ivanovitch."

"Get along there quickly, and tell her that Michael Ivanovitch the bear and his brother Levon Ivanovitch the wolf have been ready for a long time, and have brought presents of a sheep and an ox, as greetings to his Excellency ..."

"His Excellency, mind," says the wolf; "don't forget."

[p. 116]

The hare ran off as hard as he could go, glad to have escaped so easily. Meanwhile the wolf and the bear looked about for good places in which to hide.

"It will be best to climb trees," says the bear. "I shall go up to the top of this fir."

"But what am I to do?" says the wolf. "I can't climb a tree for the life of me. Brother Michael, Brother Michael, hide me somewhere or other before you climb up. I beg you, hide me, or I shall certainly be killed."

"Crouch down under these bushes," says the bear, "and I will cover you with the dead leaves."

"May you be rewarded," says the wolf; and he crouched down under the bushes, and the bear covered him up with dead leaves, so that only the tip of his nose could be seen.

Then the bear climbed slowly up into the fir tree, into the very top, and looked out to see if the fox and Cat Ivanovitch were coming.

They were coming; oh yes, they were coming! The hare ran up and knocked on the door, and said to the fox,--

"Michael Ivanovitch the bear and his brother Levon Ivanovitch the wolf have been ready for a long time, and have brought presents of a sheep and an ox as greetings to his Excellency."

[p. 117]

"Get along, Squinteye," says the fox; "we are just coming."

And so the fox and the cat set out together.

The bear, up in the top of the tree, saw them, and called down to the wolf,--

"They are coming, Brother Levon; they are coming, the fox and her husband. But what a little one he is, to be sure!"

"Quiet, quiet," whispers the wolf. "He'll hear you, and then we are done for."

The cat came up, and arched his back and set all his furs on end, and threw himself on the ox, and began tearing the meat with his teeth and claws. And as he tore he purred. And the bear listened, and heard the purring of the cat, and it seemed to him that the cat was angrily muttering, "Small, small, small...."

And the bear whispers: "He's no giant, but what a glutton! Why, we couldn't get through a quarter of that, and he finds it not enough. Heaven help us if he comes after us!"

The wolf tried to see, but could not, because his head, all but his nose, was covered with the dry leaves. Little by little he moved his head, so as to clear the leaves away from in front of his eyes. Try as he would to be quiet, the leaves rustled, so little, ever so little,

[p. 118]

but enough to be heard by the one ear of the cat.

The cat stopped tearing the meat and listened.

"I haven't caught a mouse to-day," he thought.

Once more the leaves rustled.

The cat leapt through the air and dropped with all four paws, and his claws out, on the nose of the wolf. How the wolf yelped! The leaves flew like dust, and the wolf leapt up and ran off as fast as his legs could carry him.

Well, the wolf was frightened, I can tell you, but he was not so frightened as the cat.

When the great wolf leapt up out of the leaves, the cat screamed and ran up the nearest tree, and that was the tree where Michael Ivanovitch the bear was hiding in the topmost branches.

"Oh, he has seen me. Cat Ivanovitch has seen me," thought the bear. He had no time to climb down, and the cat was coming up in long leaps.

The bear trusted to Providence, and jumped from the top of the tree. Many were the branches he broke as he fell; many were the bones he broke when he crashed to the ground. He picked himself up and stumbled off, groaning.

The pretty young fox sat still, and cried out, "Run, run, Brother Levon!... Quicker on your pins, Brother Michael! His Excellency is behind you; his Excellency is close behind!"

[p. 119]

Ever since then all the wild beasts have been afraid of the cat, and the cat and the fox live merrily together, and eat fresh meat all the year round, which the other animals kill for them and leave a little way off.

And that is what happened to the old tom-cat with one eye, who was sewn up in a bag and thrown away in the forest.

"Just think what would happen to our handsome Vladimir if we were to throw him away!" said Vanya.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 120]

 

SPRING IN THE FOREST.

Warmer the sun shone, and warmer yet. The pines were green now. All the snow had melted off them, drip, drip, the falling drops of water making tiny wells in the snow under the trees. And the snow under the trees was melting too. Much had gone, and now there were only patches of snow in the forest--like scraps of a big white blanket, shrinking every day.

"Isn't it lucky our blankets don't shrink like that?" said Maroosia.

Old Peter laughed.

"What do you do when the warm weather comes?" he asked. "Do you still wear sheepskin coats? Do you still roll up at night under the rugs?"

"No," said Maroosia; "I throw the rugs off, and put my fluffy coat away till next winter."

"Well," said old Peter, "and God, the Father of us all, He does for the earth just what you do for yourself; but He does it better. For the blankets He gives the earth in winter get smaller and smaller as

[p. 121]

the warm weather comes, little by little, day by day."

"And then a hard frost comes, grandfather," said Ivan.

"God knows all about that, little one," said old Peter, "and it's for the best. It's good to have a nip or two in the spring, to make you feel alive. Perhaps it's His way of telling the earth to wake up. For the whole earth is only His little one after all."

That night, when it was story-time, Ivan and Maroosia consulted together; and when old Peter asked what the story was to be, they were ready with an answer.

"The snow is all melting away," said Ivan.

"The summer is coming," said Maroosia.

"We'd like the tale of the little snow girl," said Ivan.

"'The Little Daughter of the Snow,'" said Maroosia.

Old Peter shook out his pipe, and closed his eyes under his bushy eyebrows, thinking for a minute. Then he began.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

 

THE LITTLE DAUGHTER OF THE SNOW.

There were once an old man, as old as I am, perhaps, and an old woman, his wife, and they lived together in a hut, in a village on the edge of the forest. There were many people in the village; quite a town it was--eight huts at least, thirty or forty souls, good company to be had for crossing the road. But the old man and the old woman were unhappy, in spite of living like that in the very middle of the world. And why do you think they were unhappy? They were unhappy because they had no little Vanya and no little Maroosia. Think of that. Some would say they were better off without them.

"Would you say that, grandfather?" asked Maroosia.

[p. 123]

"You are a stupid little pigeon," said old Peter, and he went on.

Well, these two were very unhappy. All the other huts had babies in them--yes, and little ones playing about in the road outside, and having to be shouted at when any one came driving by. But there were no babies in their hut, and the old woman never had to go to the door to see where her little one had strayed to, because she had no little one.

And these two, the old man and the old woman, used to stand whole hours, just peeping through their window to watch the children playing outside. They had dogs and a cat, and cocks and hens, but none of these made up for having no children. These two would just stand and watch the children of the other huts. The dogs would bark, but they took no notice; and the cat would curl up against them, but they never felt her; and as for the cocks and hens, well, they were fed, but that was all. The old people did not care for them, and spent all their time in watching the Vanyas and Maroosias who belonged to the other huts.

In the winter the children in their little sheepskin coats....

"Like ours?" said Vanya and Maroosia together.

"Like yours," said old Peter.

[p. 124]

In their little sheepskin coats, he went on, played in the crisp snow. They pelted each other with snowballs, and shouted and laughed, and then they rolled the snow together and made a snow woman--a regular snow Baba Yaga, a snow witch; such an old fright!

And the old man, watching from the window, saw this, and he says to the old woman,--

"Wife, let us go into the yard behind and make a little snow girl; and perhaps she will come alive, and be a little daughter to us."

"Husband," says the old woman, "there's no knowing what may be. Let us go into the yard and make a little snow girl."

So the two old people put on their big coats and their fur hats, and went out into the yard, where nobody could see them.

And they rolled up the snow, and began to make a little snow girl. Very, very tenderly they rolled up the snow to make her little arms and legs. The good God helped the old people, and their little snow girl was more beautiful than ever you could imagine. She was lovelier than a birch tree in spring.

Well, towards evening she was finished--a little girl, all snow, with blind white eyes, and a little mouth, with snow lips tightly closed.

[p. 125]

"Oh, speak to us," says the old man.

"Won't you run about like the others, little white pigeon?" says the old woman.

And she did, you know, she really did.

Suddenly, in the twilight, they saw her eyes shining blue like the sky on a clear day. And her lips flushed and opened, and she smiled. And there were her little white teeth. And look, she had black hair, and it stirred in the wind.

She began dancing in the snow, like a little white spirit, tossing her long hair, and laughing softly to herself.

Wildly she danced, like snowflakes whirled in the wind. Her eyes shone, and her hair flew round her, and she sang, while the old people watched and wondered, and thanked God.

This is what she sang:--

"No warm blood in me doth glow,
 Water in my veins doth flow;
 Yet I'll laugh and sing and play
 By frosty night and frosty day--
 Little daughter of the Snow.

"But whenever I do know
 That you love me little, then
 I shall melt away again.
 Back into the sky I'll go--
 Little daughter of the Snow."

[p. 126]

"God of mine, isn't she beautiful!" said the old man. "Run, wife, and fetch a blanket to wrap her in while you make clothes for her."

The old woman fetched a blanket, and put it round the shoulders of the little snow girl. And the old man picked her up, and she put her little cold arms round his neck.

"You must not keep me too warm," she said.

Well, they took her into the hut, and she lay on a bench in the corner farthest from the stove, while the old woman made her a little coat.

The old man went out to buy a fur hat and boots from a neighbour for the little girl. The neighbour laughed at the old man; but a rouble is a rouble everywhere, and no one turns it from the door, and so he sold the old man a little fur hat, and a pair of little red boots with fur round the tops.

Then they dressed the little snow girl.

"Too hot, too hot," said the little snow girl. "I must go out into the cool night."

"But you must go to sleep now," said the old woman.

"By frosty night and frosty day," sang the little girl. "No; I will play by myself in the yard all night, and in the morning I'll play in the road with the children."

[p. 127]

Nothing the old people said could change her mind.

"I am the little daughter of the Snow," she replied to everything, and she ran out into the yard into the snow.

How she danced and ran about in the moonlight on the white frozen snow!

The old people watched her and watched her. At last they went to bed; but more than once the old man got up in the night to make sure she was still there. And there she was, running about in the yard, chasing her shadow in the moonlight and throwing snowballs at the stars.

In the morning she came in, laughing, to have breakfast with the old people. She showed them how to make porridge for her, and that was very simple. They had only to take a piece of ice and crush it up in a little wooden bowl.

Then after breakfast she ran out in the road, to join the other children. And the old people watched her. Oh, proud they were, I can tell you, to see a little girl of their own out there playing in the road! They fairly longed for a sledge to come driving by, so that they could run out into the road and call to the little snow girl to be careful.

And the little snow girl played in the snow with the other children.

[p. 128]

How she played! She could run faster than any of them. Her little red boots flashed as she ran about. Not one of the other children was a match for her at snowballing. And when the children began making a snow woman, a Baba Yaga, you would have thought the little daughter of the Snow would have died of laughing. She laughed and laughed, like ringing peals on little glass bells. But she helped in the making of the snow woman, only laughing all the time.

When it was done, all the children threw snowballs at it, till it fell to pieces. And the little snow girl laughed and laughed, and was so quick she threw more snowballs than any of them.

The old man and the old woman watched her, and were very proud.

"She is all our own," said the old woman.

"Our little white pigeon," said the old man.

In the evening she had another bowl of ice-porridge, and then she went off again to play by herself in the yard.

"You'll be tired, my dear," says the old man.

"You'll sleep in the hut to-night, won't you, my love," says the old woman, "after running about all day long?"

But the little daughter of the Snow only laughed. "By frosty night and

[p. 129]

frosty day," she sang, and ran out of the door, laughing back at them with shining eyes.

And so it went on all through the winter. The little daughter of the Snow was singing and laughing and dancing all the time. She always ran out into the night and played by herself till dawn. Then she'd come in and have her ice-porridge. Then she'd play with the children. Then she'd have ice-porridge again, and off she would go, out into the night.

She was very good. She did everything the old woman told her. Only she would never sleep indoors. All the children of the village loved her. They did not know how they had ever played without her.

It went on so till just about this time of year. Perhaps it was a little earlier. Anyhow the snow was melting, and you could get about the paths. Often the children went together a little way into the forest in the sunny part of the day. The little snow girl went with them. It would have been no fun without her.

And then one day they went too far into the wood, and when they said they were going to turn back, little snow girl tossed her head under her little fur hat, and ran on laughing among the trees. The other

[p. 130]

children were afraid to follow her. It was getting dark. They waited as long as they dared, and then they ran home, holding each other's hands.

And there was the little daughter of the Snow out in the forest alone.

She looked back for the others, and could not see them. She climbed up into a tree; but the other trees were thick round her, and she could not see farther than when she was on the ground.

She called out from the tree,--

"Ai, ai, little friends, have pity on the little snow girl."

An old brown bear heard her, and came shambling up on his heavy paws.

"What are you crying about, little daughter of the Snow?"

"O big bear," says the little snow girl, "how can I help crying? I have lost my way, and dusk is falling, and all my little friends are gone."

"I will take you home," says the old brown bear.

"O big bear," says the little snow girl, "I am afraid of you. I think you would eat me. I would rather go home with some one else."

So the bear shambled away and left her.

[p. 131]

An old gray wolf heard her, and came galloping up on his swift feet. He stood under the tree and asked,--

"What are you crying about, little daughter of the Snow?"

"O gray wolf," says the little snow girl, "how can I help crying? I have lost my way, and it is getting dark, and all my little friends are gone."

"I will take you home," says the old gray wolf.

"O gray wolf," says the little snow girl, "I am afraid of you. I think you would eat me. I would rather go home with some one else."

So the wolf galloped away and left her.

An old red fox heard her, and came running up to the tree on his little pads. He called out cheerfully,--

"What are you crying about, little daughter of the Snow?"

"O red fox," says the little snow girl, "how can I help crying? I have lost my way, and it is quite dark, and all my little friends are gone."

"I will take you home," says the old red fox.

"O red fox," says the little snow girl, "I am not afraid of you. I do not think you will eat me. I will go home with you, if you will take me."

So she scrambled down from the tree, and she held the fox by the hair

[p. 132]

of his back, and they ran together through the dark forest. Presently they saw the lights in the windows of the huts, and in a few minutes they were at the door of the hut that belonged to the old man and the old woman.

And there were the old man and the old woman, crying and lamenting.

"Oh, what has become of our little snow girl?"

"Oh, where is our little white pigeon?"

"Here I am," says the little snow girl. "The kind red fox has brought me home. You must shut up the dogs."

The old man shut up the dogs.

"We are very grateful to you," says he to the fox.

"Are you really?" says the old red fox; "for I am very hungry."

"Here is a nice crust for you," says the old woman.

"Oh," says the fox, "but what I would like would be a nice plump hen. After all, your little snow girl is worth a nice plump hen."

"Very well," says the old woman, but she grumbles to her husband.

"Husband," says she, "we have our little girl again."

[p. 133]

"We have," says he; "thanks be for that."

"It seems waste to give away a good plump hen."

"It does," says he.

"Well, I was thinking," says the old woman, and then she tells him what she meant to do. And he went off and got two sacks.

In one sack they put a fine plump hen, and in the other they put the fiercest of the dogs. They took the bags outside and called to the fox. The old red fox came up to them, licking his lips, because he was so hungry.

They opened one sack, and out the hen fluttered. The old red fox was just going to seize her, when they opened the other sack, and out jumped the fierce dog. The poor fox saw his eyes flashing in the dark, and was so frightened that he ran all the way back into the deep forest, and never had the hen at all.

"That was well done," said the old man and the old woman. "We have got our little snow girl, and not had to give away our plump hen."

Then they heard the little snow girl singing in the hut. This is what she sang:--

"Old ones, old ones, now I know
 Less you love me than a hen,
 I shall go away again. [p. 134]
 Good-bye, ancient ones, good-bye,
 Back I go across the sky;
 To my motherkin I go--
 Little daughter of the Snow."

They ran into the house. There were a little pool of water in front of the stove, and a fur hat, and a little coat, and little red boots were lying in it. And yet it seemed to the old man and the old woman that they saw the little snow girl, with her bright eyes and her long hair, dancing in the room.

"Do not go! do not go!" they begged, and already they could hardly see the little dancing girl.

But they heard her laughing, and they heard her song:--

"Old ones, old ones, now I know
 Less you love me than a hen,
 I shall melt away again.
 To my motherkin I go--
 Little daughter of the Snow."

And just then the door blew open from the yard, and a cold wind filled the room, and the little daughter of the Snow was gone.

"You always used to say something else, grandfather," said Maroosia.

Old Peter patted her head, and went on.

[p. 135]

"I haven't forgotten. The little snow girl leapt into the arms of Frost her father and Snow her mother, and they carried her away over the stars to the far north, and there she plays all through the summer on the frozen seas. In winter she comes back to Russia, and some day, you know, when you are making a snow woman, you may find the little daughter of the Snow standing there instead."

"Wouldn't that be lovely!" said Maroosia.

Vanya thought for a minute, and then he said,--

"I'd love her much more than a hen."

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

 

PRINCE IVAN, THE WITCH BABY, AND THE LITTLE SISTER OF THE SUN.

Once upon a time, very long ago, there was a little Prince Ivan who was dumb. Never a word had he spoken from the day that he was born--not so much as a "Yes" or a "No," or a "Please" or a "Thank you." A great sorrow he was to his father because he could not speak. Indeed, neither his father nor his mother could bear the sight of him, for they thought, "A poor sort of Tzar will a dumb boy make!" They even prayed, and said, "If only we could have another child, whatever it is like, it could be no worse than this tongue-tied brat who cannot say a word." And for that wish they were punished, as you shall hear.

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] And they took no sort of care of the little Prince Ivan, and he spent all his time in the stables, listening to the tales of an old groom.

He was a wise man was the old groom, and he knew the past and the future, and what was happening under the earth. Maybe he had learnt his wisdom from the horses. Anyway, he knew more than other folk, and there came a day when he said to Prince Ivan,--

"Little Prince," says he, "to-day you have a sister, and a bad one at that. She has come because of your father's prayers and your mother's wishes. A witch she is, and she will grow like a seed of corn. In six weeks she'll be a grown witch, and with her iron teeth she will eat up your father, and eat up your mother, and eat up you too, if she gets the chance. There's no saving the old people; but if you are quick, and do what I tell you, you may escape, and keep your soul in your body. And I love you, my little dumb Prince, and do not wish to think of your little body between her iron teeth. You must go to your father and ask him for the best horse he has, and then gallop like the wind, and away to the end of the world."

The little Prince ran off and found his father. There was his father, and there was his mother, and a little baby girl was in his mother's

[p. 138]

arms, screaming like a little fury.

"Well, she's not dumb," said his father, as if he were well pleased.

"Father," says the little Prince, "may I have the fastest horse in the stable?" And those were the first words that ever left his mouth.

"What!" says his father, "have you got a voice at last? Yes, take whatever horse you want. And see, you have a little sister; a fine little girl she is too. She has teeth already. It's a pity they are black, but time will put that right, and it's better to have black teeth than to be born dumb."

Little Prince Ivan shook in his shoes when he heard of the black teeth of his little sister, for he knew that they were iron. He thanked his father and ran off to the stable. The old groom saddled the finest horse there was. Such a horse you never saw. Black it was, and its saddle and bridle were trimmed with shining silver. And little Prince Ivan climbed up and sat on the great black horse, and waved his hand to the old groom, and galloped away, on and on over the wide world.

"It's a big place, this world," thought the little Prince. "I wonder when I shall come to the end of it." You see, he had never been

[p. 139]

outside the palace grounds. And he had only ridden a little Finnish pony. And now he sat high up, perched on the back of the great black horse, who galloped with hoofs that thundered beneath him, and leapt over rivers and streams and hillocks, and anything else that came in his way.

On and on galloped the little Prince on the great black horse. There were no houses anywhere to be seen. It was a long time since they had passed any people, and little Prince Ivan began to feel very lonely, and to wonder if indeed he had come to the end of the world, and could bring his journey to an end.

Suddenly, on a wide, sandy plain, he saw two old, old women sitting in the road.

They were bent double over their work, sewing and sewing, and now one and now the other broke a needle, and took a new one out of a box between them, and threaded the needle with thread from another box, and went on sewing and sewing. Their old noses nearly touched their knees as they bent over their work.

Little Prince Ivan pulled up the great black horse in a cloud of dust, and spoke to the old women.

"Grandmothers," said he, "is this the end of the world? Let me stay

[p. 140]

here and live with you, and be safe from my baby sister, who is a witch and has iron teeth. Please let me stay with you, and I'll be very little trouble, and thread your needles for you when you break them."

"Prince Ivan, my dear," said one of the old women, "this is not the end of the world, and little good would it be to you to stay with us. For as soon as we have broken all our needles and used up all our thread we shall die, and then where would you be? Your sister with the iron teeth would have you in a minute."

The little Prince cried bitterly, for he was very little and all alone. He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse galloping and galloping, and throwing the dust from his thundering hoofs.

He came into a forest of great oaks, the biggest oak trees in the whole world. And in that forest was a dreadful noise--the crashing of trees falling, the breaking of branches, and the whistling of things hurled through the air. The Prince rode on, and there before him was the huge giant, Tree-rooter, hauling the great oaks out of the ground and flinging them aside like weeds.

"I should be safe with him," thought little Prince Ivan, "and this, surely, must be the end of the world."

[p. 141]

He rode close up under the giant, and stopped the black horse, and shouted up into the air.

"Please, great giant," says he, "is this the end of the world? And may I live with you and be safe from my sister, who is a witch, and grows like a seed of corn, and has iron teeth?"

"Prince Ivan, my dear," says Tree-rooter, "this is not the end of the world, and little good would it be to you to stay with me. For as soon as I have rooted up all these trees I shall die, and then where would you be? Your sister would have you in a minute. And already there are not many big trees left."

And the giant set to work again, pulling up the great trees and throwing them aside. The sky was full of flying trees.

Little Prince Ivan cried bitterly, for he was very little and was all alone. He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse galloping and galloping under the tall trees, and throwing clods of earth from his thundering hoofs.

He came among the mountains. And there was a roaring and a crashing in the mountains as if the earth was falling to pieces. One after another whole mountains were lifted up into the sky and flung down to earth, so that they broke and scattered into dust. And the big black horse

[p. 142]

galloped through the mountains, and little Prince Ivan sat bravely on his back. And there, close before him, was the huge giant Mountain-tosser, picking up the mountains like pebbles and hurling them to little pieces and dust upon the ground.

"This must be the end of the world," thought the little Prince; "and at any rate I should be safe with him."

"Please, great giant," says he, "is this the end of the world? And may I live with you and be safe from my sister, who is a witch, and has iron teeth, and grows like a seed of corn?"

"Prince Ivan, my dear," says Mountain-tosser, resting for a moment and dusting the rocks off his great hands, "this is not the end of the world, and little good would it be to you to stay with me. For as soon as I have picked up all these mountains and thrown them down again I shall die, and then where would you be? Your sister would have you in a minute. And there are not very many mountains left."

And the giant set to work again, lifting up the great mountains and hurling them away. The sky was full of flying mountains.

Little Prince Ivan wept bitterly, for he was very little and was all alone. He rode on further over the wide world, the black horse

[p. 143]

galloping and galloping along the mountain paths, and throwing the stones from his thundering hoofs.

At last he came to the end of the world, and there, hanging in the sky above him, was the castle of the little sister of the Sun. Beautiful it was, made of cloud, and hanging in the sky, as if it were built of red roses.

"I should be safe up there," thought little Prince Ivan, and just then the Sun's little sister opened the window and beckoned to him.

Prince Ivan patted the big black horse and whispered to it, and it leapt up high into the air and through the window, into the very courtyard of the castle.

"Stay here and play with me," said the little sister of the Sun; and Prince Ivan tumbled off the big black horse into her arms, and laughed because he was so happy.

Merry and pretty was the Sun's little sister, and she was very kind to little Prince Ivan. They played games together, and when she was tired she let him do whatever he liked and run about her castle. This way and that he ran about the battlements of rosy cloud, hanging in the sky over the end of the world.

But one day he climbed up and up to the topmost turret of the castle. From there he could see the whole world. And far, far away, beyond the

[p. 144]

mountains, beyond the forests, beyond the wide plains, he saw his father's palace where he had been born. The roof of the palace was gone, and the walls were broken and crumbling. And little Prince Ivan came slowly down from the turret, and his eyes were red with weeping.

"My dear," says the Sun's little sister, "why are your eyes so red?"

"It is the wind up there," says little Prince Ivan.

And the Sun's little sister put her head out of the window of the castle of cloud and whispered to the winds not to blow so hard.

But next day little Prince Ivan went up again to that topmost turret, and looked far away over the wide world to the ruined palace. "She has eaten them all with her iron teeth," he said to himself. And his eyes were red when he came down.

"My dear," says the Sun's little sister, "your eyes are red again."

"It is the wind," says little Prince Ivan.

And the Sun's little sister put her head out of the window and scolded the wind.

But the third day again little Prince Ivan climbed up the stairs of cloud to that topmost turret, and looked far away to the broken palace

[p. 145]

where his father and mother had lived. And he came down from the turret with the tears running down his face.

"Why, you are crying, my dear!" says the Sun's little sister. "Tell me what it is all about."

So little Prince Ivan told the little sister of the Sun how his sister was a witch, and how he wept to think of his father and mother, and how he had seen the ruins of his father's palace far away, and how he could not stay with hen happily until he knew how it was with his parents.

"Perhaps it is not yet too late to save them from her iron teeth, though the old groom said that she would certainly eat them, and that it was the will of God. But let me ride back on my big black horse."

"Do not leave me, my dear," says the Sun's little sister. "I am lonely here by myself."

"I will ride back on my big black horse, and then I will come to you again."

"What must be, must," says the Sun's little sister; "though she is more likely to eat you than you are to save them. You shall go. But you must take with you a magic comb, a magic brush, and two apples of youth. These apples would make young once more the oldest things on earth."

[p. 146]

Then she kissed little Prince Ivan, and he climbed up on his big black horse, and leapt out of the window of the castle down on the end of the world, and galloped off on his way back over the wide world.

He came to Mountain-tosser, the giant. There was only one mountain left, and the giant was just picking it up. Sadly he was picking it up, for he knew that when he had thrown it away his work would be done and he would have to die.

"Well, little Prince Ivan," says Mountain-tosser, "this is the end;" and he heaves up the mountain. But before he could toss it away the little Prince threw his magic brush on the plain, and the brush swelled and burst, and there were range upon range of high mountains, touching the sky itself.

"Why," says Mountain-tosser, "I have enough mountains now to last me for another thousand years. Thank you kindly, little Prince."

And he set to work again, heaving up mountains and tossing them down, while little Prince Ivan galloped on across the wide world.

He came to Tree-rooter, the giant. There were only two of the great oaks left, and the giant had one in each hand.

[p. 147]

"Ah me, little Prince Ivan," says Tree-rooter, "my life is come to its end; for I have only to pluck up these two trees and throw them down, and then I shall die."

"Pluck them up," says little Prince Ivan. "Here are plenty more for you." And he threw down his comb. There was a noise of spreading branches, of swishing leaves, of opening buds, all together, and there before them was a forest of great oaks stretching farther than the giant could see, tall though he was.

"Why," says Tree-rooter, "here are enough trees to last me for another thousand years. Thank you kindly, little Prince."

And he set to work again, pulling up the big trees, laughing joyfully and hurling them over his head, while little Prince Ivan galloped on across the wide world.

He came to the two old women. They were crying their eyes out.

"There is only one needle left!" says the first.

"There is only one bit of thread in the box!" sobs the second.

"And then we shall die!" they say both together, mumbling with their old mouths.

"Before you use the needle and thread, just eat these apples," says little Prince Ivan, and he gives them the two apples of youth.

[p. 148]

The two old women took the apples in their old shaking fingers and ate them, bent double, mumbling with their old lips. They had hardly finished their last mouthfuls when they sat up straight, smiled with sweet red lips, and looked at the little Prince with shining eyes. They had become young girls again, and their gray hair was black as the raven.

"Thank you kindly, little Prince," say the two young girls. "You must take with you the handkerchief we have been sewing all these years. Throw it to the ground, and it will turn into a lake of water. Perhaps some day it will be useful to you."

"Thank you," says the little Prince, and off he gallops, on and on over the wide world.

He came at last to his father's palace. The roof was gone, and there were holes in the walls. He left his horse at the edge of the garden, and crept up to the ruined palace and peeped through a hole. Inside, in the great hall, was sitting a huge baby girl, filling the whole hall. There was no room for her to move. She had knocked off the roof with a shake of her head. And she sat there in the ruined hall, sucking her thumb.

[p. 149]

And while Prince Ivan was watching through the hole he heard her mutter to herself,--

"Eaten the father, eaten the mother,
 And now to eat the little brother"

And she began shrinking, getting smaller and smaller every minute.

Little Prince Ivan had only just time to get away from the hole in the wall when a pretty little baby girl came running out of the ruined palace.

"You must be my little brother Ivan," she called out to him, and came up to him smiling. But as she smiled the little Prince saw that her teeth were black; and as she shut her mouth he heard them clink together like pokers.

"Come in," says she, and she took little Prince Ivan with her to a room in the palace, all broken down and cobwebbed. There was a dulcimer lying in the dust on the floor.

"Well, little brother," says the witch baby, "you play on the dulcimer and amuse yourself while I get supper ready. But don't stop playing, or I shall feel lonely." And she ran off and left him.

Little Prince Ivan sat down and played tunes on the dulcimer--sad enough tunes. You would not play dance music if you thought you were going to be eaten by a witch.

[p. 150]

But while he was playing a little gray mouse came out of a crack in the floor. Some people think that this was the wise old groom, who had turned into a little gray mouse to save Ivan from the witch baby.

"Ivan, Ivan," says the little gray mouse, "run while you may. Your father and mother were eaten long ago, and well they deserved it. But be quick, or you will be eaten too. Your pretty little sister is putting an edge on her teeth!"

Little Prince Ivan thanked the mouse, and ran out from the ruined palace, and climbed up on the back of his big black horse, with its saddle and bridle trimmed with silver. Away he galloped over the wide world. The witch baby stopped her work and listened. She heard the music of the dulcimer, so she made sure he was still there. She went on sharpening her teeth with a file, and growing bigger and bigger every minute. And all the time the music of the dulcimer sounded among the ruins.

As soon as her teeth were quite sharp she rushed off to eat little Prince Ivan. She tore aside the walls of the room. There was nobody there--only a little gray mouse running and jumping this way and that on the strings of the dulcimer.

When it saw the witch baby the little mouse ran across the floor and

[p. 151]

into the crack and away, so that she never caught it. How the witch baby gnashed her teeth! Poker and tongs, poker and tongs--what a noise they made! She swelled up, bigger and bigger, till she was a baby as high as the palace. And then she jumped up so that the palace fell to pieces about her. Then off she ran after little Prince Ivan.

Little Prince Ivan, on the big black horse, heard a noise behind him. He looked back, and there was the huge witch, towering over the trees. She was dressed like a little baby, and her eyes flashed and her teeth clanged as she shut her mouth. She was running with long strides, faster even than the black horse could gallop--and he was the best horse in all the world.

Little Prince Ivan threw down the handkerchief that had been sewn by the two old women who had eaten the apples of youth. It turned into a deep, broad lake, so that the witch baby had to swim--and swimming is slower than running. It took her a long time to get across, and all that time Prince Ivan was galloping on, never stopping for a moment.

The witch baby crossed the lake and came thundering after him. Close behind she was, and would have caught him; but the giant Tree-rooter

[p. 152]

saw the little Prince galloping on the big black horse, and the witch baby tearing after him. He pulled up the great oaks in armfuls, and threw them down just in front of the witch baby. He made a huge pile of the big trees, and the witch baby had to stop and gnaw her way through them with her iron teeth.

It took her a long time to gnaw through the trees, and the black horse galloped and galloped ahead. But presently Prince Ivan heard a noise behind him. He looked back, and there was the witch baby, thirty feet high, racing after him, clanging with her teeth. Close behind she was, and the little Prince sat firm on the big black horse, and galloped and galloped. But she would have caught him if the giant Mountain-tosser had not seen the little Prince on the big black horse, and the great witch baby running after him. The giant tore up the biggest mountain in the world and flung it down in front of her, and another on the top of that. She had to bite her way through them, while the little Prince galloped and galloped.

At last little Prince Ivan saw the cloud castle of the little sister of the Sun, hanging over the end of the world and gleaming in the sky as if it were made of roses. He shouted with hope, and the black horse

[p. 153]

shook his head proudly and galloped on. The witch baby thundered after him. Nearer she came and nearer.

"Ah, little one," screams the witch baby, "you shan't get away this time!"

The Sun's little sister was looking from a window of the castle in the sky, and she saw the witch baby stretching out to grab little Prince Ivan. She flung the window open, and just in time the big black horse leapt up, and through the window and into the courtyard, with little Prince Ivan safe on its back.

How the witch baby gnashed her iron teeth!

"Give him up!" she screams.

"I will not," says the Sun's little sister.

"See you here," says the witch baby, and she makes herself smaller and smaller and smaller, till she was just like a real little girl. "Let us be weighed in the great scales, and if I am heavier than Prince Ivan, I can take him; and if he is heavier than I am, I'll say no more about it."

The Sun's little sister laughed at the witch baby and teased her, and she hung the great scales out of the cloud castle so that they swung above the end of the world.

Little Prince Ivan got into one scale, and down it went.

"Now," says the witch baby, "we shall see."

[p. 154]

And she made herself bigger and bigger and bigger, till she was as big as she had been when she sat and sucked her thumb in the hall of the ruined palace. "I am the heavier," she shouted, and gnashed her iron teeth. Then she jumped into the other scale.

She was so heavy that the scale with the little Prince in it shot up into the air. It shot up so fast that little Prince Ivan flew up into the sky, up and up and up, and came down on the topmost turret of the cloud castle of the little sister of the Sun.

The Sun's little sister laughed, and closed the window, and went up to the turret to meet the little Prince. But the witch baby turned back the way she had come, and went off, gnashing her iron teeth until they broke. And ever since then little Prince Ivan and the little sister of the Sun play together in the castle of cloud that hangs over the end of the world. They borrow the stars to play at ball, and put them back at night whenever they remember.

"So when there are no stars?" asked Maroosia.

"It means that Prince Ivan and the Sun's little sister have gone to sleep over their games and forgotten to put their toys away."

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 155]

 

THE STOLEN TURNIPS, THE MAGIC TABLECLOTH, THE SNEEZING GOAT, AND THE WOODEN WHISTLE.

This is the story which old Peter used to tell whenever either Vanya or Maroosia was cross. This did not often happen; but it would be no use to pretend that it never happened at all. Sometimes it was Vanya who scolded Maroosia, and sometimes it was Maroosia who scolded Vanya. Sometimes there were two scoldings going on at once. And old Peter did not like crossness in the hut, whoever did the scolding. He said it spoilt his tobacco and put a sour taste in the tea. And, of course, when the children remembered that they were spoiling their grandfather's tea and tobacco they stopped just as quickly as they could, unless their tongues had run right away with them--which happens sometimes, you know, even to grown-up people. This story used

[p. 156]

to be told in two ways. It was either the tale of an old man who was bothered by a cross old woman, or the tale of an old woman who was bothered by a cross old man. And the moment old Peter began the story both children would ask at once, "Which is the cross one?"--for t hen they would know which of them old Peter thought was in the wrong.

"This time it's the old woman," said their grandfather; "but, as like as not, it will be the old man next."

And then any quarrelling there was came to an end, and was forgotten before the end of the story. This is the story.

An old man and an old woman lived in a little wooden house. All round the house there was a garden, crammed with flowers, and potatoes, and beetroots, and cabbages. And in one corner of the house there was a narrow wooden stairway which went up and up, twisting and twisting, into a high tower. In the top of the tower was a dovecot, and on the top of the dovecot was a flat roof.

Now, the old woman was never content with the doings of the old man. She scolded all day, and she scolded all night. If there was too much

[p. 157]

rain, it was the old man's fault; and if there was a drought, and all green things were parched for lack of water, well, the old man was to blame for not altering the weather. And though he was old and tired, it was all the same to her how much work she put on his shoulders. The garden was full. There was no room in it at all, not even for a single pea. And all of a sudden the old woman sets her heart on growing turnips.

"But there is no room in the garden," says the old man.

"Sow them on the top of the dovecot," says the old woman.

"But there is no earth there."

"Carry earth up and put it there," says she.

So the old man laboured up and down with his tired old bones, and covered the top of the dovecot with good black earth. He could only take up a very little at a time, because he was old and weak, and because the stairs were so narrow and dangerous that he had to hold on with both hands and carry the earth in a bag which he held in his teeth. His teeth were strong enough, because he had been biting crusts all his life. The old woman left him nothing else, for she took all the crumb for herself. The old man did his best, and by evening the

[p. 158]

top of the dovecot was covered with earth, and he had sown it with turnip seed.

Next day, and the day after that and every day, the old woman scolded the old man till he went up to the dovecot to see how those turnip seeds were getting on.

"Are they ready to eat yet?"

"They are not ready to eat."

"Is the green sprouting?"

"The green is sprouting."

And at last there came a day when the old man came down from the dovecot and said: "The turnips are doing finely--quite big they are getting; but all the best ones have been stolen away."

"Stolen away?" cried the old woman, shaking with rage. "And have you lived all these years and not learned how to keep thieves from a turnip bed, on the top of a dovecot, on the top of a tower, on the top of a house? Out with you, and don't you dare to come back till you have caught the thieves."

The old man did not dare to tell her that the door had been bolted, although he knew it had, because he had bolted it himself. He hurried away out of the house, more because he wanted to get out of earshot of

[p. 159]

her scolding than because he had any hope of finding the thieves. "They may be birds," thinks he, "or the little brown squirrels. Who else could climb so high without using the stairs? And how is an old man like me to get hold of them, flying through the tops of the high trees and running up and down the branches?"

And so he wandered away without his dinner into the deep forest.

But God is good to old men. Hasn't He given me two little pigeons, who nearly always are as merry as all little pigeons should be? And God led the old man through the forest, though the old man thought he was just wandering on, trying to lose himself and forget the scolding voice of the old woman.

And after he had walked a long way through the dark green forest, he saw a little hut standing under the pine trees. There was no smoke coming from the chimney, but there was such a chattering in the hut you could hear it far away. It was like coming near a rookery at evening, or disturbing a lot of starlings. And as the old man came slowly nearer to the hut, he thought he saw little faces looking at him through the window and peeping through the door. He could not be sure, because they were gone so quickly. And all the time the

[p. 160]

chattering went on louder and louder, till the old man nearly put his hands to his ears.

And then suddenly the chattering stopped. There was not a sound--no noise at all. The old man stood still. A squirrel dropped a fir cone close by, and the old man was startled by the fall of it, because everything else was so quiet.

"Whatever there is in the hut, it won't be worse than the old woman," says the old man to himself. So he makes the sign of the holy Cross, and steps up to the little hut and takes a look through the door.

There was no one to be seen. You would have thought the hut was empty.

The old man took a step inside, bending under the little low door. Still he could see nobody, only a great heap of rags and blankets on the sleeping-place on the top of the stove. The hut was as clean as if it had only that minute been swept by Maroosia herself. But in the middle of the floor there was a scrap of green leaf lying, and the old man knew in a moment that it was a scrap of green leaf from the top of a young turnip.

And while the old man looked at it, the heap of blankets and rugs on the stove moved, first in one place and then in another. Then there

[p. 161]

was a little laugh. Then another. And suddenly there was a great stir in the blankets, and they were all thrown back helter-skelter, and there were dozens and dozens of little queer children, laughing and laughing and laughing, and looking at the old man. And every child had a little turnip, and showed it to the old man and laughed.

Just then the door of the stove flew open, and out tumbled more of the little queer children, dozens and dozens of them. The more they came tumbling out into the hut, the more there seemed to be chattering in the stove and squeezing to get out one over the top of another. The noise of chattering and laughing would have made your head spin. And everyone of the children out of the stove had a little turnip like the others, and waved it about and showed it to the old man, and laughed like anything.

"Ho," says the old man, "so you are the thieves who have stolen the turnips from the top of the dovecot?"

"Yes," cried the children, and the chatter rattled as fast as hailstones on the roof. "Yes! yes! yes! We stole the turnips."

"How did you get on to the top of the dovecot when the door into the house was bolted and fast?"

[p. 162]

At that the children all burst out laughing, and did not answer a word.

"Laugh you may," said the old man; "but it is I who get the scolding when the turnips fly away in the night."

"Never mind! never mind!" cried the children. "We'll pay for the turnips."

"How can you pay for them?" asks the old man. "You have got nothing to pay with."

All the children chattered together, and looked at the old man and smiled. Then one of them said to the old man, "Are you hungry, grandfather?"

"Hungry!" says the old man. "Why, yes, of course I am, my dear. I've been looking for you all day, and I had to start without my dinner."

"If you are hungry, open the cupboard behind you."

The old man opened the cupboard.

"Take out the tablecloth."

The old man took out the tablecloth.

"Spread it on the table."

The old man spread the tablecloth on the table.

"Now!" shouted the children, chattering like a thousand nests full of young birds, "we'll all sit down and have dinner."

[p. 163]

They pulled out the benches and gave the old man a chair at one end, and all crowded round the table ready to begin.

"But there's no food," said the old man.

How they laughed!

"Grandfather," one of them sings out from the other end of the table, "you just tell the tablecloth to turn inside out,"

"How?" says he.

"Tell the tablecloth to turn inside out. That's easy enough."

"There's no harm in doing that," thinks the old man; so he says to the tablecloth as firmly as he could, "Now then you, tablecloth, turn inside out!"

The tablecloth hove itself up into the air, and rolled itself this way and that as if it were in a whirlwind, and then suddenly laid itself flat on the table again. And somehow or other it had covered itself with dishes and plates and wooden spoons with pictures on them, and bowls of soup and mushrooms and kasha, and meat and cakes and fish and ducks, and everything else you could think of, ready for the best dinner in the world.

The chattering and laughing stopped, and the old man and those dozens

[p. 164]

and dozens of little queer children set to work and ate everything on the table.

"Which of you washes the dishes?" asked the old man, when they had all done.

The children laughed.

"Tell the tablecloth to turn outside in."

"Tablecloth," says the old man, "turn outside in."

Up jumped the tablecloth with all the empty dishes and dirty plates and spoons, whirled itself this way and that in the air, and suddenly spread itself out flat again on the table, as clean and white as when it was taken out of the cupboard. There was not a dish or a bowl, or a spoon or a plate, or a knife to be seen; no, not even a crumb.

"That's a good tablecloth," says the old man.

"See here, grandfather," shouted the children: "you take the tablecloth along with you, and say no more about those turnips."

"Well, I'm content with that," says the old man. And he folded up the tablecloth very carefully and put it away inside his shirt, and said he must be going.

"Good-bye," says he, "and thank you for the dinner and the tablecloth."

"Good-bye," say they, "and thank you for the turnips."

[p. 165]

The old man made his way home, singing through the forest in his creaky old voice until he came near the little wooden house where he lived with the old woman. As soon as he came near there he slipped along like any mouse. And as soon as he put his head inside the door the old woman began,--

"Have you found the thieves, you old fool?"

"I found the thieves."

"Who were they?"

"They were a whole crowd of little queer children."

"Have you given them a beating they'll remember?"

"No, I have not."

"What? Bring them to me, and I'll teach them to steal my turnips!"

"I haven't got them."

"What have you done with them?"

"I had dinner with them."

Well, at that the old woman flew into such a rage she could hardly speak. But speak she did--yes, and shout too and scream--and it was all the old man could do not to run away out of the cottage. But he stood still and listened, and thought of something else; and when she had done he said, "They paid for the turnips."

[p. 166]

"Paid for the turnips!" scolded the old woman. "A lot of children! What did they give you? Mushrooms? We can get them without losing our turnips."

"They gave me a tablecloth," said the old man; "it's a very good tablecloth."

He pulled it out of his shirt and spread it on the table; and as quickly as he could, before she began again, he said, "Tablecloth, turn inside out!"

The old woman stopped short, just when she was taking breath to scold with, when the tablecloth jumped up and danced in the air and settled on the table again, covered with things to eat and to drink. She smelt the meat, took a spoonful of the soup, and tried all the other dishes.

"Look at all the washing up it will mean," says she.

"Tablecloth, turn outside in!" says the old man; and there was a whirl of white cloth and dishes and everything else, and then the tablecloth spread itself out on the table as clean as ever you could wish.

"That's not a bad tablecloth," says the old woman; "but, of course, they owed me something for stealing all those turnips."

The old man said nothing. He was very tired, and he just laid down and went to sleep.

[p. 167]

As soon as he was asleep the old woman took the tablecloth and hid it away in an iron chest, and put a tablecloth of her own in its place. "They were my turnips," says she, "and I don't see why he should have a share in the tablecloth. He's had a meal from it once at my expense, and once is enough." Then she lay down and went to sleep, grumbling to herself even in her dreams.

Early in the morning the old woman woke the old man and told him to go up to the dovecot and see how those turnips were getting on.

He got up and rubbed his eyes. When he saw the tablecloth on the table, the wish came to him to have a bite of food to begin the day with. So he stopped in the middle of putting on his shirt, and called to the tablecloth, "Tablecloth, turn inside out!"

Nothing happened. Why should anything happen? It was not the same tablecloth.

The old man told the old woman. "You should have made a good feast yesterday," says he, "for the tablecloth is no good any more. That is, it's no good that way; it's like any ordinary tablecloth."

"Most tablecloths are," says the old woman. "But what are you dawdling about? Up you go and have a look at those turnips."

[p. 168]

The old man went climbing up the narrow twisting stairs. He held on with both hands for fear of falling, because they were so steep. He climbed to the top of the house, to the top of the tower, to the top of the dovecot, and looked at the turnips. He looked at the turnips, and he counted the turnips, and then he came slowly down the stairs again wondering what the old woman would say to him.

"Well," says the old woman in her sharp voice, "are they doing nicely? Because if not, I know whose fault it is."

"They are doing finely," said the old man; "but some of them have gone. Indeed, quite a lot of them have been stolen away."

"Stolen away!" screamed the old woman. "How dare you stand there and tell me that? Didn't you find the thieves yesterday? Go and find those children again, and take a stick with you, and don't show yourself here till you can tell me that they won't steal again in a hurry."

"Let me have a bite to eat," begs the old man. "It's a long way to go on an empty stomach."

"Not a mouthful!" yells the old woman. "Off with you. Letting my turnips be stolen every night, and then talking to me about bites of food!"

[p. 169]

So the old man went off again without his dinner, and hobbled away into the forest as quickly as he could to get out of earshot of the old woman's scolding tongue.

As soon as he was out of sight the old woman stopped screaming after him, and went into the house and opened the iron chest and took out the tablecloth the children had given the old man, and laid it on the table instead of her own. She told it to turn inside out, and up it flew and whirled about and flopped down flat again, all covered with good things. She ate as much as she could hold. Then she told the tablecloth to turn outside in, and folded it up and hid it away again in the iron chest.

Meanwhile the old man tightened his belt, because he was so hungry. He hobbled along through the green forest till he came to the little hut standing under the pine trees. There was no smoke coming from the chimney, but there was such a chattering you would have thought that all the Vanyas and Maroosias in Holy Russia were talking to each other inside.

He had no sooner come in sight of the hut than the dozens and dozens of little queer children came pouring out of the door to meet him. And every single one of them had a turnip, and showed it to the old man,

[p. 170]

and laughed and laughed as if it were the best joke in the world.

"I knew it was you," said the old man.

"Of course it was us," cried the children. "We stole the turnips."

"But how did you get to the top of the dovecot when the door into the house was bolted and fast?"

The children laughed and laughed and did not answer a word.

"Laugh you may," says the old man; "but it is I who get the scolding when the turnips fly away in the night."

"Never mind! never mind!" cried the children. "We'll pay for the turnips."

"All very well," says the old man; "but that tablecloth of yours--it was fine yesterday, but this morning it would not give me even a glass of tea and a hunk of black bread."

At that the faces of the little queer children were troubled and grave. For a moment or two they all chattered together, and took no notice of the old man. Then one of them said,--

"Well, this time we'll give you something better. We'll give you a goat."

"A goat?" says the old man.

"A goat with a cold in its head," said the children; and they crowded

[p. 171]

round him and took him behind the hut where there was a gray goat with a long beard cropping the short grass.

"It's a good enough goat," says the old man; "I don't see anything wrong with him."

"It's better than that," cried the children. "You tell it to sneeze."

The old man thought the children might be laughing at him, but he did not care, and he remembered the tablecloth. So he took off his hat and bowed to the goat. "Sneeze, goat," says he.

And instantly the goat started sneezing as if it would shake itself to pieces. And as it sneezed, good gold pieces flew from it in all directions, till the ground was thick with them.

"That's enough," said the children hurriedly; "tell him to stop, for all this gold is no use to us, and it's such a bother having to sweep it away."

"Stop sneezing, goat," says the old man; and the goat stopped sneezing, and stood there panting and out of breath in the middle of the sea of gold pieces.

The children began kicking the gold pieces about, spreading them by walking through them as if they were dead leaves. My old father used to say that those gold pieces are lying about still for anybody to

[p. 172]

pick up; but I doubt if he knew just where to look for them, or he would have had better clothes on his back and a little more food on the table. But who knows? Some day we may come upon that little hut somewhere in the forest, and then we shall know what to look for.

The children laughed and chattered and kicked the gold pieces this way and that into the green bushes. Then they brought the old man into the hut and gave him a bowl of kasha to eat, because he had had no dinner. There was no magic about the kasha; but it was good enough kasha for all that, and hunger made it better. When the old man had finished the kasha and drunk a glass of tea and smoked a little pipe, he got up and made a low bow and thanked the children. And the children tied a rope to the goat and sent the old man home with it. He hobbled away through the forest, and as he went he looked back, and there were the little queer children all dancing together, and he heard them chattering and shouting: "Who stole the turnips? We stole the turnips. Who paid for the turnips? We paid for the turnips. Who stole the tablecloth? Who will pay for the tablecloth? Who will steal turnips again? We will steal turnips again."

But the old man was too pleased with the goat to give much heed to

[p. 173]

what they said; and he hobbled home through the green forest as fast as he could, with the goat trotting and walking behind him, pulling leaves off the bushes to chew as they hurried along.

The old woman was waiting in the doorway of the house. She was still as angry as ever.

"Have you beaten the children?" she screamed. "Have you beaten the children for stealing my good turnips?"

"No," said the old man; "they paid for the turnips."

"What did they pay?"

"They gave me this goat."

"That skinny old goat! I have three already, and the worst of them is better than that."

"It has a cold in the head," says the old man.

"Worse than ever!" screams the old woman.

"Wait a minute," says the old man as quickly as he could, to stop her scolding.--"Sneeze, goat."

And the goat began to shake itself almost to bits, sneezing and sneezing and sneezing. The good gold pieces flew all ways at once. And the old woman threw herself after the gold pieces, picking them up like an old hen picking up corn. As fast as she picked them up more gold pieces came showering down on her like heavy gold hail, beating

[p. 174]

her on her head and her hands as she grubbed after those that had fallen already.

"Stop sneezing, goat," says the old man; and the goat stood there tired and panting, trying to get its breath. But the old woman did not look up till she had gathered everyone of the gold pieces. When she did look up, she said,--

"There's no supper for you. I've had supper already."

The old man said nothing. He tied up the goat to the doorpost of the house, where it could eat the green grass. Then he went into the house and lay down, and fell asleep at once, because he was an old man and had done a lot of walking.

As soon as he was asleep the old woman untied the goat and took it away and hid it in the bushes, and tied up one of her own goats instead. "They were my turnips," says she to herself, "and I don't see why he should have a share in the gold." Then she went in, and lay down grumbling to herself.

Early in the morning she woke the old man.

"Get up, you lazy fellow," says she; "you would lie all day and let all the thieves in the world come in and steal my turnips. Up with you to the dovecot and see how my turnips are getting on."

[p. 175]

The old man got up and rubbed his eyes, and climbed up the rickety stairs, creak, creak, creak, holding on with both hands, till he came to the top of the house, to the top of the tower, to the top of the dovecot, and looked at the turnips.

He was afraid to come down, for there were hardly any turnips left at all.

And when he did come down, the scolding the old woman gave him was worse than the other two scoldings rolled into one. She was so angry that she shook like a rag in the high wind, and the old man put both hands to his ears and hobbled away into the forest.

He hobbled along as fast as he could hobble, until he came to the hut under the pine trees. This time the little queer children were not hiding under the blankets or in the stove, or chattering in the hut. They were all over the roof of the hut, dancing and crawling about. Some of them were even sitting on the chimney. And everyone of the little queer children was playing with a turnip. As soon as they saw the old man they all came tumbling off the roof, one after another, head over heels, like a lot of peas rolling off a shovel.

"We stole the turnips!" they shouted, before the old man could say anything at all.

[p. 176]

"I know you did," says the old man; "but that does not make it any better for me. And it is I who get the scolding when the turnips fly away in the night."

"Never again!" shouted the children.

"I'm glad to hear that," says the old man.

"And we'll pay for the turnips."

"Thank you kindly," says the old man. He hadn't the heart to be angry with those little queer children.

Three or four of them ran into the hut and came out again with a wooden whistle, a regular whistle-pipe, such as shepherds use. They gave it to the old man.

"I can never play that," says the old man. "I don't know one tune from another; and if I did, my old fingers are as stiff as oak twigs."

"Blow in it," cried the children; and all the others came crowding round, laughing and chattering and whispering to each other. "Is he going to blow in it?" they asked. "He is going to blow in it." How they laughed!

The old man took the whistle, and gathered his breath and puffed out his cheeks, and blew in the whistle-pipe as hard as he could. And before he could take the whistle from his lips, three lively whips had

[p. 177]

slipped out of it, and were beating him as hard as they could go, although there was nobody to hold them. Phew! phew! phew! The three whips came down on him one after the other.

"Blow again!" the children shouted, laughing as if they were mad. "Blow again--quick, quick, quick!--and tell the whips to get into the whistle."

The old man did not wait to be told twice. He blew for all he was worth, and instantly the three whips stopped beating him. "Into the whistle!" he cried; and the three lively whips shot up into the whistle, like three snakes going into a hole. He could hardly have believed they had been out at all if it had not been for the soreness of his back.

"You take that home," cried the children. "That'll pay for the turnips, and put everything right."

"Who knows?" said the old man; and he thanked the children, and set off home through the green forest.

"Good-bye," cried the little queer children. But as soon as he had started they forgot all about him. When he looked round to wave his hand to them, not one of them was thinking of him. They were up again on the roof of the hut, jumping over each other and dancing and crawling about, and rolling each other down the roof and climbing up

[p. 178]

again, as if they had been doing nothing else all day, and were going to do nothing else till the end of the world.

The old man hobbled home through the green forest with the whistle stuck safely away into his shirt. As soon as he came to the door of the hut, the old woman, who was sitting inside counting the gold pieces, jumped up and started her scolding.

"What have the children tricked you with this time?" she screamed at him.

"They gave me a whistle-pipe," says the old man, "and they are not going to steal the turnips any more."

"A whistle-pipe!" she screamed. "What's the good of that? It's worse than the tablecloth and the skinny old goat."

The old man said nothing.

"Give it to me!" screamed the old woman. "They were my turnips, so it is my whistle-pipe."

"Well, whatever you do, don't blow in it," says the old man, and he hands over the whistle-pipe.

She wouldn't listen to him.

"What?" says she; "I must not blow my own whistle-pipe?"

And with that she put the whistle-pipe to her lips and blew.

[p. 179]

Out jumped the three lively whips, flew up in the air, and began to beat her--phew! phew! phew!--one after another. If they made the old man sore, it was nothing to what they did to the cross old woman.

"Stop them! Stop them!" she screamed, running this way and that in the hut, with the whips flying after her beating her all the time. "I'll never scold again. I am to blame. I stole the magic tablecloth, and put an old one instead of it. I hid it in the iron chest." She ran to the iron chest and opened it, and pulled out the tablecloth. "Stop them! Stop them!" she screamed, while the whips laid it on hard and fast, one after the other. "I am to blame. The goat that sneezes gold pieces is hidden in the bushes. The goat by the door is one of the old ones. I wanted all the gold for myself."

All this time the old man was trying to get hold of the whistle-pipe. But the old woman was running about the hut so fast, with the whips flying after her and beating her, that he could not get it out of her hands. At last he grabbed it. "Into the whistle," says he, and put it to his lips and blew.

In a moment the three lively whips had hidden themselves in the whistle. And there was the cross old woman, kissing his hand and

[p. 180]

promising never to scold any more.

"That's all right," says the old man; and he fetched the sneezing goat out of the bushes and made it sneeze a little gold, just to be sure that it was that goat and no other. Then he laid the tablecloth on the table and told it to turn inside out. Up it flew, and came down again with the best dinner that ever was cooked, only waiting to be eaten. And the old man and the old woman sat down and ate till they could eat no more. The old woman rubbed herself now and again. And the old man rubbed himself too. But there was never a cross word between them, and they went to bed singing like nightingales.

"Is that the end?" Maroosia always asked.

"Is that all?" asked Vanya, though he knew it was not.

"Not quite," said old Peter; "but the tale won't go any quicker than my old tongue."

In the morning the old woman had forgotten about her promise. And just from habit, she set about scolding the old man as if the whips had never jumped out of the whistle. She scolded him for sleeping too long, sent him upstairs, with a lot of cross words after him, to go to the top of the dovecot to see how those turnips were getting on.

[p. 181]

After a little the old man came down.

"The turnips are coming on grandly," says he, "and not a single one has gone in the night. I told you the children said they would not steal any more."

"I don't believe you," said the old woman. "I'll see for myself. And if any are gone, you shall pay for it, and pay for it well."

Up she jumped, and tried to climb the stairs. But the stairs were narrow and steep and twisting. She tried and tried, and could not get up at all. So she gets angrier than ever, and starts scolding the old man again.

"You must carry me up," says she.

"I have to hold on with both hands, or I couldn't get up myself," says the old man.

"I'll get in the flour sack, and you must carry me up with your teeth," says she; "they're strong enough."

And the old woman got into the flour sack.

"Don't ask me any questions," says the old man; and he took the sack in his teeth and began slowly climbing up the stairs, holding on with both hands.

He climbed and climbed, but he did not climb fast enough for the old woman.

"Are we at the top?" says she.

[p. 182]

The old man said nothing, but went on, climbing up and up, nearly dead with the weight of the old woman in the sack which he was holding in his teeth.

He climbed a little further, and the old woman screamed out,--

"Are we at the top now? We must be at the top. Let me out, you old fool!"

The old man said nothing; he climbed on and on.

The old woman raged in the flour sack. She jumped about in the sack, and screamed at the old man,--

"Are we near the top now? Answer me, can't you! Answer me at once, or you'll pay for it later. Are we near the top?"

"Very near," said the old man.

And as he opened his mouth to say that the sack slipped from between his teeth, and bump, bump, bumpety bump, the old woman in the sack fell all the way to the very bottom, bumping on every step. That was the end of her.

After that the old man lived alone in the hut. When he wanted tobacco or clothes or a new axe, he made the goat sneeze some gold pieces, and off he went to the town with plenty of money in his pocket. When he

[p. 183]

wanted his dinner he had only to lay the tablecloth. He never had any washing up to do, because the tablecloth did it for him. When he wanted to get rid of troublesome guests, he gave them the whistle to blow. And when he was lonely and wanted company, he went to the little hut under the pine trees and played with the little queer children.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

 

LITTLE MASTER MISERY.

Once upon a time there were two brothers, peasants, and one was kind and the other was cunning. And the cunning one made money and became rich--very rich--so rich that he thought himself far too good for the village. He went off to the town, and dressed in fine furs, and clothed his wife in rich brocades, and made friends among the merchants, and began to live as merchants live, eating all day long, no longer like a simple peasant who eats kasha one day, kasha the next day, and for a change kasha on the third day also. And always he grew richer and richer.

It was very different with the kind one. He lent money to a neighbour, and the neighbour never paid it back. He sowed before the last frost, and lost all his crops. His horse went lame. His cow gave no milk. If

[p. 185]

his hens laid eggs, they were stolen; and if he set a night-line in the river, some one else always pulled it out and stole the fish and the hooks. Everything went wrong with him, and each day saw him poorer than the day before. At last there came a time when he had not a crumb of bread in the house. He and his wife were thin as sticks because they had nothing to eat, and the children were crying all day long because of their little empty stomachs. From morning till night he dug and worked, struggling against poverty like a fish against the ice; but it was no good. Things went from bad to worse.

At last his wife said to him: "You must go to the town and see that rich brother of yours. He will surely not refuse to give you a little help."

And he said: "Truly, wife, there is nothing else to be done. I will go to the town, and perhaps my rich brother will help me. I am sure he would not let my children starve. After all, he is their uncle."

So he took his stick and tramped off to the town.

He came to the house of his rich brother. A fine house it was, with painted eaves and a doorway carved by a master. Many servants were there and food in plenty, and people coming and going. He went in and

[p. 186]

found his brother, and said,--

"Dear brother of mine, I beg you help me, even if only a little. My wife and children are without bread. All day long they sit hungry and waiting, and I have no food to give them."

The rich brother looks at him, and hums and strokes his beard. Then says he: "I will help you. But, of course, you must do something in return. Stay here and work for me, and at the end of a week you shall have the help you have earned."

The poor brother thanked him, and bowed and kissed his hand, and praised God for the kindness of his brother's heart, and set instantly to work. For a whole week he slaved, and scarcely slept. He cleaned out the stables and cut the wood, swept the yard, drew water from the well, and ran errands for the cook. And at the end of the week his brother called him, and gave him a single loaf of bread.

"You must not forget," says the rich brother, "that I have fed you all the week you have been here, and all that food counts in the payment."

The poor brother thanked him, and was setting off to carry the loaf to his wife and children when the rich brother called him back.

[p. 187]

"Stop a minute," said he; "I would like you to know that I am well disposed towards you. To-morrow is my name-day. Come to the feast, and bring your wife with you."

"How can I do that, brother? Your friends are rich merchants, with fine clothes, and boots on their feet. And I have nothing but my old coat, and my legs are bound in rags and my feet shuffle along in straw slippers. I do not want to shame you before your guests."

"Never mind about that," says the rich brother; "we will find a place for you."

"Very good, brother, and thank you kindly. God be praised for having given you a tender heart."

And the poor brother, though he was tired out after all the work he had done, set off home as fast as he could to take the bread to his wife and children.

"He might have given you more than that," said his wife.

"But listen," said he; "what do you think of this? To-morrow we are invited, you and I, as guests, to go to a great feast."

"What do you mean? A feast? Who has invited us?"

"My brother has invited us. To-morrow is his name-day. I always told

[p. 188]

you he had a kind heart. We shall be well fed, and I dare say we shall be able to bring back something for the children."

"A pleasure like that does not often come our way," said his wife.

So early in the morning they got up, and walked all the way to the town, so as not to shame the rich brother by putting up their old cart in the yard beside the merchants' fine carriages. They came to the rich brother's house, and found the guests all assembled and making merry; rich merchants and their plump wives, all eating and laughing and drinking and talking.

They wished a long life to the rich brother, and the poor brother wanted to make a speech, congratulating him on his name-day. But the rich brother scarcely thanked him, because he was so busy entertaining the rich merchants and their plump, laughing wives. He was pressing food on his guests, now this, now that, and calling to the servants to keep their glasses filled and their plates full of all the tastiest kinds of food. As for the poor brother and his wife, the rich one forgot all about them, and they got nothing to eat and never a drop to drink. They just sat there with empty plates and empty glasses,

[p. 189]

watching how the others ate and drank. The poor brother laughed with the rest, because he did not wish to show that he had been forgotten.

The dinner came to an end. One by one the guests went up to the giver of the feast to thank him for his good cheer. And the poor brother too got up from the bench, and bowed low before his brother and thanked him.

The guests went home, drunken and joyful. A fine noise they made, as people do on these occasions, shouting jokes to each other and singing songs at the top of their voices.

The poor brother and his wife went home empty and sad. All that long way they had walked, and now they had to walk it again, and the feast was over, and never a bite had they had in their mouths, nor a drop in their gullets.

"Come, wife," says the poor brother as he trudged along, "let us sing a song like the others."

"What a fool you are!" says his wife. Hungry and cross she was, as even Maroosia would be after a day like that watching other people stuff themselves. "What a fool you are!" says she. "People may very well sing when they have eaten tasty dishes and drunk good wine. But

[p. 190]

what reason have you got for making a merry noise in the night?"

"Why, my dear" says he, "we have been at my brother's name-day feast. I am ashamed to go home without a song. I'll sing. I'll sing so that everyone shall think he loaded us with good things like the rest."

"Well, sing if you like; but you'll sing by yourself."

So the peasant, the poor brother, started singing a song with his dry throat. He lifted his voice and sang like the rest, while his wife trudged silently beside him.

But as he sang it seemed to the peasant that he heard two voices singing--his own and another's. He stopped, and asked his wife,--

"Is that you joining in my song with a little thin voice?"

"What's the matter with you? I never thought of singing with you. I never opened my mouth."

"Who is it then?"

"No one except yourself. Any one would say you had had a drink of wine after all."

"But I heard some one ... a little weak voice ... a little sad voice ... joining with mine."

"I heard nothing," said his wife; "but sing again, and I'll listen."

[p. 191]

The poor man sang again. He sang alone. His wife listened, and it was clear that there were two voices singing--the dry voice of the poor man, and a little miserable voice that came from the shadows under the trees. The poor man stopped, and asked out loud,--

"Who are you who are singing with me?"

And a little thin voice answered out of the shadows by the roadside, under the trees,--

"I am Misery."

"So it was you, Misery, who were helping me?"

"Yes, master, I was helping you."

"Well, little Master Misery, come along with us and keep us company."

"I'll do that willingly," says little Master Misery, "and I'll never, never leave you at all--no, not if you have no other friend in the world."

And a wretched little man, with a miserable face and little thin legs and arms, came out of the shadows and went home with the peasant and his wife.

It was late when they got home, but little Master Misery asked the peasant to take him to the tavern. "After such a day as this has been," says he, "there's nothing else to be done."

"But I have no money," says the peasant.

[p. 192]

Click to enlarge
Misery seated himself firmly on his shoulders and pulled out handfuls of his hair.

"What of that?" says little Master Misery. "Spring has begun, and you have a winter jacket on. It will soon be summer, and whether you have it or not you won't wear it. Bring it along to the tavern, and change it for a drink."

The poor man went to the tavern with little Master Misery, and they sat there and drank the vodka that the tavern-keeper gave them in exchange for the coat.

Next day, early in the morning, little Master Misery began complaining. His head ached and he could not open his eyes, and he did not like the weather, and the children were crying, and there was no food in the house. He asked the peasant to come with him to the tavern again and forget all this wretchedness in a drink.

"But I've got no money," says the peasant.

"Rubbish!" says little Master Misery; "you have a sledge and a cart."

They took the cart and the sledge to the tavern, and stayed there drinking until the tavern-keeper said they had had all that the cart and the sledge were worth. Then the tavern-keeper took them and threw them out of doors into the night, and they picked themselves up and crawled home.

Next day Misery complained worse than before, and begged the peasant to come with him to the tavern. There was no getting rid of him, no

[p. 193]

keeping him quiet. The peasant sold his barrow and plough, so that he could no longer work his land. He went to the tavern with little Master Misery.

A month went by like that, and at the end of it the peasant had nothing left at all. He had even pledged the hut he lived in to a neighbour, and taken the money to the tavern.

And every day little Master Misery begged him to come. "There I am not wretched any longer," says Misery. "There I sing, and even dance, hitting the floor with my heels and making a merry noise."

"But now I have no money at all, and nothing left to sell," says the poor peasant. "I'd be willing enough to go with you, but I can't, and here is an end of it."

"Rubbish!" says Misery; "your wife has two dresses. Leave her one; she can't wear both at once. Leave her one, and buy a drink with the other. They are both ragged, but take the better of the two. The tavern-keeper is a just man, and will give us more drink for the better one."

The peasant took the dress and sold it; and Misery laughed and danced, while the peasant thought to himself, "Well, this is the end. I've

[p. 194]

nothing left to sell, and my wife has nothing either. We've the clothes on our backs, and nothing else in the world."

In the morning little Master Misery woke with a headache as usual, and a mouthful of groans and complaints. But he saw that the peasant had nothing left to sell, and he called out,--

"Listen to me, master of the house."

"What is it, Misery?" says the peasant, who was master of nothing in the world.

"Go you to a neighbour and beg the loan of a cart and a pair of good oxen."

The poor peasant had no will of his own left. He did exactly as he was told. He went to his neighbour and begged the loan of the oxen and cart.

"But how will you repay me?" says the neighbour.

"I will do a week's work for you for nothing."

"Very well," says the neighbour; "take the oxen and cart, but be careful not to give them too heavy a load."

"Indeed I won't," says the peasant, thinking to himself that he had nothing to load them with. "And thank you very much," says he; and he goes back to Misery, taking with him the oxen and cart.

[p. 195]

Misery looked at him and grumbled in his wretched little voice, "They are hardly strong enough,"

"They are the best I could borrow," says the peasant; "and you and I have starved too long to be heavy."

And the peasant and little Master Misery sat together in the cart and drove off together, Misery holding his head in both hands and groaning at the jolt of the cart.

As soon as they had left the village, Misery sat up and asked the peasant,--

"Do you know the big stone that stands alone in the middle of a field not far from here?"

"Of course I know it," says the peasant.

"Drive straight to it," says Misery, and went on rocking himself to and fro, and groaning and complaining in his wretched little voice.

They came to the stone, and got down from the cart and looked at the stone. It was very big and heavy, and was fixed in the ground.

"Heave it up," says Misery.

The poor peasant set to work to heave it up, and Misery helped him, groaning, and complaining that the peasant was nothing of a fellow because he could not do his work by himself. Well, they heaved it up, and there below it was a deep hole, and the hole was filled with gold

[p. 196]

pieces to the very top; more gold pieces than ever you will see copper ones if you live to be a hundred and ten.

"Well, what are you staring at?" says Misery. "Stir yourself, and be quick about it, and load all this gold into the cart."

The peasant set to work, and piled all the gold into the cart down to the very last gold piece; while Misery sat on the stone and watched, groaning and chuckling in his weak, wretched little voice.

"Be quick," says Misery; "and then we can get back to the tavern."

The peasant looked into the pit to see that there was nothing left there, and then says he,--

"Just take a look, little Master Misery, and see that we have left nothing behind. You are smaller than I, and can get right down into the pit...."

Misery slipped down from the stone, grumbling at the peasant, and bent over the pit.

"You've taken the lot," says he; "there's nothing to be seen."

"But what is that," says the peasant--"there, shining in the corner?"

"I don't see it."

[p. 197]

"Jump down into the pit and you'll see it. It would be a pity to waste a gold piece."

Misery jumped down into the pit, and instantly the peasant rolled the stone over the hole and shut him in.

"Things will be better so," says the peasant. "If I were to let you out of that, sooner or later you would drink up all this money, just as you drank up everything I had."

Then the peasant drove home and hid the gold in the cellar; took the oxen and cart back to his neighbour, thanked him kindly, and began to think what he would do, now that Misery was his master no longer, and he with plenty of money.

"But he had to work for a week to pay for the loan of the oxen and cart," said Vanya.

"Well, during the week, while he was working, he was thinking all the time, in his head," said old Peter, a little grumpily. Then he went on with his tale.

As soon as the week was over, he bought a forest and built himself a fine house, and began to live twice as richly as his brother in the town. And his wife had two new dresses, perhaps more; with a lot of gold and silver braid, and necklaces of big yellow stones, and bracelets and sparkling rings. His children were well fed every

[p. 198]

day--rivers of milk between banks of kisel jelly, and mushrooms with sauce, and soup, and cakes with little balls of egg and meat hidden in the middle. And they had toys that squeaked, a little boy feeding a goose that poked its head into a dish, and a painted hen with a lot of chickens that all squeaked together.

Time went on, and when his name-day drew near he thought of his brother, the merchant, and drove off to the town to invite him to take part in the feast.

"I have not forgotten, brother, that you invited me to yours."

"What a fellow you are!" says his brother; "you have nothing to eat yourself, and here you are inviting other people for your name-day."

"Yes," said the peasant, "once upon a time, it is true, I had nothing to eat; but now, praise be to God, I am no poorer than yourself. Come to my name-day feast and you will see."

"Very well," says his brother, "I'll come; but don't think you can play any jokes on me."

On the morning of the peasant's name-day his brother, the merchant in the town, put on his best clothes, and his plump wife dressed in all her richest, and they got into their cart--a fine cart it was too,

[p. 199]

painted in the brightest colours--and off they drove together to the house of the brother who had once been poor. They took a basket of food with them, in case he had only been joking when he invited them to his name-day feast.

They drove to the village, and asked for him at the hut where he used to be.

An old man hobbling along the road answered them,--

"Oh, you mean our Ivan Ilyitch. Well, he does not live here any longer. Where have you been that you have not heard? His is the big new house on the hill. You can see it through the trees over there, where all these people are walking. He has a kind heart, he has, and riches have not spoiled it. He has invited the whole village to feast with him, because to-day is his name-day."

"Riches!" thought the merchant; "a new house!" He was very much surprised, but as he drove along the road he was more surprised still. For he passed all the villagers on their way to the feast; and every one was talking of his brother, and how kind he was and how generous, and what a feast there was going to be, and how many barrels of mead and, wine had been taken up to the house. All the folk were hurrying

[p. 200]

along the road licking their lips, each one going faster than the other so as to be sure not to miss any of the good things.

The rich brother from the town drove with his wife into the courtyard of the fine new house. And there on the steps was the peasant brother, Ivan Ilyitch, and his wife, receiving their guests. And if the rich brother was well dressed, the peasant was better dressed; and if the rich brother's wife was in her fine clothes, the peasant's wife fairly glittered--what with the gold braid on her bosom and the shining silver in her hair.

And the peasant brother kissed his brother from the town on both cheeks, and gave him and his wife the best places at the table. He fed them--ah, how he fed them!--with little red slips of smoked salmon, and beetroot soup with cream, and slabs of sturgeon, and meats of three or four kinds, and game and sweetmeats of the best. There never was such a feast--no, not even at the wedding of a Tzar. And as for drink, there were red wine and white wine, and beer and mead in great barrels, and everywhere the peasant went about among his guests, filling glasses and seeing that their plates were kept piled with the foods each one liked best.

And the rich brother wondered and wondered, and at last he could wait

[p. 201]

no longer, and he took his brother aside and said,--

"I am delighted to see you so rich. But tell me, I beg you, how it was that all this good fortune came to you."

The poor brother, never thinking, told him all--the whole truth about little Master Misery and the pit full of gold, and how Misery was shut in there under the big stone.

The merchant brother listened, and did not forget a word. He could hardly bear himself for envy, and as for his wife, she was worse. She looked at the peasant's wife with her beautiful head-dress, and she bit her lips till they bled.

As soon as they could, they said good-bye and drove off home.

The merchant brother could not bear the thought that his brother was richer than he. He said to himself, "I will go to the field, and move the stone, and let Master Misery out. Then he will go and tear my brother to pieces for shutting him in; and his riches will not be of much use to him then, even if Misery does not give them to me as a token of gratitude. Think of my brother daring to show off his riches to me!"

So he drove off to the field, and came at last to the big stone. He

[p. 202]

moved the stone on one side, and then bent over the pit to see what was in it.

He had scarcely put his head over the edge before Misery sprang up out of the pit, seated himself firmly on his shoulders, squeezed his neck between his little wiry legs, and pulled out handfuls of his hair.

"Scream away!" cried little Master Misery. "You tried to kill me, shutting me up in there, while you went off and bought fine clothes. You tried to kill me, and came to feast your eyes on my corpse. Now, whatever happens, I'll never leave you again."

"Listen, Misery!" screamed the merchant. "Ai, ai! stop pulling my hair. You are choking me. Ai! Listen. It was not I who shut you in under the stone...."

"Who was it, if it was not you?" asked Misery, tugging out his hair, and digging his knees into the merchant's throat.

"It was my brother. I came here on purpose to let you out. I came out of pity."

Misery tugged the merchant's hair, and twisted the merchant's ears till they nearly came off.

"Liar, liar!" he shouted in his little, wretched, angry voice. "You tricked me once. Do you think you'll get the better of me again by a

[p. 203]

clumsy lie of that kind? Now then. Gee up! Home we go."

And so the rich brother went trotting home, crying with pain; while little Master Misery sat firmly on his shoulders, pulling at his hair.

Instantly Misery was at his old tricks.

"You seem to have bought a good deal with the gold," he said, looking at the merchant's house. "We'll see how far it will go." And every day he rode the rich merchant to the tavern, and made him drink up all his money, and his house, his clothes, his horses and carts and sledges--everything he had--until he was as poor as his brother had been in the beginning.

The merchant thought and thought, and puzzled his brain to find a way to get rid of him. And at last one night, when Misery had groaned himself to sleep, the merchant went out into the yard and took a big cart wheel and made two stout wedges of wood, just big enough to fit into the hub of the wheel. He drove one wedge firmly in at one end of the hub, and left the wheel in the yard with the other wedge, and a big hammer lying handy close to it.

In the morning Misery wakes as usual, and cries out to be taken to the tavern.

[p. 204]

"We've sold everything I've got," says the merchant.

"Well, what are you going to do to amuse me?" says Misery.

"Let's play hide-and-seek in the yard," says the merchant.

"Right," says Misery; "but you'll never find me, for I can make myself so small I can hide in a mouse-hole in the floor."

"We'll see," says the merchant.

The merchant hid first, and Misery found him at once.

"Now it's my turn," says Misery; "but what's the good? You'll never find me. Why, I could get inside the hub of that wheel if I had a mind to."

"What a liar you are!" says the merchant; "you never could get into that little hole."

"Look," says Misery, and he made himself little, little, little, and sat on the hub of the wheel.

"Look," says he, making himself smaller again; and then, pouf! in he pops into the hole of the hub.

Instantly the merchant took the other wedge and the hammer, and drove the wedge into the hole. The first wedge had closed up the other end,

[p. 205]

and so there was Misery shut up inside the hub of the cart wheel.

The merchant set the wheel on his shoulders, and took it to the river and threw it out as far as he could, and it went floating away down to the sea.

Then he went home and set to work to make money again, and earn his daily bread; for Misery had made him so poor that he had nothing left, and had to hire himself out to make a living, just as his peasant brother used to do.

But what happened to Misery when he went floating away?

He floated away down the river, shut up in the hub of the wheel. He ought to have starved there. But I am afraid some silly, greedy fellow thought to get a new wheel for nothing, and pulled the wedges out and let him go; for, by all I hear, Misery is still wandering about the world and making people wretched--bad luck to him!

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 206]

 

A CHAPTER OF FISH.

Sometimes in spring, when the big river flooded its banks and made lakes of the meadows, and the little rivers flowed deep, old Peter spent a few days netting fish. Also in summer he set night-lines in the little river not far from where it left the forest. And so it happened that one day he sat in the warm sunshine outside his hut, mending his nets and making floats for them; not cork floats like ours, but little rolls of the silver bark of the birch tree.

And while he sat there Vanya and Maroosia watched him, and sometimes even helped, holding a piece of the net between them, while old Peter fastened on the little glistening rolls of bark that were to keep it up in the water. And all the time old Peter worked he smoked, and told them stories about fish.

[p. 207]

First he told them what happened when the first pike was born, and how it is that all the little fish are not eaten by the great pike with his huge greedy mouth and his sharp teeth.

On the night of Ivanov's Day (that is the day of Saint John, which is Midsummer) there was born the pike, a huge fish, with such teeth as never were. And when the pike was born the waters of the river foamed and raged, so that the ships in the river were all but swamped, and the pretty young girls who were playing on the banks ran away as fast as they could, frightened, they were, by the roaring of the waves, and the black wind and the white foam on the water. Terrible was the birth of the sharp-toothed pike.

And when the pike was born he did not grow up by months or by days, but by hours. Every day it was two inches longer than the day before. In a month it was two yards long; in two months it was twelve feet long; in three months it was raging up and down the river like a tempest, eating the bream and the perch, and all the small fish that came in its way. There was a bream or a perch swimming lazily in the stream. The pike saw it as it raged by, caught it in its great white mouth, and instantly the bream or the perch was gone, torn to pieces

[p. 208]

by the pike's teeth, and swallowed as you would swallow a sunflower seed. And bream and perch are big fish. It was worse for the little ones.

Click to enlarge
Head in air and tail in sea, Fish, fish, listen to me.

What was to be done? The bream and the perch put their heads together in a quiet pool. It was clear enough that the great pike would eat everyone of them. So they called a meeting of all the little fish, and set to thinking what could be done by way of dealing with the great pike, which had such sharp teeth and was making so free with their lives.

They all came to the meeting--bream, and perch, and roach, and dace, and gudgeon; yes, and the little ersh with his spiny back.

The silly roach said, "Let us kill the pike."

But the gudgeon looked at him with his great eyes, and asked, "Have you got good teeth?"

"No," says the roach, "I haven't any teeth."

"You'd swallow the pike, I suppose?" says the perch.

"My mouth is too small."

"Then do not use it to talk foolishness," said the gudgeon; and the roach's fins blushed scarlet, and are red to this day.

"I will set my prickles on end," says the perch, who has a row of sharp prickles in the fin on his back. "The pike won't find them too

[p. 209]

comfortable in his throat."

"Yes," said the bream; "but you will have to go into his throat to put them there, and he'll swallow you all the same. Besides, we have not all got prickles."

There was a lot more foolishness talked. Even the minnows had something to say, until they were made to be quiet by the dace.

Now the little ersh had come to the meeting, with his spiny back, and his big front fins, and his head all shining in blue and gold and green. And when he had heard all they had to say, he began to talk.

"Think away," says he, "and break your heads, and spoil your brains, if ever you had any; but listen for a moment to what I have to say."

And all the fish turned to listen to the ersh, who is the cleverest of all the little fish, because he has a big head and a small body.

"Listen," says the ersh. "It is clear enough that the pike lives in this big river, and that he does not give the little fish a chance, crunches them all with his sharp teeth, and swallows them ten at a time. I quite agree that it would be much better for everybody if he could be killed; but not one of us is strong enough for that. We are not strong enough to kill him; but we can starve him, and save

[p. 210]

ourselves at the same time. There's no living in the big river while he is here. Let all us little fish clear out, and go and live in the little rivers that flow into the big. There the waters are shallow, and we can hide among the weeds. No one will touch us there, and we can live and bring up our children in peace, and only be in danger when we go visiting from one little river to another. And as for the great pike, we will leave him alone in the big river to rage hungrily up and down. His teeth will soon grow blunt, for there will be nothing for him to eat."

All the little fish waved their fins and danced in the water when they heard the wisdom of the ersh's speech. And the ersh and the roach, and the bream and the perch, and the dace and the gudgeon left the big river and swam up the little rivers between the green meadows. And there they began again to live in peace and bring up their little ones, though the cunning fishermen set nets in the little rivers and caught many of them on their way. From that time on there have never been many little fish in the big river.

And as for the monstrous pike, he swam up and down the great river, lashing the waters, and driving his nose through the waves, but found

[p. 211]

no food for his sharp teeth. He had to take to worms, and was caught in the end on a fisherman's hook. Yes, and the fisherman made a soup of him--the best fish soup that ever was made. He was a friend of mine when I was a boy, and he gave me a taste in my wooden spoon.

Then he told them the story of other pike, and particularly of the pike that was king of a river, and made the little fish come together on the top of the water so that the young hunter could cross over with dry feet. And he told them of the pike that hid the lover of the princess by swallowing him and lying at the bottom of a deep pool, and how the princess saw her lover sitting in the pike, when the big fish opened his mouth to snap up a little perch that swam too near his nose. Then he told them of the big trial in the river, when the fishes chose judges, and made a case at law against the ersh, and found him guilty, and how the ersh spat in the faces of the judges and swam merrily away.

Finally, he told them the story of the Golden Fish. But that is a long story, and a chapter all by itself, and begins on the next page.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

 

THE GOLDEN FISH.

"This," said old Peter, "is a story against wanting more than enough."

Long ago, near the shore of the blue sea, an old man lived with his old woman in a little old hut made of earth and moss and logs. They never had a rouble to spend. A rouble! they never had a kopeck. They just lived there in the little hut, and the old man caught fish out of the sea in his old net, and the old woman cooked the fish; and so they lived, poorly enough in summer and worse in winter. Sometimes they had a few fish to sell, but not often. In the summer evenings they sat outside their hut on a broken old bench, and the old man mended the holes in his ragged old net. There were holes in it a hare could jump through with his ears standing, let alone one of those little fishes that live in the sea. The old woman sat on the bench

[p. 213]

beside him, and patched his trousers and complained.

Well, one day the old man went fishing, as he always did. All day long he fished, and caught nothing. And then in the evening, when he was thinking he might as well give up and go home, he threw his net for the last time, and when he came to pull it in he began to think he had caught an island instead of a haul of fish, and a strong and lively island at that--the net was so heavy and pulled so hard against his feeble old arms.

"This time," says he, "I have caught a hundred fish at least."

Not a bit of it. The net came in as heavy as if it were full of fighting fish, but empty --.

"Empty?" said Maroosia.

"Well, not quite empty," said old Peter, and went on with his tale.

Not quite empty, for when the last of the net came ashore there was something glittering in it--a golden fish, not very big and not very little, caught in the meshes. And it was this single golden fish which had made the net so heavy.

The old fisherman took the golden fish in his hands.

"At least it will be enough for supper," said he.

But the golden fish lay still in his hands, and looked at him with

[p. 214]

 

wise eyes, and spoke--yes, my dears, it spoke, just as if it were you or I.

"Old man," says the fish, "do not kill me. I beg you throw me back into the blue waters. Some day I may be able to be of use to you."

"What?" says the old fisherman; "and do you talk with a human voice?"

"I do," says the fish. "And my fish's heart feels pain like yours. It would be as bitter to me to die as it would be to yourself."

"And is that so?" says the old fisherman. "Well, you shall not die this time." And he threw the golden fish back into the sea.

You would have thought the golden fish would have splashed with his tail, and turned head downwards, and swum away into the blue depths of the sea. Not a bit of it. It stayed there with its tail slowly flapping in the water so as to keep its head up, and it looked at the fisherman with its wise eyes, and it spoke again.

"You have given me my life," says the golden fish. "Now ask anything you wish from me, and you shall have it."

The old fisherman stood there on the shore, combing his beard with his old fingers, and thinking. Think as he would, he could not call to mind a single thing he wanted.

[p. 215]

"No, fish," he said at last; "I think I have everything I need,"

"Well, if ever you do want anything, come and ask for it," says the fish, and turns over, flashing gold, and goes down into the blue sea.

The old fisherman went back to his hut, where his wife was waiting for him.

"What!" she screamed out; "you haven't caught so much as one little fish for our supper?"

"I caught one fish, mother," says the old man: "a golden fish it was, and it spoke to me; and I let it go, and it told me to ask for anything I wanted."

"And what did you ask for? Show me."

"I couldn't think of anything to ask for; so I did not ask for anything at all."

"Fool," says his wife, "and dolt, and us with no food to put in our mouths. Go back at once, and ask for some bread."

Well, the poor old fisherman got down his net, and tramped back to the seashore. And he stood on the shore of the wide blue sea, and he called out,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

And in a moment there was the golden fish with his head out of the water, flapping his tail below him in the water, and looking at the

[p. 216]

fisherman with his wise eyes.

"What is it?" said the fish.

"Be so kind," says the fisherman; "be so kind. We have no bread in the house."

"Go home," says the fish, and turned over and went down into the sea.

"God be good to me," says the old fisherman; "but what shall I say to my wife, going home like this without the bread?" And he went home very wretchedly, and slower than he came.

As soon as he came within sight of his hut he saw his wife, and she was waving her arms and shouting.

"Stir your old bones," she screamed out. "It's as fine a loaf as ever I've seen."

And he hurried along, and found his old wife cutting up a huge loaf of white bread, mind you, not black--a huge loaf of white bread, nearly as big as Maroosia.

"You did not do so badly after all," said his old wife as they sat there with the samovar on the table between them, dipping their bread in the hot tea.

But that night, as they lay sleeping on the stove, the old woman poked

[p. 217]

the old man in the ribs with her bony elbow. He groaned and woke up.

"I've been thinking," says his wife, "your fish might have given us a trough to keep the bread in while he was about it. There is a lot left over, and without a trough it will go bad, and not be fit for anything. And our old trough is broken; besides, it's too small. First thing in the morning off you go, and ask your fish to give us a new trough to put the bread in."

Early in the morning she woke the old man again, and he had to get up and go down to the seashore. He was very much afraid, because he thought the fish would not take it kindly. But at dawn, just as the red sun was rising out of the sea, he stood on the shore, and called out in his windy old voice,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

And there in the morning sunlight was the golden fish, looking at him with its wise eyes.

"I beg your pardon," says the old man, "but could you, just to oblige my wife, give us some sort of trough to put the bread in?"

"Go home," says the fish; and down it goes into the blue sea.

[p. 218]

The old man went home, and there, outside the hut, was the old woman, looking at the handsomest bread trough that ever was seen on earth. Painted it was, with little flowers, in three colours, and there were strips of gilding about its handles.

"Look at this," grumbled the old woman. "This is far too fine a trough for a tumble-down hut like ours. Why, there is scarcely a place in the roof where the rain does not come through. If we were to keep this trough in such a hut, it would be spoiled in a month. You must go back to your fish and ask it for a new hut."

"I hardly like to do that," says the old man.

"Get along with you," says his wife. "If the fish can make a trough like this, a hut will be no trouble to him. And, after all, you must not forget he owes his life to you."

"I suppose that is true," says the old man; but he went back to the shore with a heavy heart. He stood on the edge of the sea and called out, doubtfully,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

Instantly there was a ripple in the water, and the golden fish was looking at him with its wise eyes.

"Well?" says the fish.

[p. 219]

"My old woman is so pleased with the trough that she wants a new hut to keep it in, because ours, if you could only see it, is really falling to pieces, and the rain comes in and --."

"Go home," says the fish.

The old fisherman went home, but he could not find his old hut at all. At first he thought he had lost his way. But then he saw his wife. And she was walking about, first one way and then the other, looking at the finest hut that God ever gave a poor moujik to keep him from the rain and the cold, and the too great heat of the sun. It was built of sound logs, neatly finished at the ends and carved. And the overhanging of the roof was cut in patterns, so neat, so pretty, you could never think how they had been done. The old woman looked at it from all sides. And the old man stood, wondering. Then they went in together. And everything within the hut was new and clean. There were a fine big stove, and strong wooden benches, and a good table, and a fire lit in the stove, and logs ready to put in, and a samovar already on the boil--a fine new samovar of glittering brass.

You would have thought the old woman would have been satisfied with that. Not a bit of it.

"You don't know how to lift your eyes from the ground," says she. "You

[p. 220]

don't know what to ask. I am tired of being a peasant woman and a moujik's wife. I was made for something better. I want to be a lady, and have good people to do the work, and see folk bow and curtsy to me when I meet them walking abroad. Go back at once to the fish, you old fool, and ask him for that, instead of bothering him for little trifles like bread troughs and moujiks' huts. Off with you."

The old fisherman went back to the shore with a sad heart; but he was afraid of his wife, and he dared not disobey her. He stood on the shore, and called out in his windy old voice,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

Instantly there was the golden fish looking at him with its wise eyes.

"Well?" says the fish.

"My old woman won't give me a moment's peace," says the old man; "and since she has the new hut--which is a fine one, I must say; as good a hut as ever I saw--she won't be content at all. She is tired of being a peasant's wife, and wants to be a lady with a house and servants, and to see the good folk curtsy to her when she meets them walking abroad."

[p. 221]

"Go home," says the fish.

The old man went home, thinking about the hut, and how pleasant it would be to live in it, even if his wife were a lady.

But when he got home the hut had gone, and in its place there was a fine brick house, three stories high. There were servants running this way and that in the courtyard. There was a cook in the kitchen, and there was his old woman, in a dress of rich brocade, sitting idle in a tall carved chair, and giving orders right and left.

"Good health to you, wife," says the old man.

"Ah, you, clown that you are, how dare you call me your wife! Can't you see that I'm a lady? Here! Off with this fellow to the stables, and see that he gets a beating he won't forget in a hurry."

Instantly the servants seized the old man by the collar and lugged him along to the stables. There the grooms treated him to such a whipping that he could hardly stand on his feet. After that the old woman made him doorkeeper. She ordered that a besom should be given him to clean up the courtyard, and said that he was to have his meals in the kitchen. A wretched life the old man lived. All day long he was sweeping up the courtyard, and if there was a speck of dirt to be seen

[p. 222]

in it anywhere, he paid for it at once in the stable under the whips of the grooms.

Time went on, and the old woman grew tired of being only a lady. And at last there came a day when she sent into the yard to tell the old man to come before her. The poor old man combed his hair and cleaned his boots, and came into the house, and bowed low before the old woman.

"Be off with you, you old good-for-nothing!" says she. "Go and find your golden fish, and tell him from me that I am tired of being a lady. I want to be Tzaritza, with generals and courtiers and men of state to do whatever I tell them."

The old man went along to the seashore, glad enough to be out of the courtyard and out of reach of the stablemen with their whips. He came to the shore, and cried out in his windy old voice,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

And there was the golden fish looking at him with its wise eyes.

"What's the matter now, old man?" says the fish.

"My old woman is going on worse than ever," says the old fisherman. "My back is sore with the whips of her grooms. And now she says it

[p. 223]

isn't enough for her to be a lady; she wants to be a Tzaritza."

"Never you worry about it," says the fish. "Go home and praise God;" and with that the fish turned over and went down into the sea.

The old man went home slowly, for he did not know what his wife would do to him if the golden fish did not make her into a Tzaritza.

But as soon as he came near he heard the noise of trumpets and the beating of drums, and there where the fine stone house had been was now a great palace with a golden roof. Behind it was a big garden of flowers, that are fair to look at but have no fruit, and before it was a meadow of fine green grass. And on the meadow was an army of soldiers drawn up in squares and all dressed alike. And suddenly the fisherman saw his old woman in the gold and silver dress of a Tzaritza come stalking out on the balcony with her generals and boyars to hold a review of her troops. And the drums beat and the trumpets sounded, and the soldiers cried "Hurrah!" And the poor old fisherman found a dark corner in one of the barns, and lay down in the straw.

Time went on, and at last the old woman was tired of being Tzaritza.[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] She thought she was made for something better. And one day she said to her chamberlain,--

"Find me that ragged old beggar who is always hanging about in the courtyard. Find him, and bring him here."

The chamberlain told his officers, and the officers told the servants, and the servants looked for the old man, and found him at last asleep on the straw in the corner of one of the barns. They took some of the dirt off him, and brought him before the Tzaritza, sitting proudly on her golden throne.

"Listen, old fool!" says she. "Be off to your golden fish, and tell it I am tired of being Tzaritza. Anybody can be Tzaritza. I want to be the ruler of the seas, so that all the waters shall obey me, and all the fishes shall be my servants."

"I don't like to ask that," said the old man, trembling.

"What's that?" she screamed at him. "Do you dare to answer the Tzaritza? If you do not set off this minute, I'll have your head cut off and your body thrown to the dogs."

Unwillingly the old man hobbled off. He came to the shore, and cried out with a windy, quavering old voice,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

[p. 225]

Nothing happened.

The old man thought of his wife, and what would happen to him if she were still Tzaritza when he came home. Again he called out,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

Nothing happened, nothing at all.

A third time, with the tears running down his face, he called out in his windy, creaky, quavering old voice,--

"Head in air and tail in sea,
 Fish, fish, listen to me."

Suddenly there was a loud noise, louder and louder over the sea. The sun hid itself. The sea broke into waves, and the waves piled themselves one upon another. The sky and the sea turned black, and there was a great roaring wind that lifted the white crests of the waves and tossed them abroad over the waters. The golden fish came up out of the storm and spoke out of the sea.

"What is it now?" says he, in a voice more terrible than the voice of the storm itself.

"O fish," says the old man, trembling like a reed shaken by the storm, "my old woman is worse than before. She is tired of being Tzaritza. She wants to be the ruler of the seas, so that all the waters shall

[p. 226]

obey her and all the fishes be her servants."

The golden fish said nothing, nothing at all. He turned over and went down into the deep seas. And the wind from the sea was so strong that the old man could hardly stand against it. For a long time he waited, afraid to go home; but at last the storm calmed, and it grew towards evening, and he hobbled back, thinking to creep in and hide amongst the straw.

As he came near, he listened for the trumpets and the drums. He heard nothing except the wind from the sea rustling the little leaves of birch trees. He looked for the palace. It was gone, and where it had been was a little tumbledown hut of earth and logs. It seemed to the old fisherman that he knew the little hut, and he looked at it with joy. And he went to the door of the hut, and there was sitting his old woman in a ragged dress, cleaning out a saucepan, and singing in a creaky old voice. And this time she was glad to see him, and they sat down together on the bench and drank tea without sugar, because they had not any money.

They began to live again as they used to live, and the old man grew happier every day. He fished and fished, and many were the fish that

[p. 227]

he caught, and of many kinds; but never again did he catch another golden fish that could talk like a human being. I doubt whether he would have said anything to his wife about it, even if he had caught one every day.

"What a horrid old woman!" said Maroosia.

"I wonder the old fisherman forgave her," said Ivan.

"I think he might have beaten her a little," said Maroosia. "she deserved it."

"Well," said old Peter, "supposing we could have everything we wanted for the asking, I wonder how it would be. Perhaps God knew what He was doing when He made those golden fishes rare."

"Are there really any of them?" asked Vanya.

"Well, there was once one, anyhow," said old Peter; and then he rolled his nets neatly together, hung them on the fence, and went into the hut to make the dinner. And Vanya and Maroosia went in with him to help him as much as they could; though Vanya was wondering all the time whether he could make a net, and throw it in the little river where old Peter fished, and perhaps pull out a golden fish that would speak to him with the voice of a human being.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228]

 

WHO LIVED IN THE SKULL?

Once upon a time a horse's skull lay on the open plain. It had been picked clean by the ants, and shone white in the sunlight.

Little Burrowing Mouse came along, twirling his whiskers and looking at the world. He saw the white skull, and thought it was as good as a palace. He stood up in front of it and called out,--

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

No one answered, for there was no one inside.

"I will live there myself," says little Burrowing Mouse, and in he went, and set up house in the horse's skull.

Croaking Frog came along, a jump, three long strides, and a jump again.

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

[p. 229]

"I am Burrowing Mouse; who are you?"

"I am Croaking Frog."

"Come in and make yourself at home."

So the frog went in, and they began to live, the two of them together.

Hare Hide-in-the-Hill came running by.

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

"Burrowing Mouse and Croaking Frog. Who are you?"

"I am Hare Hide-in-the-Hill."

"Come along in."

So the hare put his ears down and went in, and they began to live, the three of them together.

Then the fox came running by.

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

"Burrowing Mouse and Croaking Frog and Hare Hide-in-the-Hill. Who are you?"

"I am Fox Run-about-Everywhere."

"Come along in; we've room for you."

So the fox went in, and they began to live, the four of them together.

Then the wolf came prowling by, and saw the skull.

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

[p. 230]

"Burrowing Mouse, and Croaking Frog, and Hare Hide-in-the-Hill, and Fox Run-about-Everywhere. Who are you?"

"I am Wolf Leap-out-of-the-Bushes."

"Come in then."

So the wolf went in, and they began to live, the five of them together.

And then there came along the Bear. He was very slow and very heavy.

"Little house, little house! Who lives in the little house?"

"Burrowing Mouse, and Croaking Frog, and Hare Hide-in-the-Hill, and Fox Run-about-Everywhere, and Wolf Leap-out-of-the-Bushes. Who are you?"

"I am Bear Squash-the-Lot."

And the Bear sat down on the horse's skull, and squashed the whole lot of them.

The way to tell that story is to make one hand the skull, and the fingers and thumb of the other hand the animals that go in one by one. At least that was the way old Peter told it; and when it came to the end, and the Bear came along, why, the Bear was old Peter himself, who squashed both little hands, and Vanya or Maroosia, whichever it was, all together in one big hug.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 231]

 

ALENOUSHKA AND HER BROTHER.

Once upon a time there were two orphan children, a little boy and a little girl. Their father and mother were dead, and they had not even an old grandfather to spend his time in telling them stories. They were alone. The little boy was called Vanoushka, [*3] and the little girl's name was Alenoushka. [*3]

They set out together to walk through the whole of the great wide world. It was a long journey they set out on, and they did not think of any end to it, but only of moving on and on, and never stopping long enough in one place to be unhappy there.

They were travelling one day over a broad plain, padding along on their little bare feet. There were no trees on the plain, no bushes; open flat country as far as you could see, and the great sun up in the sky burning the grass and making their throats dry, and the sandy ground so hot that they could scarcely bear to set their feet on it. All day from early morning they had been walking, and the heat grew greater and greater towards noon.

[p. 232]

"Oh," said little Vanoushka, "my throat is so dry. I want a drink. I must have a drink--just a little drink of cool water."

"We must go on," said Alenoushka, "till we come to a well. Then we will drink."

They went on along the track, with their eyes burning and their throats as dry as sand on a stove.

But presently Vanoushka cried out joyfully. He saw a horse's hoofmark in the ground. And it was full of water, like a little well.

"Sister, sister," says he, "the horse has made a little well for me with his great hoof, and now we can have a drink; and oh, but I am thirsty!"

"Not yet, brother," says Alenoushka. "If you drink from the hoofmark of a horse, you will turn into a little foal, and that would never do."

"I am so very thirsty," says Vanoushka; but he did as his sister told him, and they walked on together under the burning sun.

[p. 233]

A little farther on Vanoushka saw the hoof-mark of a cow, and there was water in it glittering in the sun.

"Sister, sister," says Vanoushka, "the cow has made a little well for me, and now I can have a drink."

"Not yet, brother," says Alenoushka. "If you drink from the hoofmark of a cow, you will turn into a little calf, and that would never do. We must go on till we come to a well. There we will drink and rest ourselves. There will be trees by the well, and shadows, and we will lie down there by the quiet water and cool our hands and feet, and perhaps our eyes will stop burning."

So they went on farther along the track that scorched the bare soles of their feet, and under the sun that burned their heads and their little bare necks. The sun was high in the sky above them, and it seemed to Vanoushka that they would never come to the well.

But when they had walked on and on, and he was nearly crying with thirst, only that the sun had dried up all his tears and burnt them before they had time to come into his eyes, he saw another footprint. It was quite a tiny footprint, divided in the middle--the footprint of

[p. 234]

a sheep; and in it was a little drop of clear water, sparkling in the sun. He said nothing to his sister, nothing at all. But he went down on his hands and knees and drank that water, that little drop of clear water, to cool his burning throat. And he had no sooner drunk it than he had turned into a little lamb...

"A little white lamb," said Maroosia.

"With a black nose," said Vanya.

A little lamb, said old Peter, a little lamb who ran round and round Alenoushka, frisking and leaping, with its little tail tossing in the air.

Alenoushka looked round for her brother, but could not see him. But there was the little lamb, leaping round her, trying to lick her face, and there in the ground was the print left by the sheep's foot.

She guessed at once what had happened, and burst into tears. There was a hayrick close by, and under the hayrick Alenoushka sat down and wept. The little lamb, seeing her so sad, stood gravely in front of her; but not for long, for he was a little lamb, and he could not help himself. However sad he felt, he had to leap and frisk in the sun, and toss his little white tail.

Presently a fine gentleman came riding by on his big black horse. He

[p. 235]

stopped when he came to the hayrick. He was very much surprised at seeing a beautiful little girl sitting there, crying her eyes out, while a white lamb frisked this way and that, and played before her, and now and then ran up to her and licked the tears from her face with its little pink tongue.

"What is your name," says the fine gentleman, "and why are you in trouble? Perhaps I may be able to help you."

"My name is Alenoushka, and this is my little brother Vanoushka, whom I love." And she told him the whole story.

"Well, I can hardly believe all that," says the fine gentleman, "But come with me, and I will dress you in fine clothes, and set silver ornaments in your hair, and bracelets of gold on your little brown wrists. And as for the lamb, he shall come too, if you love him. Wherever you are there he shall be, and you shall never be parted from him."

And so Alenoushka took her little brother in her arms, and the fine gentleman lifted them up before him on the big black horse, and galloped home with them across the plain to his big house not far from the river. And when he got home he made a feast and married Alenoushka, and they lived together so happily that good people rejoiced to see them, and bad ones were jealous. And the little lamb

[p. 236]

lived in the house, and never grew any bigger, but always frisked and played, and followed Alenoushka wherever she went.

And then one day, when the fine gentleman had ridden far away to the town to buy a new bracelet for Alenoushka, there came an old witch. Ugly she was, with only one tooth in her head, and wicked as ever went about the world doing evil to decent folk. She begged from Alenoushka, and said she was hungry, and Alenoushka begged her to share her dinner. And she put a spell in the wine that Alenoushka drank, so that Alenoushka fell ill, and before evening, when the fine gentleman came riding back, had become pale, pale as snow, and as thin as an old stick.

"My dear," says the fine gentleman, "what is the matter with you?"

"Perhaps I shall be better to-morrow," says Alenoushka.

Well, the next day the gentleman rode into the fields, and the old hag came again while he was out.

"Would you like me to cure you?" says she. "I know a way to make you as well as ever you were. Plump you will be, and pretty again, before your husband comes riding home."

[p. 237]

"And what must I do?" says Alenoushka, crying to think herself so ugly.

"You must go to the river and bathe this afternoon," says the old witch. "I will be there and put a spell on the water. Secretly you must go, for if any one knows whither you have gone my spell will not work."

So Alenoushka wrapped a shawl about her head, and slipped out of the house and went to the river. Only the little lamb, Vanoushka, knew where she had gone. He followed her, leaping about, and tossing his little white tail. The old witch was waiting for her. She sprang out of the bushes by the riverside, and seized Alenoushka, and tore off her pretty white dress, and fastened a heavy stone about her neck, and threw her from the bank into a deep place, so that she sank to the bottom of the river. Then the old witch, the wicked hag, put on Alenoushka's pretty white dress, and cast a spell, and made herself so like Alenoushka to look at that nobody could tell the difference. Only the little lamb had seen everything that had happened.

The fine gentleman came riding home in the evening, and he rejoiced when he saw his dear Alenoushka well again, with plump pink cheeks, and a smile on her rosy lips.

[p. 238]

But the little lamb knew everything. He was sad and melancholy, and would not eat, and went every morning and every evening to the river, and there wandered about the banks, and cried, "Baa, baa," and was answered by the sighing of the wind in the long reeds.

The witch saw that the lamb went off by himself every morning and every evening. She watched where he went, and when she knew she began to hate the lamb; and she gave orders for the sticks to be cut, and the iron cauldron to be heated, and the steel knives made sharp. She sent a servant to catch the lamb; and she said to the fine gentleman, who thought all the time that she was Alenoushka, "It is time for the lamb to be killed, and made into a tasty stew."

The fine gentleman was astonished.

"What," says he, "you want to have the lamb killed? Why, you called it your brother when first I found you by the hayrick in the plain. You were always giving it caresses and sweet words. You loved it so much that I was sick of the sight of it, and now you give orders for its throat to be cut. Truly," says he, "the mind of woman is like the wind in summer."

The lamb ran away when he saw that the servant had come to catch him.

[p. 239]

He heard the sharpening of the knives, and had seen the cutting of the wood, and the great cauldron taken from its place. He was frightened, and he ran away, and came to the river bank, where the wind was sighing through the tall reeds. And there he sang a farewell song to his sister, thinking he had not long to live. The servant followed the lamb cunningly, and crept near to catch him, and heard his little song. This is what he sang:--

"Alenoushka, little sister,
 They are going to slaughter me;
 They are cutting wooden fagots,
 They are heating iron cauldrons,
 They are sharpening knives of steel."

And Alenoushka, lamenting, answered the lamb from the bottom of the river:--

"O my brother Ivanoushka,
 A heavy stone is round my throat,
 Silken grass grows through my fingers,
 Yellow sand lies on my breast.

The servant listened, and marvelled at the miracle of the lamb singing, and the sweet voice answering him from the river. He crept away quietly, and came to the fine gentleman, and told him what he had heard; and they set out together to the river, to watch the lamb, and listen, and see what was happening.

[p. 240]

Click to enlarge
He stepped on one of its fiery wings and pressed it to the ground.

The little white lamb stood on the bank of the river weeping, so that his tears fell into the water. And presently he sang again:--

"Alenoushka, little sister,
 They are going to slaughter me;
 They are cutting wooden fagots,
 They are heating iron cauldrons, They are sharpening knives of steel.

And Alenoushka answered him, lamenting, from the bottom of the river:--

"O my brother Ivanoushka,
 A heavy stone is round my throat,
 Silken grass grows through my fingers,
 Yellow sand lies on my breast."

The fine gentleman heard, and he was sure that the voice was the voice of his own dear wife, and he remembered how she had loved the lamb. He sent his servant to fetch men, and fishing nets and nets of silk. The men came running, and they dragged the river with fishing nets, and brought their nets empty to land. Then they tried with nets of fine silk, and, as they drew them in, there was Alenoushka lying in the nets as if she were asleep.

They brought her to the bank and untied the stone from her white neck, and washed her in fresh water and clothed her in white clothes. But they had no sooner done all this than she woke up, more beautiful than

[p. 241]

ever she had been before, though then she was pretty enough, God knows. She woke, and sprang up, and threw her arms round the neck of the little white lamb, who suddenly became once more her little brother Vanoushka, who had been so thirsty as to drink water from the hoofmark of a sheep. And Vanoushka laughed and shouted in the sunshine, and the fine gentleman wept tears of joy. And they all praised God and kissed each other, and went home together, and began to live as happily as before, even more happily, because Vanoushka was no longer a lamb. But as soon as they got home the fine gentleman turned the old witch out of the house. And she became an ugly old hag, and went away to the deep woods, shrieking as she went.

"And did she ever come back again?" asked Ivan.

"No, she never came back again," said old Peter. "Once was enough."

"And what happened to Vanoushka when he grew up?"

"He grew up as handsome as Alenoushka was pretty. And he became a great hunter. And he married the sister of the fine gentleman. And they all lived happily together, and ate honey every day, with white bread and new milk."

Footnotes

^231:3 That means that they were called Ivan and Elena. Vanoushka and Alenoushka are affectionate forms of these names.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 242]

 

THE FIRE-BIRD, THE HORSE OF POWER, AND THE PRINCESS VASILISSA.

Once upon a time a strong and powerful Tzar ruled in a country far away. And among his servants was a young archer, and this archer had a horse--a horse of power--such a horse as belonged to the wonderful men of long ago--a great horse with a broad chest, eyes like fire, and hoofs of iron. There are no such horses nowadays. They sleep with the strong men who rode them, the bogatirs, until the time comes when Russia has need of them. Then the great horses will thunder up from under the ground, and the valiant men leap from the graves in the armour they have worn so long. The strong men will sit those horses of power, and there will be swinging of clubs and thunder of hoofs, and

[p. 243]

the earth will be swept clean from the enemies of God and the Tzar. So my grandfather used to say, and he was as much older than I as I am older than you, little ones, and so he should know.

Well, one day long ago, in the green time of the year, the young archer rode through the forest on his horse of power. The trees were green; there were little blue flowers on the ground under the trees; the squirrels ran in the branches, and the hares in the undergrowth; but no birds sang. The young archer rode along the forest path and listened for the singing of the birds, but there was no singing. The forest was silent, and the only noises in it were the scratching of four-footed beasts, the dropping of fir cones, and the heavy stamping of the horse of power in the soft path.

"What has come to the birds?" said the young archer.

He had scarcely said this before he saw a big curving feather lying in the path before him. The feather was larger than a swan's, larger than an eagle's. It lay in the path, glittering like a flame; for the sun was on it, and it was a feather of pure gold. Then he knew why there was no singing in the forest. For he knew that the firebird had flown

[p. 244]

that way, and that the feather in the path before him was a feather from its burning breast.

The horse of power spoke and said,--

"Leave the golden feather where it lies. If you take it you will be sorry for it, and know the meaning of fear."

But the brave young archer sat on the horse of power and looked at the golden feather, and wondered whether to take it or not. He had no wish to learn what it was to be afraid, but he thought, "If I take it and bring it to the Tzar my master, he will be pleased; and he will not send me away with empty hands, for no Tzar in the world has a feather from the burning breast of the fire-bird." And the more he thought, the more he wanted to carry the feather to the Tzar. And in the end he did not listen to the words of the horse of power. He leapt from the saddle, picked up the golden feather of the fire-bird, mounted his horse again, and galloped back through the green forest till he came to the palace of the Tzar.

He went into the palace, and bowed before the Tzar and said,--

"O Tzar, I have brought you a feather of the fire-bird."

[p. 245]

The Tzar looked gladly at the feather, and then at the young archer.

"Thank you," says he; "but if you have brought me a feather of the fire-bird, you will be able to bring me the bird itself. I should like to see it. A feather is not a fit gift to bring to the Tzar. Bring the bird itself, or, I swear by my sword, your head shall no longer sit between your shoulders!"

The young archer bowed his head and went out. Bitterly he wept, for he knew now what it was to be afraid. He went out into the courtyard, where the horse of power was waiting for him, tossing its head and stamping on the ground.

"Master," says the horse of power, "why do you weep?"

"The Tzar has told me to bring him the firebird, and no man on earth can do that," says the young archer, and he bowed his head on his breast.

"I told you," says the horse of power, "that if you took the feather you would learn the meaning of fear. Well, do not be frightened yet, and do not weep. The trouble is not now; the trouble lies before you. Go to the Tzar and ask him to have a hundred sacks of maize scattered

[p. 246]

over the open field, and let this be done at midnight."

The young archer went back into the palace and begged the Tzar for this, and the Tzar ordered that at midnight a hundred sacks of maize should be scattered in the open field.

Next morning, at the first redness in the sky, the young archer rode out on the horse of power, and came to the open field. The ground was scattered all over with maize. In the middle of the field stood a great oak with spreading boughs. The young archer leapt to the ground, took off the saddle, and let the horse of power loose to wander as he pleased about the field. Then he climbed up into the oak and hid himself among the green boughs.

The sky grew red and gold, and the sun rose. Suddenly there was a noise in the forest round the field. The trees shook and swayed, and almost fell. There was a mighty wind. The sea piled itself into waves with crests of foam, and the firebird came flying from the other side of the world. Huge and golden and flaming in the sun, it flew, dropped down with open wings into the field, and began to eat the maize.

The horse of power wandered in the field. This way he went, and that,

[p. 247]

but always he came a little nearer to the fire-bird. Nearer and nearer came the horse. He came close up to the firebird, and then suddenly stepped on one of its spreading fiery wings and pressed it heavily to the ground. The bird struggled, flapping mightily with its fiery wings, but it could not get away. The young archer slipped down from the tree, bound the fire-bird with three strong ropes, swung it on his back, saddled the horse, and rode to the palace of the Tzar.

The young archer stood before the Tzar, and his back was bent under the great weight of the fire-bird, and the broad wings of the bird hung on either side of him like fiery shields, and there was a trail of golden feathers on the floor. The young archer swung the magic bird to the foot of the throne before the Tzar; and the Tzar was glad, because since the beginning of the world no Tzar had seen the fire-bird flung before him like a wild duck caught in a snare.

The Tzar looked at the fire-bird and laughed with pride. Then he lifted his eyes and looked at the young archer, and says he,--

"As you have known how to take the fire-bird, you will know how to bring me my bride, for whom I have long been waiting. In the land of Never, on the very edge of the world, where the red sun rises in flame

[p. 248]

from behind the sea, lives the Princess Vasilissa. I will marry none but her. Bring her to me, and I will reward you with silver and gold. But if you do not bring her, then, by my sword, your head will no longer sit between your shoulders!"

The young archer wept bitter tears, and went out into the courtyard, where the horse of power was, stamping the ground with its hoofs of iron and tossing its thick mane.

"Master, why do you weep?" asked the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered me to go to the land of Never, and to bring back the Princess Vasilissa."

"Do not weep--do not grieve. The trouble is not yet; the trouble is to come. Go to the Tzar and ask him for a silver tent with a golden roof, and for all kinds of food and drink to take with us on the journey."

The young archer went in and asked the Tzar for this, and the Tzar gave him a silver tent with silver hangings and a gold-embroidered roof, and every kind of rich wine and the tastiest of foods.

Then the young archer mounted the horse of power and rode off to the land of Never. On and on he rode, many days and nights, and came at

[p. 249]

last to the edge of the world, where the red sun rises in flame from behind the deep blue sea.

On the shore of the sea the young archer reined in the horse of power, and the heavy hoofs of the horse sank in the sand. He shaded his eyes and looked out over the blue water, and there was the Princess Vasilissa in a little silver boat, rowing with golden oars.

The young archer rode back a little way to where the sand ended and the green world began. There he loosed the horse to wander where he pleased, and to feed on the green grass. Then on the edge of the shore, where the green grass ended and grew thin and the sand began, he set up the shining tent, with its silver hangings and its gold embroidered roof. In the tent he set out the tasty dishes and the rich flagons of wine which the Tzar had given him, and he sat himself down in the tent and began to regale himself, while he waited for the Princess Vasilissa.

The Princess Vasilissa dipped her golden oars in the blue water, and the little silver boat moved lightly through the dancing waves. She sat in the little boat and looked over the blue sea to the edge of the world, and there, between the golden sand and the green earth, she saw the tent standing, silver and gold in the sun. She dipped her oars,

[p. 250]

and came nearer to see it the better. The nearer she came the fairer seemed the tent, and at last she rowed to the shore and grounded her little boat on the golden sand, and stepped out daintily and came up to the tent. She was a little frightened, and now and again she stopped and looked back to where the silver boat lay on the sand with the blue sea beyond it. The young archer said not a word, but went on regaling himself on the pleasant dishes he had set out there in the tent.

At last the Princess Vasilissa came up to the tent and looked in.

The young archer rose and bowed before her. Says he,--

"Good-day to you, Princess! Be so kind as to come in and take bread and salt with me, and taste my foreign wines."

And the Princess Vasilissa came into the tent and sat down with the young archer, and ate sweetmeats with him, and drank his health in a golden goblet of the wine the Tzar had given him. Now this wine was heavy, and the last drop from the goblet had no sooner trickled down her little slender throat than her eyes closed against her will, once, twice, and again.

"Ah me!" says the Princess, "it is as if the night itself had perched on my eyelids, and yet it is but noon."

[p. 251]

And the golden goblet dropped to the ground from her little fingers, and she leant back on a cushion and fell instantly asleep. If she had been beautiful before, she was lovelier still when she lay in that deep sleep in the shadow of the tent.

Quickly the young archer called to the horse of power. Lightly he lifted the Princess in his strong young arms. Swiftly he leapt with her into the saddle. Like a feather she lay in the hollow of his left arm, and slept while the iron hoofs of the great horse thundered over the ground.

They came to the Tzar's palace, and the young archer leapt from the horse of power and carried the Princess into the palace. Great was the joy of the Tzar; but it did not last for long.

"Go, sound the trumpets for our wedding," he said to his servants; "let all the bells be rung."

The bells rang out and the trumpets sounded, and at the noise of the horns and the ringing of the bells the Princess Vasilissa woke up and looked about her.

"What is this ringing of bells," says she, "and this noise of trumpets? And where, oh, where is the blue sea, and my little silver

[p. 252]

boat with its golden oars?" And the Princess put her hand to her eyes.

"The blue sea is far away," says the Tzar, "and for your little silver boat I give you a golden throne. The trumpets sound for our wedding, and the bells are ringing for our joy."

But the Princess turned her face away from the Tzar; and there was no wonder in that, for he was old, and his eyes were not kind.

And she looked with love at the young archer; and there was no wonder in that either, for he was a young man fit to ride the horse of power.

The Tzar was angry with the Princess Vasilissa, but his anger was as useless as his joy.

"Why, Princess," says he, "will you not marry me, and forget your blue sea and your silver boat?"

"In the middle of the deep blue sea lies a great stone," says the Princess, "and under that stone is hidden my wedding dress. If I cannot wear that dress I will marry nobody at all."

Instantly the Tzar turned to the young archer, who was waiting before the throne.

"Ride swiftly back," says he, "to the land of Never, where the red sun rises in flame. There--do you hear what the Princess says?--a great stone lies in the middle of the sea. Under that stone is hidden her

[p. 253]

wedding dress. Ride swiftly. Bring back that dress, or, by my sword, your head shall no longer sit between your shoulders!"

The young archer wept bitter tears, and went out into the courtyard, where the horse of power was waiting for him, champing its golden bit.

"There is no way of escaping death this time," he said.

"Master, why do you weep?" asked the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered me to ride to the land of Never, to fetch the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa from the bottom of the deep blue sea. Besides, the dress is wanted for the Tzar's wedding, and I love the Princess myself."

"What did I tell you?" says the horse of power. "I told you that there would be trouble if you picked up the golden feather from the firebird's burning breast. Well, do not be afraid. The trouble is not yet; the trouble is to come. Up! into the saddle with you, and away for the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa!"

The young archer leapt into the saddle, and the horse of power, with his thundering hoofs, carried him swiftly through the green forests and over the bare plains, till they came to the edge of the world, to the land of Never, where the red sun rises in flame from behind the

[p. 254]

deep blue sea. There they rested, at the very edge of the sea.

The young archer looked sadly over the wide waters, but the horse of power tossed its mane and did not look at the sea, but on the shore. This way and that it looked, and saw at last a huge lobster moving slowly, sideways, along the golden sand.

Nearer and nearer came the lobster, and it was a giant among lobsters, the Tzar of all the lobsters; and it moved slowly along the shore, while the horse of power moved carefully and as if by accident, until it stood between the lobster and the sea. Then, when the lobster came close by, the horse of power lifted an iron hoof and set it firmly on the lobster's tail.

"You will be the death of me!" screamed the lobster--as well he might, with the heavy foot of the horse of power pressing his tail into the sand. "Let me live, and I will do whatever you ask of me."

"Very well," says the horse of power; "we will let you live," and he slowly lifted his foot. "But this is what you shall do for us. In the middle of the blue sea lies a great stone, and under that stone is hidden the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa. Bring it here."

[p. 255]

The lobster groaned with the pain in his tail. Then he cried out in a voice that could be heard all over the deep blue sea. And the sea was disturbed, and from all sides lobsters in thousands made their way towards the bank. And the huge lobster that was the oldest of them all and the Tzar of all the lobsters that live between the rising and the setting of the sun, gave them the order and sent them back into the sea. And the young archer sat on the horse of power and waited.

After a little time the sea was disturbed again, and the lobsters in their thousands came to the shore, and with them they brought a golden casket in which was the wedding dress of the Princess Vasilissa. They had taken it from under the great stone that lay in the middle of the sea.

The Tzar of all the lobsters raised himself painfully on his bruised tail and gave the casket into the hands of the young archer, and instantly the horse of power turned himself about and galloped back to the palace of the Tzar, far, far away, at the other side of the green forests and beyond the treeless plains.

The young archer went into the palace and gave the casket into the hands of the Princess, and looked at her with sadness in his eyes, and she looked at him with love. Then she went away into an inner chamber,

[p. 256]

and came back in her wedding dress, fairer than the spring itself. Great was the joy of the Tzar. The wedding feast was made ready, and the bells rang, and flags waved above the palace.

The Tzar held out his hand to the Princess, and looked at her with his old eyes. But she would not take his hand.

"No," says she; "I will marry nobody until the man who brought me here has done penance in boiling water."

Instantly the Tzar turned to his servants and ordered them to make a great fire, and to fill a great cauldron with water and set it on the fire, and, when the water should be at its hottest, to take the young archer and throw him into it, to do penance for having taken the Princess Vasilissa away from the land of Never.

There was no gratitude in the mind of that Tzar.

Swiftly the servants brought wood and made a mighty fire, and on it they laid a huge cauldron of water, and built the fire round the walls of the cauldron. The fire burned hot and the water steamed. The fire burned hotter, and the water bubbled and seethed. They made ready to take the young archer, to throw him into the cauldron.

[p. 257]

"Oh, misery!" thought the young archer. "Why did I ever take the golden feather that had fallen from the fire-bird's burning breast? Why did I not listen to the wise words of the horse of power?" And he remembered the horse of power, and he begged the Tzar,--

"O lord Tzar, I do not complain. I shall presently die in the heat of the water on the fire. Suffer me, before I die, once more to see my horse."

"Let him see his horse," says the Princess.

"Very well," says the Tzar. "Say good-bye to your horse, for you will not ride him again. But let your farewells be short, for we are waiting."

The young archer crossed the courtyard and came to the horse of power, who was scraping the ground with his iron hoofs.

"Farewell, my horse of power," says the young archer. "I should have listened to your words of wisdom, for now the end is come, and we shall never more see the green trees pass above us and the ground disappear beneath us, as we race the wind between the earth and the sky."

"Why so?" says the horse of power.

"The Tzar has ordered that I am to be boiled to death--thrown into that cauldron that is seething on the great fire."

[p. 258]

"Fear not," says the horse of power, "for the Princess Vasilissa has made him do this, and the end of these things is better than I thought. Go back, and when they are ready to throw you in the cauldron, do you run boldly and leap yourself into the boiling water."

The young archer went back across the courtyard, and the servants made ready to throw him into the cauldron.

"Are you sure that the water is boiling?" says the Princess Vasilissa.

"It bubbles and seethes," said the servants.

"Let me see for myself," says the Princess, and she went to the fire and waved her hand above the cauldron. And some say there was something in her hand, and some say there was not.

"It is boiling," says she, and the servants laid hands on the young archer; but he threw them from him, and ran and leapt boldly before them all into the very middle of the cauldron.

Twice he sank below the surface, borne round with the bubbles and foam of the boiling water. Then he leapt from the cauldron and stood before the Tzar and the Princess. He had become so beautiful a youth that all who saw cried aloud in wonder.

"This is a miracle," says the Tzar. And the Tzar looked at the

[p. 259]

beautiful young archer, and thought of himself--of his age, of his bent back, and his gray beard, and his toothless gums. "I too will become beautiful," thinks he, and he rose from his throne and clambered into the cauldron, and was boiled to death in a moment.

And the end of the story? They buried the Tzar, and made the young archer Tzar in his place. He married the Princess Vasilissa, and lived many years with her in love and good fellowship. And he built a golden stable for the horse of power, and never forgot what he owed to him.

     
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260]

 

THE HUNTER AND HIS WIFE.

It sometimes happened that the two children asked too many questions even for old Peter, though he was the kindest old Russian peasant who ever was a grandfather. Sometimes he was busy; sometimes he was tired, and really could not think of the right answer; sometimes he did not know the right answer. And once, when Vanya asked him why the sun was hot, and his sister Maroosia went on and on asking if the sun was a fire, who lit it? and if it was burning, why didn't it burn out? old Peter grumbled that he would not answer any more.

For a moment the two children were quiet, and then Maroosia asked one more question.

Old Peter looked up from the net he was mending. "Maroosia, my dear,"

[p. 261]

he said, "you had better watch the tip of your tongue, or perhaps, when you are grown up and have a husband, the same thing will happen to you that happened to the wife of the huntsman who saw a snake in a burning wood-pile."

"Oh, tell us what happened to her!" said Maroosia.

"That is another question," said old Peter; "but I'll tell you, and then perhaps you won't ask any more, and will give my old head a rest."

And then he told them the story of the hunter and his wife.

Once upon a time there was a hunter who went out into the forest to shoot game. He had a wife and two dogs. His wife was for ever asking questions, so that he was glad to get away from her into the forest. And she did not like dogs, and said they were always bringing dirt into the house with their muddy paws. So that the dogs were glad to get away into the forest with the hunter.

One day the hunter and the two dogs wandered all day through the deep woods, and never got a sight of a bird; no, they never even saw a hare. All day long they wandered on and saw nothing. The hunter had not fired a cartridge. He did not want to go home and have to answer

[p. 262]

his wife's questions about why he had an empty bag, so he went deeper and deeper into the thick forest. And suddenly, as it grew towards evening, the sharp smell of burning wood floated through the trees, and the hunter, looking about him, saw the flickering of a fire. He made his way towards it, and found a clearing in the forest, and a wood pile in the middle of it, and it was burning so fiercely that he could scarcely come near it.

And this was the marvel, that in the middle of the blazing timbers was sitting a great snake, curled round and round upon itself and waving its head above the flames.

As soon as it saw the hunter it called out, in a loud hissing voice, to come near.

He went as near as he could, shading his face from the heat.

"My good man," says the snake, "pull me out of the fire, and you shall understand the talk of the beasts and the songs of the birds."

"I'll be happy to help you," says the hunter, "but how? for the flames are so hot that I cannot reach you."

"Put the barrel of your gun into the fire, and I'll crawl out along it."

The hunter put the barrel of his long gun into the flames, and

[p. 263]

instantly the snake wound itself about it, and so escaped out of the fire.

"Thank you, my good man," says the snake; "you shall know henceforward the language of all living things. But one thing you must remember. You must not tell any one of this, for if you tell you will die the death; and man only dies once, and that will be an end of your life and your knowledge."

Then the snake slipped off along the ground, and almost before the hunter knew it was going, it was gone, and he never saw it again.

Well, he went on with the two dogs, looking for something to shoot at; and when the dark night fell he was still far from home, away in the deep forest.

"I am tired," he thought, "and perhaps there will be birds stirring in the early morning. I will sleep the night here, and try my luck at sunrise."

He made a fire of twigs and broken branches, and lay down beside it, together with his dogs. He had scarcely lain down to sleep when he heard the dogs talking together and calling each other "Brother." He understood every word they said.

"Well, brother," says the first, "you sleep here and look after our

[p. 264]

master, while I run home to look after the house and yard. It will soon be one o'clock, and when the master is away that is the time for thieves."

"Off with you, brother, and God be with you," says the second.

And the hunter heard the first dog go bounding away through the undergrowth, while the second lay still, with its head between its paws, watching its master blinking at the fire.

Early in the morning the hunter was awakened by the noise of the dog pushing through the brushwood on its way back. He heard how the dogs greeted each other.

"Well, and how are you, brother?" says the first.

"Finely," says the second; "and how's yourself?"

"Finely too. Did the night pass well?"

"Well enough, thanks be to God. But with you, brother? How was it at home?"

"Oh, badly. I ran home, and the mistress, when she sees me, sings out, 'What the devil are you doing here without your master? Well, there's your supper;' and she threw me a crust of bread, burnt to a black cinder. I snuffed it and snuffed it, but as for eating it, it was burnt through. No dog alive could have made a meal of it. And with

[p. 265]

that she ups with a poker and beats me. Brother, she counted all my ribs and nearly broke each one of them. But at night, later on--just as I thought--thieves came into the yard, and were going to clear out the barn and the larder. But I let loose such a howl, and leapt upon them so vicious and angry, that they had little thought to spare for other people's goods, and had all they could do to get away whole themselves. And so I spent the night."

The hunter heard all that the dogs said, and kept it in mind. "Wait a bit, my good woman," says he, "and see what I have to say to you when I get home."

That morning his luck was good, and he came home with a couple of hares and three or four woodcock.

"Good-day, mistress," says he to his wife, who was standing in the doorway.

"Good-day, master," says she.

"Last night one of the dogs came home."

"It did," says she.

"And how did you feed it?"

"Feed it, my love?" says she. "I gave it a whole basin of milk, and crumbled a loaf of bread for it."

[p. 266]

"You lie, you old witch," says the hunter; "you gave it nothing but a burnt crust, and you beat it with the poker."

The old woman was so surprised that she let the truth out of her mouth before she knew. She says to her husband, "How on earth did you know all that?"

"I won't tell you," says the hunter.

"Tell me, tell me," begs the old woman, just like Maroosia when she wants to know too much.

"I can't tell you," says the hunter; "it's forbidden me to tell."

"Tell me, dear one," says she.

"Truly, I can't."

"Tell me, my little pigeon."

"If I tell you I shall die the death."

"Rubbish, my dearest; only tell me."

"But I shall die."

"Just tell me that one little thing. You won't die for that."

And so she bothered him and bothered him, until he thought, "There's nothing to be done if a woman sets her mind on a thing. I'd better die and get it over at once."

So he put on a clean white shirt, and lay down on the bench in the

[p. 267]

corner, under the sacred images, and made all ready for his death; and was just going to tell his wife the whole truth about the snake and the wood-pile, and how he knew the language of all living things. But just then there was a great clucking in the yard, and some of the hens ran into the cottage, and after them came the cock, scolding first one and then another, and boasting,--

"That's the way to deal with you," says the cock; and the hunter, lying there in his white shirt, ready to die, heard and understood every word, "Yes," says the cock, as he drove the hens about the room, "you see I am not such a fool as our master here, who does not know how to keep a single wife in order. Why, I have thirty of you and more, and the whole lot hear from me sharp enough if they do not do as I say."

As soon as the hunter heard this he made up his mind to be a fool no longer. He jumped up from the bench, and took his whip and gave his wife such a beating that she never asked him another question to this day. And she has never yet learnt how it was that he knew what she did in the hut while he was away in the forest.

"Yes," said Maroosia, "but then she was a bad woman; and besides, my

[p. 268]

husband would never call me an old witch."

"Old witch!" said Vanya, and bolted out of the hut with Maroosia after him; and so old Peter was left in peace.

    
Old Peter's Russian Tales, by Arthur Ransome, [1916], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 269]

 

THE THREE MEN OF POWER--EVENING, MIDNIGHT, AND SUNRISE.

Long ago there lived a King, and he had three daughters, the loveliest in all the world. He loved them so well that he built a palace for them underground, lest the rough winds should blow on them or the red sun scorch their delicate faces. A wonderful palace it was, down there underground, with fountains and courts, and lamps burning, and precious stones glittering in the light of the lamps. And the three lovely princesses grew up in that palace underground, and knew no other light but that of the coloured lanterns, and had never seen the broad world that lies open under the sun by day and under the stars by night. Indeed, they did not know that there was a world

[p. 270]

outside those glittering walls, above that shining ceiling, carved and gilded and set with precious stones.

But it so happened that among the books that were given them to read was one in which was written of the world: how the sun shines in the sky; how trees grow green; how the grass waves in the wind and the leaves whisper together; how the rivers flow between their green banks and through the flowery meadows, until they come to the blue sea that joins the earth and the sky. They read in that book of white-walled towns, of churches with gilded and painted domes, of the brown wooden huts of the peasants, of the great forests, of the ships on the rivers, and of the long roads with the folk moving on them, this way and that, about the world.

And when the King came to see them, as he was used to do, they asked him,--

"Father, is it true that there is a garden in the world?"

"Yes," said the King.

"And green grass?"

"Yes," said the King.

"And little shining flowers?"

"Why, yes," said the King, wondering and stroking his silver beard.

[p. 271]

And the three lovely princesses all begged him at once,--

"Oh, your Majesty, our own little father, whom, we love, let us out to see this world. Let us out just so that we may see this garden, and walk in it on the green grass, and see the shining flowers."

The King turned his head away and tried not to listen to them. But what could he do? They were the loveliest princesses in the world, and when they begged him just to let them walk in the garden he could see the tears in their eyes. And after all, he thought, there were high walls to the garden.

So he called up his army, and set soldiers all round the garden, and a hundred soldiers to each gate, so that no one should come in. And then he let the princesses come up from their underground palace, and step out into the sunshine in the garden, with ten nurses and maids to each princess to see that no harm came to her.

The princesses stepped out into the garden, under the blue sky, shading their eyes at first because they had never before been in the golden sunlight. Soon they were taking hands, and running this way and that along the garden paths and over the green grass, and gathering posies of shining flowers to set in their girdles and to shame their

[p. 272]

golden crowns. And the King sat and watched them with love in his eyes, and was glad to see how happy they were. And after all, he thought, what with the high walls and the soldiers standing to arms, nothing could get in to hurt them.

Click to enlarge
It caught up the princesses and carried them up into the air.

But just as he had quieted his old heart a strong whirlwind came down out of the blue sky, tearing up trees and throwing them aside, and lifting the roofs from the houses. But it did not touch the palace roofs, shining green in the sunlight, and it plucked no trees from the garden. It raged this way and that, and then with its swift whirling arms it caught up the three lovely princesses, and carried them up into the air, over the high walls and over the heads of the guarding soldiers. For a moment the King saw them, his daughters, the three lovely princesses, spinning round and round, as if they were dancing in the sky. A moment later they were no more than little whirling specks, like dust in the sunlight. And then they were out of sight, and the King and all the maids and nurses were alone in the empty garden. The noise of the wind had gone. The soldiers did not dare to speak. The only sound in the King's ears was the sobbing and weeping of the maids and nurses.

[p. 273]

The King called his generals, and made them send the soldiers in all directions over the country to bring back the princesses, if the whirlwind should tire and set them again upon the ground. The soldiers went to the very boundaries of the kingdom, but they came back as they went. Not one of them had seen the three lovely princesses.

Then the King called together all his faithful servants, and promised a great reward to any one who should bring news of the three princesses. It was the same with the servants as with the soldiers. Far and wide they galloped out. Slowly, one by one, they rode back, with bent heads, on tired horses. Not one of them had seen the King's daughters.

Then the King called a grand council of his wise boyars and men of state. They all sat round and listened as the King told his tale and asked if one of them would not undertake the task of finding and rescuing the three princesses. "The wind has not set them down within the boundaries of my kingdom; and now, God knows, they may be in the power of wicked men or worse." He said he would give one of the princesses in marriage to any one who could follow where the wind went and bring his daughters back; yes, and besides, he would make him the richest man in the kingdom. But the boyars and the wise men of state

[p. 274]

sat round in silence. He asked them one by one. They were all silent and afraid. For they were boyars and wise men of state, and not one of them would undertake to follow the whirlwind and rescue the three princesses.

The King wept bitter tears.

"I see," he said, "I have no friends about me in the palace. My soldiers cannot, my servants cannot, and my boyars and wise men will not, bring back my three sweet maids, whom I love better than my kingdom."

And with that he sent heralds throughout the kingdom to announce the news, and to ask if there were none among the common folk, the moujiks, the simple folk like us, who would put his hand to the work of rescuing the three lovely princesses, since not one of the boyars and wise men was willing to do it.

Now, at that time in a certain village lived a poor widow, and she had three sons, strong men, true bogatirs and men of power. All three had been born in a single night: the eldest at evening, the middle one at midnight, and the youngest just as the sky was lightening with the dawn. For this reason they were called Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise. Evening was dusky, with brown eyes and hair; Midnight was dark, with

[p. 275]

eyes and hair as black as charcoal; while Sunrise had hair golden as the sun, and eyes blue as morning sky. And all three were as strong as any of the strong men and mighty bogatirs who have shaken this land of Russia with their tread.

As soon as the King's word had been proclaimed in the village, the three brothers asked for their mother's blessing, which she gave them, kissing them on the forehead and on both cheeks. Then they made ready for the journey and rode off to the capital--Evening on his horse of dusky brown, Midnight on his black horse, and Sunrise on his horse that was as white as clouds in summer. They came to the capital, and as they rode through the streets everybody stopped to look at them, and all the pretty young women waved handkerchiefs at the windows. But the three brothers looked neither to right nor left but straight before them, and they rode to the palace of the King.

They came to the King, bowed low before him, and said,--

"May you live for many years, O King. We have come to you not for feasting but for service. Let us, O King, ride out to rescue your three princesses."

[p. 276]

"God give you success, my good young men," says the King. "What are your names?"

"We are three brothers--Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise."

"What will you have to take with you on the road?"

"For ourselves, O King, we want nothing. Only, do not leave our mother in poverty, for she is old."

The King sent for the old woman, their mother, and gave her a home in his palace, and made her eat and drink at his table, and gave her new boots made by his own cobblers, and new clothes sewn by the very sempstresses who were used to make dresses for the three daughters of the King, who were the loveliest princesses in the world, and had been carried away by the whirlwind. No old woman in Russia was better looked after than the mother of the three young bogatirs and men of power, Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise, while they were away on their adventure seeking the King's daughters.

The young men rode out on their journey. A month they rode together, two months, and in the third month they came to a broad desert plain, where there were no towns, no villages, no farms, and not a human being to be seen. They rode on over the sand, through the rank grass,

[p. 277]

over the stony wastes. At last, on the other side of that desolate plain, they came to a thick forest. They found a path through the thick undergrowth, and rode along that path together into the very heart of the forest. And there, alone in the heart of the forest, they came to a hut, with a railed yard and a shed full of cattle and sheep. They called out with their strong young voices, and were answered by the lowing of the cattle, the bleating of the sheep, and the strong wind in the tops of the great trees.

They rode through the railed yard and came to the hut. Evening leant from his brown horse and knocked on the window. There was no answer. They forced open the door, and found no one at all.

"Well, brothers," says Evening, "let us make ourselves at home. Let us stay here awhile. We have been riding three months. Let us rest, and then ride farther. We shall deal better with our adventure if we come to it as fresh men, and not dusty and weary from the long road."

The others agreed. They tied up their horses, fed them, drew water from the well, and gave them to drink; and then, tired out, they went into the hut, said their prayers to God, and lay down to sleep with

[p. 278]

their weapons close to their hands, like true bogatirs and men of power.

In the morning the youngest brother. Sunrise, said to the eldest brother, Evening,--

"Midnight and I are going hunting to-day, and you shall rest here, and see what sort of dinner you can give us when we come back."

"Very well," says Evening; "but to-morrow I shall go hunting, and one of you shall stay here and cook the dinner."

Nobody made bones about that, and so Evening stood at the door of the hut while the others rode off--Midnight on his black horse, and Sunrise on his horse, white as a summer cloud. They rode off into the forest, and disappeared among the green trees.

Evening watched them out of sight, and then, without thinking twice about what he was doing, went out into the yard, picked out the finest sheep he could see, caught it, killed it, skinned it, cleaned it, and set it in a cauldron on the stove so as to be ready and hot whenever his brothers should come riding back from the forest. As soon as that was done, Evening lay down on the broad bench to rest himself.

He had scarcely lain down before there were a knocking and a rattling

[p. 279]

and a stumbling, and the door opened, and in walked a little man a yard high, with a beard seven yards long [*4] flowing out behind him over both his shoulders. He looked round angrily, and saw Evening, who yawned, and sat up on the bench, and began chuckling at the sight of him. The little man screamed out,--

"What are you chuckling about? How dare you play the master in my house? How dare you kill my best sheep?"

Evening answered him, laughing,--

"Grow a little bigger, and it won't be so hard to see you down there. Till then it will be better for you to keep a civil tongue in your head."

The little man was angry before, but now he was angrier.

"What?" he screamed. "I am little, am I? Well, see what little does!"

And with that he grabbed an old crust of bread, leapt on Evening's shoulders, and began beating him over the head. Yes, and the little fellow was so strong he beat Evening till he was half dead, and was blind in one eye and could not see out of the other. Then, when he was

[p. 280]

 tired, he threw Evening under the bench, took the sheep out of the cauldron, gobbled it up in a few mouthfuls, and, when he had done, went off again into the forest.

When Evening came to his senses again, he bound up his head with a dishcloth, and lay on the ground and groaned.

Midnight and Sunrise rode back, on the black horse and the white, and came to the hut, where they found their brother groaning on the ground, unable to see out of his eyes, and with a dishcloth round his head.

"What are you tied up like that for?" they asked; "and where is our dinner?"

Evening was ashamed to tell them the truth--how he had been thumped about with a crust of bread by a little fellow only a yard high. He moaned and said,--

"O my brothers, I made a fire in the stove, and fell ill from the great heat in this little hut. My head ached. All day I lay senseless, and could neither boil nor roast. I thought my head would burst with the heat, and my brains fly beyond the seventh world."

Next day Sunrise went hunting with Evening, whose head was still bound up in a dishcloth, and hurting so sorely that he could hardly see.

[p. 281]

[paragraph continues] Midnight stayed at home. It was his turn to see to the dinner. Sunrise rode out on his cloud-white horse, and Evening on his dusky brown. Midnight stood in the doorway of the hut, watched them disappear among the green trees, and then set about getting the dinner.

He lit the fire, but was careful not to make it too hot. Then he went into the yard, caught the very fattest of the sheep, killed it, skinned it, cleaned it, cut it up, and set it on the stove. Then, when all was ready, he lay down on the bench and rested himself.

But before he had lain there long there were a knocking, a stamping, a rattling, a grumbling, and in came the little old man, one yard high, with a beard seven yards long, and without wasting words the little fellow leapt on the shoulders of the bogatir, and set to beating him and thumping him, first on one side of his head and then on the other. He gave him such a banging that he very nearly made an end of him altogether. Then the little fellow ate up the whole of the sheep in a few mouthfuls, and went off angrily into the forest, with his long white beard flowing behind him.

Midnight tied up his head with a handkerchief, and lay down under the bench, groaning and groaning, unable to put his head to the ground, or

[p. 282]

even to lay it in the crook of his arm, it was so bruised by the beating given it by the little old man.

In the evening the brothers rode back, and found Midnight groaning under the bench, with his head bound up in a handkerchief.

Evening looked at him and said nothing. Perhaps he was thinking of his own bruised head, which was still tied up in a dishcloth.

"What's the matter with you?" says Sunrise.

"There never was such another stove as this," says Midnight. "I'd no sooner lit it than it seemed as if the whole hut were on fire. My head nearly burst. It's aching now; and as for your dinner, why, I've not been able to put a hand to anything all day."

Evening chuckled to himself, but Sunrise only said, "That's bad, brother; but you shall go hunting to-morrow, and I'll stay at home, and see what I can do with the stove."

And so on the third day the two elder brothers went hunting--Midnight on his black horse, and Evening on his horse of dusky brown. Sunrise stood in the doorway of the hut, and saw them disappear under the

[p. 283]

green trees. The sun shone on his golden curls, and his blue eyes were like the sky itself. There, never was such another bogatir as he.

He went into the hut and lit the stove. Then he went out into the yard, chose the best sheep he could find, killed it, skinned it, cleaned it, cut it up, and set it on the stove. He made everything ready, and then lay down on the bench.

Before he had lain there very long he heard a stumping, a thumping, a knocking, a rattling, a grumbling, a rumbling. Sunrise leaped up from the bench and looked out through the window of the hut. There in the yard was the little old man, one yard high, with a beard seven yards long. He was carrying a whole haystack on his head and a great tub of water in his arms. He came into the middle of the yard, and set down his tub to water all the beasts. He set down the haystack and scattered the hay about. All the cattle and the sheep came together to eat and to drink, and the little man stood and counted them. He counted the oxen, he counted the goats, and then he counted the sheep. He counted them once, and his eyes began to flash. He counted them twice, and he began to grind his teeth. He counted them a third time, made sure that one was missing, and then he flew into a violent rage,

[p. 284]

rushed across the yard and into the hut, and gave Sunrise a terrific blow on the head.

Sunrise shook his head as if a fly had settled on it. Then he jumped suddenly and caught the end of the long beard of the little old man, and set to pulling him this way and that, round and round the hut, as if his beard was a rope. Phew! how the little man roared.

Sunrise laughed, and tugged him this way and that, and mocked him, crying out, "If you do not know the ford, it is better not to go into the water," meaning that the little fellow had begun to beat him without finding out who was the stronger.

The little old man, one yard high, with a beard seven yards long, began to pray and to beg,--

"O man of power, O great and mighty bogatir, have mercy upon me. Do not kill me. Leave me my soul to repent with."

Sunrise laughed, and dragged the little fellow out into the yard, whirled him round at the end of his beard, and brought him to a great oak trunk that lay on the ground. Then with a heavy iron wedge he fixed the end of the little man's beard firmly in the oaken trunk, and, leaving the little man howling and lamenting, went back to the

[p. 285]

hut, set it in order again, saw that the sheep was cooking as it should, and then lay down in peace to wait for the coming of his brothers.

Evening and Midnight rode home, leapt from their horses, and came into the hut to see how the little man had dealt with their brother. They could hardly believe their eyes when they saw him alive and well, without a bruise, lying comfortably on the bench.

He sat up and laughed in their faces.

"Well, brothers," says he, "come along with me into the yard, and I think I can show you that headache of yours. It's a good deal stronger than it is big, but for the time being you need not be afraid of it, for it's fastened to an oak timber that all three of us together could not lift."

He got up and went into the yard. Evening and Midnight followed him with shamed faces. But when they came to the oaken timber the little man was not there. Long ago he had torn himself free and run away into the forest. But half his beard was left, wedged in the trunk, and Sunrise pointed to that and said,--

"Tell me, brothers, was it the heat of the stove that gave you your headaches? Or had this long beard something to do with it?"

The brothers grew red, and laughed, and told him the whole truth.

[p. 286]

Meanwhile Sunrise had been looking at the end of the beard, the end of the half beard that was left, and he saw that it had been torn out by the roots, and that drops of blood from the little man's chin showed the way he had gone.

Quickly the brothers went back to the hut and ate up the sheep. Then they leapt on their horses, and rode off into the green forest, following the drops of blood that had fallen from the little man's chin. For three days they rode through the green forest, until at last the red drops of the trail led them to a deep pit, a black hole in the earth, hidden by thick bushes and going far down into the underworld.

Sunrise left his brothers to guard the hole, while he went off into the forest and gathered bast, and twisted it, and made a strong rope, and brought it to the mouth of the pit, and asked his brothers to lower him down.

He made a loop in the rope. His brothers kissed him on both cheeks, and he kissed them back. Then he sat in the loop, and Evening and Midnight lowered him down into the darkness. Down and down he went, swinging in the dark, till he came into a world under the world, with a light that was neither that of the sun, nor of the moon, nor of the stars. He stepped from the loop in the rope of twisted bast, and set

[p. 287]

out walking through the underworld, going whither his eyes led him, for he found no more drops of blood, nor any other traces of the little old man.

He walked and walked, and came at last to a palace of copper, green and ruddy in the strange light. He went into that palace, and there came to meet him in the copper halls a maiden whose cheeks were redder than the aloe and whiter than the snow. She was the youngest daughter of the King, and the loveliest of the three princesses, who were the loveliest in all the world. Sweetly she curtsied to Sunrise, as he stood there with his golden hair and his eyes blue as the sky at morning, and sweetly she asked him,--

"How have you come hither, my brave young man--of your own will or against it?"

"Your father has sent to rescue you and your sisters."

She bade him sit at the table, and gave him food and brought him a little flask of the water of strength.

"Strong you are," says she, "but not strong enough for what is before you. Drink this, and your strength will be greater than it is; for you will need all the strength you have and can win, if you are to rescue us and live."

[p. 288]

Sunrise looked in her sweet eyes, and drank the water of strength in a single draught, and felt gigantic power forcing its way throughout his body.

"Now," thought he, "let come what may."

Instantly a violent wind rushed through the copper palace, and the Princess trembled.

"The snake that holds me here is coming," says she. "He is flying hither on his strong wings."

She took the great hand of the bogatir in her little fingers, and drew him to another room, and hid him there.

The copper palace rocked in the wind, and there flew into the great hall a huge snake with three heads. The snake hissed loudly, and called out in a whistling voice,--

"I smell the smell of a Russian soul. What visitor have you here?"

"How could any one come here?" said the Princess. "You have been flying over Russia. There you smelt Russian souls, and the smell is still in your nostrils, so that you think you smell them here."

"It is true," said the snake: "I have been flying over Russia. I have flown far. Let me eat and drink, for I am both hungry and thirsty."

[p. 289]

All this time Sunrise was watching from the other room.

The Princess brought meat and drink to the snake, and in the drink she put a philtre of sleep.

The snake ate and drank, and began to feel sleepy. He coiled himself up in rings, laid his three heads in the lap of the Princess, told her to scratch them for him, and dropped into a deep sleep.

The Princess called Sunrise, and the bogatir rushed in, swung his glittering sword three times round his golden head, and cut off all three heads of the snake. It was like felling three oak trees at a single blow. Then he made a great fire of wood, and threw upon it the body of the snake, and, when it was burnt up, scattered the ashes over the open country.

"And now fare you well," says Sunrise to the Princess; but she threw her arms about his neck.

"Fare you well," says he. "I go to seek your sisters. As soon as I have found them I will come back."

And at that she let him go.

He walked on further through the underworld, and came at last to a palace of silver, gleaming in the strange light.

[p. 290]

He went in there, and was met with sweet words and kindness by the second of the three lovely princesses. In that palace he killed a snake with six heads. The Princess begged him to stay; but he told her he had yet to find her eldest sister. At that she wished him the help of God, and he left her, and went on further.

He walked and walked, and came at last to a palace of gold, glittering in the light of the underworld. All happened as in the other palaces. The eldest of the three daughters of the King met him with courtesy and kindness. And he killed a snake with twelve heads and freed the Princess from her imprisonment. The Princess rejoiced, and thanked Sunrise, and set about her packing to go home.

And this was the way of her packing. She went out into the broad courtyard and waved a scarlet handkerchief, and instantly the whole palace, golden and glittering, and the kingdom belonging to it, became little, little, little, till it went into a little golden egg. The Princess tied the egg in a corner of her handkerchief, and set out with Sunrise to join her sisters and go home to her father.

Her sisters did their packing in the same way. The silver palace and its kingdom were packed by the second sister into a little silver egg.

[p. 291]

[paragraph continues] And when they came to the copper palace, the youngest of the three lovely princesses clapped her hands and kissed Sunrise on both his cheeks, and waved a scarlet handkerchief, and instantly the copper palace and its kingdom were packed into a little copper egg, shining ruddy and green.

And so Sunrise and the three daughters of the King came to the foot of the deep hole down which he had come into the underworld. And there was the rope hanging with the loop at its end. And they sat in the loop, and Evening and Midnight pulled them up one by one, rejoicing together. Then the three brothers took, each of them, a princess with him on his horse, and they all rode together back to the old King, telling talcs and singing songs as they went. The Princess from the golden palace rode with Evening on his horse of dusky brown; the Princess from the silver palace rode with Midnight on his horse as black as charcoal; but the Princess from the copper palace, the youngest of them all, rode with Sunrise on his horse, white as a summer cloud. Merry was the journey through the green forest, and gladly they rode over the open plain, till they came at last to the palace of her father.

There was the old King, sitting melancholy alone, when the three

[p. 292]

brothers with the princesses rode into the courtyard of the palace. The old King was so glad that he laughed and cried at the same time, and his tears ran down his beard.

"Ah me!" says the old King, "I am old, and you young men have brought my daughters back from the very world under the world. Safer they will be if they have you to guard them, even than they were in the palace I had built for them underground. But I have only one kingdom and three daughters."

"Do not trouble about that," laughed the three princesses, and they all rode out together into the open country, and there the princesses broke their eggs, one after the other, and there were the palaces of silver, copper, and gold, with the kingdoms belonging to them, and the cattle and the sheep and the goats. There was a kingdom for each of the brothers. Then they made a great feast, and had three weddings all together, and the old King sat with the mother of the three strong men, and men of power, the noble bogatirs, Evening, Midnight, and Sunrise, sitting at his side. Great was the feasting, loud were the songs, and the King made Sunrise his heir, so that some day he would wear his crown. But little did Sunrise think of that. He thought of nothing but the youngest Princess. And little she thought of it, for

[p. 293]

she had no eyes but for Sunrise. And merrily they lived together in the copper palace. And happily they rode together on the horse that was as white as clouds in summer.

[p. 294]

 

SALT.

One evening, when they were sitting round the table after their supper, old Peter asked the children what story they would like to hear. Vanya asked whether there were any stories left which they had not already heard.

"Why," said old Peter, "you have heard scarcely any of the stories, for there is a story to be told about everything in the world."

[p. 295]

"About everything, grandfather?" asked Vanya.

"About everything," said old Peter.

"About the sky, and the thunder, and the dogs, and the flies, and the birds, and the trees, and the milk?"

"There is a story about everyone of those things."

"I know something there isn't a story about," said Vanya.

"And what's that?" asked old Peter, smiling in his beard.

"Salt," said Vanya. "There can't be a story about salt." He put the tip of his finger into the little box of salt on the table, and then he touched his tongue with his finger to taste.

"But of course there is a story about salt," said old Peter.

"Tell it us," said Maroosia; and presently, when his pipe had been lit twice and gone out, old Peter began.

Once upon a time there were three brothers, and their father was a great merchant who sent his ships far over the sea, and traded here and there in countries the names of which I, being an old man, can never rightly call to mind. Well, the names of the two elder brothers do not matter, but the youngest was called Ivan the Ninny, because he was always playing and never working; and if there was a silly thing to do, why, off he went and did it. And so, when the brothers grew up, the father sent the two elder ones off, each in a fine ship laden with gold and jewels, and rings and bracelets, and laces and silks, and

[p. 296]

sticks with little bits of silver hammered into their handles, and spoons with patterns of blue and red, and everything else you can think of that costs too much to buy. But he made Ivan the Ninny stay at home, and did not give him a ship at all. Ivan saw his brothers go sailing off over the sea on a summer morning, to make their fortunes and come back rich men; and then, for the first time in his life, he wanted to work and do something useful. He went to his father and kissed his hand, and he kissed the hand of his little old mother, and he begged his father to give him a ship so that he could try his fortune like his brothers.

"But you have never done a wise thing in your life, and no one could count all the silly things you've done if he spent a hundred days in counting," said his father.

"True," said Ivan; "but now I am going to be wise, and sail the sea and come back with something in my pockets to show that I am not a ninny any longer. Give me just a little ship, father mine--just a little ship for myself."

"Give him a little ship," said the mother. "He may not be a ninny after all."

"Very well," said his father. "I will give him a little ship; but I am not going to waste good roubles by giving him a rich cargo."

[p. 297]

"Give me any cargo you like," said Ivan.

So his father gave him a little ship, a little old ship, and a cargo of rags and scraps and things that were not fit for anything but to be thrown away. And he gave him a crew of ancient old sailormen who were past work; and Ivan went on board and sailed away at sunset, like the ninny he was. And the feeble, ancient, old sailormen pulled up the ragged, dirty sails, and away they went over the sea to learn what fortune, good or bad, God had in mind for a crew of old men with a ninny for a master.

The fourth day after they set sail there came a great wind over the sea. The feeble old men did the best they could with the ship; but the old, torn sails tore from the masts, and the wind did what it pleased, and threw the little ship on an unknown island away in the middle of the sea. Then the wind dropped, and left the little ship on the beach, and Ivan the Ninny and his ancient old men, like good Russians, praising God that they were still alive.

"Well, children," said Ivan, for he knew how to talk to sailors, "do you stay here and mend the sails, and make new ones out of the rags we

[p. 298]

carry as cargo, while I go inland and see if there is anything that could be of use to us."

So the ancient old sailormen sat on deck with their legs crossed, and made sails out of rags, of torn scraps of old brocades, of soiled embroidered shawls, of all the rubbish that they had with them for a cargo. You never saw such sails. The tide came up and floated the ship, and they threw out anchors at bow and stern, and sat there in the sunlight, making sails and patching them and talking of the days when they were young. All this while Ivan the Ninny went walking off into the island.

Now in the middle of that island was a high mountain, a high mountain it was, and so white that when he came near it Ivan the Ninny began thinking of sheepskin coats, although it was midsummer and the sun was hot in the sky. The trees were green round about, but there was nothing growing on the mountain at all. It was just a great white mountain piled up into the sky in the middle of a green island. Ivan walked a little way up the white slopes of the mountain, and then, because he felt thirsty, he thought he would let a little snow melt in his mouth. He took some in his fingers and stuffed it in. Quickly enough it came out again, I can tell you, for the mountain was not

[p. 299]

made of snow but of good Russian salt. And if you want to try what a mouthful of salt is like, you may.

"No, thank you, grandfather," the children said hurriedly together.

Old Peter went on with his tale.

Ivan the Ninny did not stop to think twice. The salt was so clean and shone so brightly in the sunlight. He just turned round and ran back to the shore, and called out to his ancient old sailor-men and told them to empty everything they had on board over into the sea. Over it all went, rags and tags and rotten timbers, till the little ship was as empty as a soup bowl after supper. And then those ancient old men were set to work carrying salt from the mountain and taking it on board the little ship, and stowing it away below deck till there was not room for another grain. Ivan the Ninny would have liked to take the whole mountain, but there was not room in the little ship. And for that the ancient old sailormen thanked God, because their backs ached and their old legs were weak, and they said they would have died if they had had to carry any more.

Then they hoisted up the new sails they had patched together out of the rags and scraps of shawls and old brocades, and they sailed away

[p. 300]

once more over the blue sea. And the wind stood fair, and they sailed before it, and the ancient old sailors rested their backs, and told old tales, and took turn and turn about at the rudder.

And after many days' sailing they came to a town, with towers and churches and painted roofs, all set on the side of a hill that sloped down into the sea. At the foot of the hill was a quiet harbour, and they sailed in there and moored the ship and hauled down their patchwork sails.

Ivan the Ninny went ashore, and took with him a little bag of clean white salt to show what kind of goods he had for sale, and he asked his way to the palace of the Tzar of that town. He came to the palace, and went in and bowed to the ground before the Tzar.

"Who are you?" says the Tzar.

"I, great lord, am a Russian merchant, and here in a bag is some of my merchandise, and I beg your leave to trade with your subjects in this town."

"Let me see what is in the bag," says the Tzar. Ivan the Ninny took a handful from the bag and showed it to the Tzar.

"What is it?" says the Tzar.

"Good Russian salt," says Ivan the Ninny.

Now in that country they had never heard of salt, and the Tzar looked at the salt, and he looked at Ivan and he laughed.

[p. 301]

"Why, this," says he, "is nothing but white dust, and that we can pick up for nothing. The men of my town have no need to trade with you. You must be a ninny."

Ivan grew very red, for he knew what his father used to call him. He was ashamed to say anything. So he bowed to the ground, and went away out of the palace.

But when he was outside he thought to himself, "I wonder what sort of salt they use in these parts if they do not know good Russian salt when they see it. I will go to the kitchen."

So he went round to the back door of the palace, and put his head into the kitchen, and said, "I am very tired. May I sit down here and rest a little while?"

"Come in," says one of the cooks. "But you must sit just there, and not put even your little finger in the way of us; for we are the Tzar's cooks, and we are in the middle of making ready his dinner." And the cook put a stool in a corner out of the way, and Ivan slipped in round the door, and sat down in the corner and looked about him. There were seven cooks at least, boiling and baking, and stewing and

[p. 302]

toasting, and roasting and frying. And as for scullions, they were as thick as cockroaches, dozens of them, running to and fro, tumbling over each other, and helping the cooks.

Ivan the Ninny sat on his stool, with his legs tucked under him and the bag of salt on his knees. He watched the cooks and the scullions, but he did not see them put anything in the dishes which he thought could take the place of salt. No; the meat was without salt, the kasha was without salt, and there was no salt in the potatoes. Ivan nearly turned sick at the thought of the tastelessness of all that food.

There came the moment when all the cooks and scullions ran out of the kitchen to fetch the silver platters on which to lay the dishes. Ivan slipped down from his stool, and running from stove to stove, from saucepan to frying pan, he dropped a pinch of salt, just what was wanted, no more no less, in everyone of the dishes. Then he ran back to the stool in the corner, and sat there, and watched the dishes being put on the silver platters and carried off in gold-embroidered napkins to be the dinner of the Tzar.

The Tzar sat at table and took his first spoonful of soup.

[p. 303]

"The soup is very good to-day," says he, and he finishes the soup to the last drop.

"I've never known the soup so good," says the Tzaritza, and she finishes hers.

"This is the best soup I ever tasted," says the Princess, and down goes hers, and she, you know, was the prettiest princess who ever had dinner in this world.

It was the same with the kasha and the same with the meat. The Tzar and the Tzaritza and the Princess wondered why they had never had so good a dinner in all their lives before.

"Call the cooks," says the Tzar. And they called the cooks, and the cooks all came in, and bowed to the ground, and stood in a row before the Tzar.

"What did you put in the dishes to-day that you never put before?" says the Tzar.

"We put nothing unusual, your greatness," say the cooks, and bowed to the ground again.

"Then why do the dishes taste better?"

"We do not know, your greatness," say the cooks.

"Call the scullions," says the Tzar. And the scullions were called, and they too bowed to the ground, and stood in a row before the Tzar.

"What was done in the kitchen to-day that has not been done there before?" says the Tzar.

[p. 304]

"Nothing, your greatness," say all the scullions except one.

And that one scullion bowed again, and kept on bowing, and then he said, "Please, your greatness, please, great lord, there is usually none in the kitchen but ourselves; but to-day there was a young Russian merchant, who sat on a stool in the corner and said he was tired."

"Call the merchant," says the Tzar.

So they brought in Ivan the Ninny, and he bowed before the Tzar, and stood there with his little bag of salt in his hand.

"Did you do anything to my dinner?" says the Tzar.

"I did, your greatness," says Ivan.

"What did you do?"

"I put a pinch of Russian salt in every dish."

"That white dust?" says the Tzar.

"Nothing but that."

"Have you got any more of it?"

"I have a little ship in the harbour laden with nothing else," says Ivan.

"It is the most wonderful dust in the world," says the Tzar, "and I will buy every grain of it you have. What do you want for it?"

[p. 305]

Ivan the Ninny scratched his head and thought. He thought that if the Tzar liked it as much as all that it must be worth a fair price, so he said, "We will put the salt into bags, and for every bag of salt you must give me three bags of the same weight--one of gold, one of silver, and one of precious stones. Cheaper than that, your greatness, I could not possibly sell."

"Agreed," says the Tzar. "And a cheap price, too, for a dust so full of magic that it makes dull dishes tasty, and tasty dishes so good that there is no looking away from them."

So all the day long, and far into the night, the ancient old sailormen bent their backs under sacks of salt, and bent them again under sacks of gold and silver and precious stones. When all the salt had been put in the Tzar's treasury--yes, with twenty soldiers guarding it with great swords shining in the moonlight--and when the little ship was loaded with riches, so that even the deck was piled high with precious stones, the ancient old men lay down among the jewels and slept till morning, when Ivan the Ninny went to bid good-bye to the Tzar.

"And whither shall you sail now?" asked the Tzar.

[p. 306]

"I shall sail away to Russia in my little ship," says Ivan.

And the Princess, who was very beautiful, said, "A little Russian ship?"

"Yes," says Ivan.

"I have never seen a Russian ship," says the Princess, and she begs her father to let her go to the harbour with her nurses and maids, to see the little Russian ship before Ivan set sail.

She came with Ivan to the harbour, and the ancient old sailormen took them on board.

She ran all over the ship, looking now at this and now at that, and Ivan told her the names of everything--deck, mast, and rudder.

"May I see the sails?" she asked. And the ancient old men hoisted the ragged sails, and the wind filled the sails and tugged.

"Why doesn't the ship move when the sails are up?" asked the Princess.

"The anchor holds her," said Ivan.

"Please let me see the anchor," says the Princess.

"Haul up the anchor, my children, and show it to the Princess," says Ivan to the ancient old sailormen.

And the old men hauled up the anchor, and showed it to the Princess;

[p. 307]

and she said it was a very good little anchor. But, of course, as soon as the anchor was up the ship began to move. One of the ancient old men bent over the tiller, and, with a fair wind behind her, the little ship slipped out of the harbour and away to the blue sea. When the Princess looked round, thinking it was time to go home, the little ship was far from land, and away in the distance she could only see the gold towers of her father's palace, glittering like pin points in the sunlight. Her nurses and maids wrung their hands and made an outcry, and the Princess sat down on a heap of jewels, and put a handkerchief to her eyes, and cried and cried and cried.

Ivan the Ninny took her hands and comforted her, and told her of the wonders of the sea that he would show her, and the wonders of the land. And she looked up at him while he talked, and his eyes were kind and hers were sweet; and the end of it was that they were both very well content, and agreed to have a marriage feast as soon as the little ship should bring them to the home of Ivan's father. Merry was that voyage. All day long Ivan and the Princess sat on deck and said sweet things to each other, and at twilight they sang songs, and drank tea, and told stories. As for the nurses and maids, the Princess told

[p. 308]

them to be glad; and so they danced and clapped their hands, and ran about the ship, and teased the ancient old sailormen.

When they had been sailing many days, the Princess was looking out over the sea, and she cried out to Ivan, "See, over there, far away, are two big ships with white sails, not like our sails of brocade and bits of silk."

Ivan looked, shading his eyes with his hands.

"Why, those are the ships of my elder brothers," said he. "We shall all sail home together."

And he made the ancient old sailormen give a hail in their cracked old voices. And the brothers heard them, and came on board to greet Ivan and his bride. And when they saw that she was a Tzar's daughter, and that the very decks were heaped with precious stones, because there was no room below, they said one thing to Ivan and something else to each other.

To Ivan they said, "Thanks be to God, He has given you good trading."

But to each other, "How can this be?" says one. "Ivan the Ninny bringing back such a cargo, while we in our fine ships have only a bag or two of gold."

"And what is Ivan the Ninny doing with a princess?" says the other.

[p. 309]

And they ground their teeth, and waited their time, and came up suddenly, when Ivan was alone in the twilight, and picked him up by his head and his heels, and hove him overboard into the dark blue sea.

Not one of the old men had seen them, and the Princess was not on deck. In the morning they said that Ivan the Ninny must have walked overboard in his sleep. And they drew lots. The eldest brother took the Princess, and the second brother took the little ship laden with gold and silver and precious stones. And so the brothers sailed home very well content. But the Princess sat and wept all day long, looking down into the blue water. The elder brother could not comfort her, and the second brother did not try. And the ancient old sailormen muttered in their beards, and were sorry, and prayed to God to give rest to Ivan's soul; for although he had been a ninny, and although he had made them carry a lot of salt and other things, yet they loved him, because he knew how to talk to ancient old sailormen.

But Ivan was not dead. As soon as he splashed into the water, he crammed his fur hat a little tighter on his head, and began swimming in the sea. He swam about until the sun rose, and then, not far away, he saw a floating timber log, and he swam to the log, and got astride

[p. 310]

of it, and thanked God. And he sat there on the log in the middle of the sea, twiddling his thumbs for want of something to do.

There was a strong current in the sea that carried him along, and at last, after floating for many days without ever a bite for his teeth or a drop for his gullet, his feet touched land. Now that was at night, and he left the log and walked up out of the sea, and lay down on the shore and waited for morning.

When the sun rose he stood up, and saw that he was on a bare island, and he saw nothing at all on the island except a huge house as big as a mountain; and as he was looking at the house the great door creaked with a noise like that of a hurricane among the pine forests, and opened; and a giant came walking out, and came to the shore, and stood there, looking down at Ivan.

"What are you doing here, little one?" says the giant.

Ivan told him the whole story, just as I have told it to you.

The giant listened to the very end, pulling at his monstrous whiskers. Then he said, "Listen, little one. I know more of the story than you, for I can tell you that to-morrow morning your eldest brother is going

[p. 311]

to marry your Princess. But there is no need for you to take on about it. If you want to be there, I will carry you and set you down before the house in time for the wedding. And a fine wedding it is like to be, for your father thinks well of those brothers of yours bringing back all those precious stones, and silver and gold enough to buy a kingdom."

And with that he picked up Ivan the Ninny and set him on his great shoulders, and set off striding through the sea.

He went so fast that the wind of his going blew off Ivan's hat.

"Stop a moment," shouts Ivan; "my hat has blown off."

"We can't turn back for that," says the giant; "we have already left your hat five hundred versts behind us." And he rushed on, splashing through the sea. The sea was up to his armpits. He rushed on, and the sea was up to his waist. He rushed on, and before the sun had climbed to the top of the blue sky he was splashing up out of the sea with the water about his ankles. He lifted Ivan from his shoulders and set him on the ground.

"Now," says he, "little man, off you run, and you'll be in time for the feast. But don't you dare to boast about riding on my shoulders.

[p. 312]

[paragraph continues] If you open your mouth about that you'll smart for it, if I have to come ten thousand thousand versts."

Ivan the Ninny thanked the giant for carrying him through the sea, promised that he would not boast, and then ran off to his father's house. Long before he got there he heard the musicians in the courtyard playing as if they wanted to wear out their instruments before night. The wedding feast had begun, and when Ivan ran in, there, at the high board, was sitting the Princess, and beside her his eldest brother. And there were his father and mother, his second brother, and all the guests. And everyone of them was as merry as could be, except the Princess, and she was as white as the salt he had sold to her father.

Suddenly the blood flushed into her cheeks. She saw Ivan in the doorway. Up she jumped at the high board, and cried out, "There, there is my true love, and not this man who sits beside me at the table."

"What is this?" says Ivan's father, and in a few minutes knew the whole story.

He turned the two elder brothers out of doors, gave their ships to Ivan, married him to the Princess, and made him his heir. And the

[p. 313]

wedding feast began again, and they sent for the ancient old sailormen to take part in it. And the ancient old sailormen wept with joy when they saw Ivan and the Princess, like two sweet pigeons, sitting side by side; yes, and they lifted their flagons with their old shaking hands, and cheered with their old cracked voices, and poured the wine down their dry old throats.

There was wine enough and to spare, beer too, and mead--enough to drown a herd of cattle. And as the guests drank and grew merry and proud they set to boasting. This one bragged of his riches, that one of his wife. Another boasted of his cunning, another of his new house, another of his strength, and this one was angry because they would not let him show how he could lift the table on one hand. They all drank Ivan's health, and he drank theirs, and in the end he could not bear to listen to their proud boasts.

"That's all very well," says he, "but I am the only man in the world who rode on the shoulders of a giant to come to his wedding feast."

The words were scarcely out of his mouth before there were a tremendous trampling and a roar of a great wind. The house shook with the footsteps of the giant as he strode up. The giant bent down over the courtyard and looked in at the feast.

"Little man, little man," says he, "you promised not to boast of me. I

[p. 314]

told you what would come if you did, and here you are and have boasted already."

"Forgive me," says Ivan; "it was the drink that boasted, not I."

"What sort of drink is it that knows how to boast?" says the giant.

"You shall taste it," says Ivan.

And he made his ancient old sailormen roll a great barrel of wine into the yard, more than enough for a hundred men, and after that a barrel of beer that was as big, and then a barrel of mead that was no smaller.

"Try the taste of that," says Ivan the Ninny.

Well, the giant did not wait to be asked twice. He lifted the barrel of wine as if it had been a little glass, and emptied it down his throat. He lifted the barrel of beer as if it had been an acorn, and emptied it after the wine. Then he lifted the barrel of mead as if it had been a very small pea, and swallowed every drop of mead that was in it. And after that he began stamping about and breaking things. Houses fell to pieces this way and that, and trees were swept flat like grass. Every step the giant took was followed by the crash of breaking timbers. Then suddenly he fell flat on his back and slept. For three days and nights he slept without waking. At last he opened his eyes.

[p. 315]

"Just look about you," says Ivan, "and see the damage that you've done."

"And did that little drop of drink make me do all that?" says the giant. "Well, well, I can well understand that a drink like that can do a bit of bragging. And after that," says he, looking at the wrecks of houses, and all the broken things scattered about--"after that," says he, "you can boast of me for a thousand years, and I'll have nothing against you."

And he tugged at his great whiskers, and wrinkled his eyes, and went striding off into the sea.

That is the story about salt, and how it made a rich man of Ivan the Ninny, and besides, gave him the prettiest wife in the world, and she a Tzar's daughter.

[p. 316]

 

THE CHRISTENING IN THE VILLAGE.

This chapter is not one of old Peter's stories, though there are, doubtless, some stories in it. It tells how Vanya and Maroosia drove to the village to see a new baby.

Old Peter had a sister who lived in the village not so very far away from the forest. And she had a plump daughter, and the daughter was called Nastasia, and she was married to a handsome peasant called Sergie, who had three cows, a lot of pigs, and a flock of fat geese. And one day when old Peter had gone to the village to buy tobacco and sugar and sunflower seeds, he came back in the evening, and said to the children,--

"There's something new in the village."

"What sort of a something?" asked Vanya.

[p. 317]

"Alive," said old Peter.

"Is there a lot of it?" asked Vanya.

"No, only one."

"Then it can't be pigs," said Vanya, in a melancholy voice. "I thought it was pigs."

"Perhaps it is a little calf," said Maroosia.

"I know what it is," said Vanya.

"Well?"

"It's a foal. It's brown all over with white on its nose, and a lot of white hairs in its tail."

"No."

"What is it then, grandfather?"

"I'll tell you, little pigeons. It's small and red, and it's got a bumpy head with hair on it like the fluff of a duckling. It has blue eyes, and ten fingers to its fore paws, and ten toes to its hind feet--five to each."

"It's a baby," said Maroosia.

"Yes. Nastasia has got a little son, Aunt Sofia has got a grandson, you have got a new cousin, and I have got a new great-nephew. Think of that! Already it's a son, and a cousin, and a grandson, and a great-nephew, and he's only been alive twelve hours. He lost no time in taking a position for himself. He'll be a great man one of these days if he goes on as fast as that."

[p. 318]

The children had jumped up as soon as they knew it was a baby.

"When is the christening?"

"The day after to-morrow."

"O grandfather!"

"Well?"

"Who is going to the christening?"

"The baby, of course."

"Yes; but other people?"

"All the village."

"And us?"

"I have to go, and I suppose there'll be room in the cart for two little bear cubs like you."

And so it was settled that Vanya and Maroosia were to go to the christening of their new cousin, who was only twelve hours old. All the next day they could think of nothing else, and early on the morning of the christening they were up and about, Maroosia seeing that Vanya had on a clean shirt, and herself putting a green ribbon in her hair. The sun shone, and the leaves on the trees were all new and bright, and the sky was pale blue through the flickering green leaves.

Old Peter was up early too, harnessing the little yellow horse into the old cart. The cart was of rough wood, without springs, like a big box fixed on long larch poles between two pairs of wheels. The larch

[p. 319]

poles did instead of springs, bending and creaking, as the cart moved over the forest track. The shafts came from the front wheels upwards to the horse's shoulders, and between the ends of them there was a tall strong hoop of wood, called a douga, which rose high over the shoulders of the horse, above his collar, and had two little bells hanging from it at the top. The wooden hoop was painted green with little red flowers. The harness was mostly of ropes, but that did not matter so long as it held together. The horse had a long tail and mane, and looked as untidy as a little boy; but he had a green ribbon in his forelock in honour of the christening, and he could go like anything, and never got tired.

When all was ready, old Peter arranged a lot of soft fresh hay in the cart for the children to sit in. Hay is the best thing in the world to sit in when you drive in a jolting Russian cart. Old Peter put in a tremendous lot, so that the horse could eat some of it while waiting in the village, and yet leave them enough to make them comfortable on the journey back. Finally, old Peter took a gun that he had spent all the evening before in cleaning, and laid it carefully in the hay.

"What is the gun for?" asked Vanya.

"I am to be a godparent," said old Peter, "and I want to give him a

[p. 320]

present. I could not give him a better present than a gun, for he shall be a forester, and a good shot, and you cannot begin too early."

Presently Vanya and Maroosia were tucked into the hay, and old Peter climbed in with the plaited reins, and away they went along the narrow forest track, where the wheels followed the ruts and splashed through the deep holes; for the spring was young, and the roads had not yet dried. Some of the deepest holes had a few pine branches laid in them, but that was the only road-mending that ever was done. Overhead were the tall firs and silver birches with their little pale round leaves; and somewhere, not far away, a cuckoo was calling, while the murmur of the wild pigeons never stopped for a moment.

They drove on and on through the forest, and at last came out from among the trees into the open country, a broad, flat plain stretching to the river. Far away they could see the big square sail of a boat, swelled out in the light wind, and they knew that there was the river, on the banks of which stood the village. They could see a small clump of trees, and, as they came nearer, the pale green cupolas of the white village church rising above the tops of the birches.

[p. 321]

Presently they came to a rough wooden bridge, and crossed over a little stream that was on its way to join the big river.

Vanya looked at it.

"Grandfather," he asked, "when the frost went, which was water first--the big river or the little river?"

"Why, the little river, of course," said old Peter. "It's always the little streams that wake first in the spring, and running down to the big river make it swell and flood and break up the ice. It's always been so ever since the quarrel between the Vazouza and the Volga."

"What was that?" said Vanya.

"It was like this," said old Peter.

The Vazouza and the Volga flow for a long way side by side, and then they join and flow together. And the Vazouza is a little river; but the Volga is the mother of all Russia, and the greatest river in the world.

And the little Vazouza was jealous of the Volga.

"You are big and noisy," she says to the Volga, "and terribly strong; but as for brains," says she, "why, I have more brains in a single ripple than you in all that lump of water."

[p. 322]

Of course the Volga told her not to be so rude, and said that little rivers should know their place and not argue with the great.

But the Vazouza would not keep quiet, and at last she said to the Volga: "Look here, we will lie down and sleep, and we will agree that the one of us who wakes first and comes first to the sea is the wiser of the two."

And the Volga said, "Very well, if only you will stop talking."

So the little Vazouza and the big Volga lay and slept, white and still, all through the winter. And when the spring came, the little Vazouza woke first, brisk and laughing and hurrying, and rushed away as hard as she could go towards the sea. When the Volga woke the little Vazouza was already far ahead. But the Volga did not hurry. She woke slowly and shook the ice from herself, and then came roaring after the Vazouza, a huge foaming flood of angry water.

And the little Vazouza listened as she ran, and she heard the Volga coming after her; and when the Volga caught her up--a tremendous foaming river, whirling along trees and blocks of ice--she was frightened, and she said,--

"O Volga, let me be your little sister. I will never argue with you

[p. 323]

any more. You are wiser than I and stronger than I. Only take me by the hand and bring me with you to the sea."

And the Volga forgave the little Vazouza, and took her by the hand and brought her safely to the sea. And they have never quarrelled again. But all the same, it is always the little Vazouza that gets up first in the spring, and tugs at the white blankets of ice and snow, and wakes her big sister from her winter sleep.

They drove on over the flat open country, with no hedges, but only ditches to drain off the floods, and very often not even ditches to divide one field from another. And huge crows, with gray hoods and shawls, pecked about in the grass at the roadside or flew heavily in the sunshine. They passed a little girl with a flock of geese, and another little girl lying in the grass holding a long rope which was fastened to the horns of a brown cow. And the little girl lay on her face and slept among the flowers, while the cow walked slowly round her, step by step, chewing the grass and thinking about nothing at all.

And at last they came to the village, where the road was wider; and instead of one pair of ruts there were dozens, and the cart bumped worse than ever. The broad earthy road had no stones in it; and in

[p. 324]

places where the puddles would have been deeper than the axles of the wheels, it had been mended by laying down fir logs and small branches in the puddles, and putting a few spadefuls of earth on the top of them.

The road ran right through the village. On either side of it were little wooden huts. The ends of the timbers crossed outside at the four corners of the huts. They fitted neatly into each other, and some of them were carved. And there were no slates or tiles on the roofs, but little thin slips of wood overlapping each other. There was not a single stone hut or cottage in the village. Only the church was partly brick, whitewashed, with bright green cupolas up in the air, and thin gold crosses on the tops of the cupolas, shining in the clear sky.

Outside the church were rows of short posts, with long rough fir timbers nailed on the top of them, to which the country people tied their horses when they came to church. There were several carts there already, with bright-coloured rugs lying on the hay in them; and the horses were eating hay or biting the logs. Always, except when the logs are quite new, you can tell the favourite places for tying up horses to them, because the timbers will have deep holes in them,

[p. 325]

where they have been gnawed away by the horses' teeth. They bite the timbers, while their masters eat sunflower seeds, not for food, but to pass the time.

"Now then," said old Peter, as he got down from the cart, tied the horse, gave him an armful of hay from the cart, and lifted the children out. "Be quick. We shall be late if we don't take care. I believe we are late already.--Good health to you, Fedor," he said to an old peasant; "and has the baby gone in?"

"He has, Peter. And my health is not so bad; and how is yours?"

"Good also, Fedor, thanks be to God. And will you see to these two? for I am a god-parent, and must be near the priest."

"Willingly," said the old peasant Fedor. "How they do grow, to be sure, like young birch trees. Come along then, little pigeons."

Old Peter hurried into the church, followed by Fedor with Vanya and Maroosia. They all crossed themselves and said a prayer as they went in.

The ceremony was just beginning.

The priest, in his silk robes, was standing before the gold and painted screen at the end of the church, and there were the basin of holy water, and old Peter's sister, and the nurse Babka Tanya, very

[p. 326]

proud, holding the baby in a roll of white linen, and rocking it to and fro. There were coloured pictures of saints all over the screen, which stretches from one side of the church to the other. Some of the pictures were framed in gilt frames under glass, and were partly painted and partly metal. The faces and hands of the saints were painted, and their clothes were glittering silver or gold. Little lamps were burning in front of them, and candles.

A Russian christening is very different from an English one. For one thing, the baby goes right into the water, not once, but three times. Babka Tanya unrolled the baby, and the priest covered its face with his hand, and down it went under the water, once, twice, and again. Then he took some of the sacred ointment on his finger and anointed the baby's forehead, and feet, and hands, and little round stomach. Then, with a pair of scissors, he cut a little pinch of fluff from the baby's head, and rolled it into a pellet with the ointment, and threw the pellet into the holy water. And after that the baby was carried solemnly three times round the holy water. The priest blessed it and prayed for it; and there it was, a little true Russian, ready to be

[p. 327]

carried back to its mother, Nastasia, who lay at home in her cottage waiting for it.

When they got outside the church, they all went to Nastasia's cottage to congratulate her on her baby, and to tell her what good lungs it had, and what a handsome face, and how it was exactly like its father.

Nastasia smiled at Vanya and Maroosia; but they had no eyes except for the baby, and for all that belonged to it, especially its cradle. Now a Russian baby has a very much finer cradle than an English baby. A long fir pole is fastened in the middle and at one end to the beams in the ceiling of the hut, so that the other end swings free, just below the rafters. From this end is hung a big basket, and on the ropes by which the basket hangs are fastened shawls of bright colours. The baby is tucked in the basket, the shawls closed round it; and as the mother or the nurse sits at her spinning, she just kicks the basket gently now and again, and it swings up and down from the end of the pole, as if it were hung from the branch of a tree.

This baby had a fine new basket and a larch pole, newly fixed, white and shining, under the dark beams of the ceiling. It had presents besides old Peter's gun. It had a fine wooden spoon with a picture on

[p. 328]

it of a cottage and a fish. It had a wooden bowl and a painted mug, bought from one of the peddling barges that go up and down the rivers selling chairs and crockery, just like the caravans that travel our English roads. And also, although it was so young, it had a little sacred picture, made of metal, a picture of St. Nikolai; because this was St. Nikolai's day, and the baby was called Nikolai.

There was a samovar already steaming in the cottage, and a great cake of pastry, and cabbage and egg and fish. And there were cabbage soup with sour cream, and black bread and a little white bread, and red kisel jelly and a huge jug of milk.

And everybody ate and drank and talked as if they were never going to stop. The sun was warm, and presently the men went outside and sat on a log, leaning their backs against the wall of the hut and making cigarettes and smoking, or eating sunflower seeds, cracking the husks with their teeth, taking out the white kernels, and blowing the husks away. And the women sat in the hut, and now and then brought out glasses of hot tea to the men, and then went back again to talk of what a fine man the baby would be, and to remember other babies. And the old women looked at the young mothers and laughed, and said that

[p. 329]

they could remember the days when they were christened--when they were babies themselves, no bigger than the little Nikolai who swung in the basket and squalled, or slept proudly, just as if he knew that all the world belonged to him because he was so very young. And Vanya and Maroosia ate sunflower seeds too, and sometimes played outside the cottage and sometimes inside; but mostly stood very quiet close to the swinging cradle, waiting till old Babka Tanya, the nurse, should pull the shawls a little way aside and let them see the pink, crumpled face of the little Nikolai, and the yellow fluff, just like a duckling's, which covered his bumpy pink head.

At last, towards evening, old Peter packed what was left of the hay into the cart, and packed Vanya and Maroosia in with the hay. Everybody said good-byes all round, and Peter climbed in and took up the rope reins.

"He'll be a fine man," he shouted through the door to Nastasia, "a fine man; and God grant he'll be as healthy as he is good.--Till we meet again," he cried out merrily to the villagers; and Vanya and Maroosia waved their hands, and off they drove, back again to the hut in the forest.

[p. 330]

They were very much quieter on the way back than they had been when they drove to the village in the morning. And the early summer day was quiet as it came to its end. There was a corncrake rattling in the fields, and more than once they saw frogs hop out of the road as they drove by in the twilight. A hare ran before them through the dusk and disappeared. And when they came to the wooden bridge over the stream, a tall gray bird with a long beak rose up from the bank and flew slowly away, carrying his long legs, like a thin pair of crutches, straight out behind him.

"Who is that?" asked Vanya sleepily from his nest in the hay.

"That is Mr. Crane," said old Peter. "Perhaps he is on his way to visit Miss Heron and tell her that this time he has really made up his mind, and to ask her to let bygones be bygones."

"What bygones?" said Vanya.

Old Peter watched the crane's slow, steady flight above the low marshy ground on either side of the stream, and then he said,--

"Why, surely you know all about that. It is an old story, little one, and I must have told it you a dozen times."

"No, never, grandfather," said Maroosia. She was nearly as sleepy as

[p. 331]

[paragraph continues] Vanya after the day in the village, and the fuss and pleasure of the christening.

"Oh, well," said old Peter; and he told the tale of Mr. Crane and Miss Heron as the cart bumped slowly along the rough road, while Vanya and Maroosia looked out with sleepy eyes from their nest of hay and listened, and the sky turned green, and the trees grew dim, and the frogs croaked in the ditches.

Mr. Crane and Miss Heron lived in a marsh five miles across from end to end. They lived there, and fed on the frogs which they caught in their long bills, and held up in the air for a moment, and then swallowed, standing on one leg. The marsh was always damp, and there were always plenty of frogs, and life went well for them, except that they saw very little company. They had no one to pass the time of day with. For Mr. Crane had built his little hut on one side of the marsh, and Miss Heron had built hers on the other.

So it came into the head of Mr. Crane that it was dull work living alone. If only I were married, he thought, there would be two of us to drink our tea beside the samovar at night, and I should not spend my evenings in melancholy, thinking only of frogs. I will go to see Miss Heron, and I will offer to marry her.

So off he flew to the other side of the marsh, flap, flap, with his

[p. 332]

legs hanging out behind, just as we saw him to-night. He came to the other side of the marsh, and flew down to the hut of Miss Heron. He tapped on the door with his long beak.

"Is Miss Heron at home?"

"At home," said Miss Heron.

"Will you marry me?" said Mr. Crane.

"Of course I won't," said Miss Heron; "your legs are long and ill-shaped, and your coat is short, and you fly awkwardly, and you are not even rich. You would have no dainties to feed me with. Off with you, long-bodied one, and don't come bothering me."

She shut the door in his face.

Mr. Crane looked the fool he thought himself, and went off home, wishing he had never made the journey.

But as soon as he was gone, Miss Heron, sitting alone in her hut, began to think things over and to be sorry she had spoken in such a hurry.

"After all," thinks she, "it is poor work living alone. And Mr. Crane, in spite of what I said about his looks, is really a handsome enough young fellow. Indeed at evening, when he stands on one leg, he is very handsome indeed. Yes, I will go and marry him."

[p. 333]

So off flew Miss Heron, flap, flap, over five miles of marsh, and came to the hut of Mr. Crane.

"Is the master at home?"

"At home," said Mr. Crane.

"Ah, Mr. Crane," said Miss Heron, "I was chaffing you just now. When shall we be married?"

"No, Miss Heron," said Mr. Crane; "I have no need of you at all. I do not wish to marry, and I would not take you for my wife even if I did. Clear out, and let me see the last of you." He shut the door.

Miss Heron wept tears of shame, that ran from her eyes down her long bill and dropped one by one to the ground. Then she flew away home, wishing she had not come.

As soon as she was gone Mr. Crane began to think, and he said to himself, "What a fool I was to be so short with Miss Heron! It's dull living alone. Since she wants it, I will marry her." And he flew off after Miss Heron. He came to her hut, and told her,--

"Miss Heron, I have thought things over. I have decided to marry you."

"Mr. Crane," said Miss Heron, "I, too, have thought things over. I would not marry you, not for ten thousand young frogs."

[p. 334]

Off flew Mr. Crane.

As soon as he was gone Miss Heron thought, "Why didn't I agree to marry Mr. Crane? It's dull alone. I will go at once and tell him I have changed my mind."

She flew off to betroth herself; but Mr. Crane would have none of her, and she flew back again.

And so they go on to this day--first one and then the other flying across the marsh with an offer of marriage, and flying back with shame. They have never married, and never will.

"Grandfather," whispered Maroosia, tugging at old Peter's sleeve, "Vanya is asleep."

They drove on through the forest silently, except for the creaking of the cart and the loud singing of the nightingales in the tops of the tall firs. They came at last to their hut.

Footnotes

^279:4 The little man was really one arshin high, and his beard was seven arshins long. An arshin is 0.77 of a yard, so any one who knows decimals can tell exactly how high the little man was and the precise length of his beard.

"Ah!" said old Peter, as he lifted them out, first one and then the other; "it isn't only Vanya who's asleep." And he carried them in, and put them to bed without waking them.

  

THE END.

     


===== BOOK: orfb.txt =====


The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

The Orange Fairy Book

Edited by Andrew Lang

London: Longmans, Green and Co.

[1906]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

CONTENTS

[*Preface]

[*The Story of the Hero Makoma]

[*The Magic Mirror]

[*Story of the King who would see Paradise]

[*How Isuro the Rabbit tricked Gudu]

[*Ian, the Soldier's Son]

[*The Fox and the Wolf]

[*How Ian Direach got the Blue Falcon]

[*The Ugly Duckling]

[*The Two Caskets]

[*The Goldsmith's Fortune]

[*The Enchanted Wreath]

[*The Foolish Weaver]

[*The Clever Cat]

[*The Story of Manus]

[*Pinkel the Thief]

[*The Adventures of a Jackal]

[*The Adventures of the Jachal's Eldest Son]

[*The Adventures of the Younger Son of the Jackal]

[*The Three Treasures of the Giants]

[*The Rover of the Plain]

[*The White Doe]

[*The Girl Fish]

[*The Owl and the Eagle]

[*The Frog and the Lion Fairy]

[*The Adventures of Covan the Brown-haired]

[*The Princess Bella-Flor]

[*The Bird of Truth]

[*The Mink and the Wolf]

[*Adventures of an Indian Brave]

[*How the Stalos were Tricked]

[*Andras Baive]

[*The White Slipper]

[*The Magic Book]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

Preface

The children who read fairy books, or have fairy books read to them, do not read prefaces, and the parents, aunts, uncles, and cousins, who give fairy books to their daughters, nieces, and cousines, leave prefaces unread. For whom, then, are prefaces written? When an author publishes a book 'out of his own head,' he writes the preface for his own pleasure. After reading over his book in print--to make sure that all the 'u's' are not printed as 'n's,' and all the 'n's' as 'u's' in the proper names--then the author says, mildly, in his preface, what he thinks about his own book, and what he means it to prove--if he means it to prove anything--and why it is not a better book than it is. But, perhaps, nobody reads prefaces except other authors; and critics, who hope that they will find enough in the preface to enable them to do without reading any of the book.

This appears to be the philosophy of prefaces in general, and perhaps authors might be more daring and candid than they are with advantage, and write regular criticisms of their own books in their prefaces, for nobody can be so good a critic of himself as the author--if he has a sense of humour. If he has not, the less he says in his preface the better.

These Fairy Books, however, are not written by the Editor, as he has often explained, 'out of his own head.' The stories are taken from those told by grannies to grandchildren in many countries and in many languages-- French, Italian, Spanish, Catalan, Gaelic, Icelandic, Cherokee, African, Indian, Australian, Slavonic, Eskimo, and what not. The stories are not literal, or word by word translations, but have been altered in many ways to make them suitable for children. Much has been left out in places, and the narrative has been broken up into conversations, the characters telling each other how matters stand, and speaking for themselves, as children, and some older people, prefer them to do. In many tales, fairly cruel and savage deeds are done, and these have been softened down as much as possible; though it is impossible, even if it were desirable, to conceal the circumstance that popular stories were never intended to be tracts and nothing else. Though they usually take the side of courage and kindness, and the virtues in general, the old story-tellers admire successful cunning as much as Homer does in the Odyssey. At least, if the cunning hero, human or animal, is the weaker, like Odysseus, Brer Rabbit, and many others, the story-teller sees little in intellect but superior cunning, by which tiny Jack gets the better of the giants. In the fairy tales of no country are 'improper' incidents common, which is to the credit of human nature, as they were obviously composed mainly for children. It is not difficult to get rid of this element when it does occur in popular tales.

The old puzzle remains a puzzle--why do the stories of the remotest people so closely resemble each other? Of course, in the immeasurable past, they have been carried about by conquering races, and learned by conquering races from vanquished peoples. Slaves carried far from home brought their stories with them into captivity. Wanderers, travellers, shipwrecked men, merchants, and wives stolen from alien tribes have diffused the stories; gipsies and Jews have passed them about; Roman soldiers of many different races, moved here and there about the Empire, have trafficked in them. From the remotest days men have been wanderers, and wherever they went their stories accompanied them. The slave trade might take a Greek to Persia, a Persian to Greece; an Egyptian woman to Phoenicia; a Babylonian to Egypt; a Scandinavian child might be carried with the amber from the Baltic to the Adriatic; or a Sidonian to Ophir, wherever Ophir may have been; while the Portuguese may have borne their tales to South Africa, or to Asia, and thence brought back other tales to Egypt. The stories wandered wherever the Buddhist missionaries went, and the earliest French voyageurs told them to the Red Indians. These facts help to account for the sameness of the stories everywhere; and the uniformity of human fancy in early societies must be the cause of many other resemblances.

In this volume there are stories from the natives of Rhodesia, collected by Mr. Fairbridge, who speaks the native language, and one is brought by Mr. Cripps from another part of Africa, Uganda. Three tales from the Punjaub were collected and translated by Major Campbell. Various savage tales, which needed a good deal of editing, are derived from the learned pages of the 'Journal of the Anthropological Institute.' With these exceptions, and 'The Magic Book,' translated by Mrs. Pedersen, from 'Eventyr fra Jylland,' by Mr. Ewald Tang Kristensen (Stories from Jutland), all the tales have been done, from various sources, by Mrs. Lang, who has modified, where it seemed desirable, all the narratives.

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

The Orange Fairy Book

The Story of the Hero Makoma From the Senna (Oral Tradition)

Once upon a time, at the town of Senna on the banks of the Zambesi, was born a child. He was not like other children, for he was very tall and strong; over his shoulder he carried a big sack, and in his hand an iron hammer. He could also speak like a grown man, but usually he was very silent.

One day his mother said to him: 'My child, by what name shall we know you?'

And he answered: 'Call all the head men of Senna here to the river's bank.' And his mother called the head men of the town, and when they had come he led them down to a deep black pool in the river where all the fierce crocodiles lived.

'O great men!' he said, while they all listened, 'which of you will leap into the pool and overcome the crocodiles?' But no one would come forward. So he turned and sprang into the water and disappeared.

The people held their breath, for they thought: 'Surely the boy is bewitched and throws away his life, for the crocodiles will eat him!' Then suddenly the ground trembled, and the pool, heaving and swirling, became red with blood, and presently the boy rising to the surface swam on shore.

But he was no longer just a boy! He was stronger than any man and very tall and handsome, so that the people shouted with gladness when they saw him.

'Now, O my people!' he cried, waving his hand, 'you know my name--I am Makoma, "the Greater"; for have I not slain the crocodiles into the pool where none would venture?'

Then he said to his mother: 'Rest gently, my mother, for I go to make a home for myself and become a hero.' Then, entering his hut he took Nu-endo, his iron hammer, and throwing the sack over his shoulder, he went away.

Makoma crossed the Zambesi, and for many moons he wandered towards the north and west until he came to a very hilly country where, one day, he met a huge giant making mountains.

'Greeting,' shouted Makoma, 'you are you?'

'I am Chi-eswa-mapiri, who makes the mountains,' answered the giant; 'and who are you?'

'I am Makoma, which signifies "greater,"' answered he.

'Greater than who?' asked the giant.

'Greater than you!' answered Makoma.

The giant gave a roar and rushed upon him. Makoma said nothing, but swinging his great hammer, Nu-endo, he struck the giant upon the head.

He struck him so hard a blow that the giant shrank into quite a little man, who fell upon his knees saying: 'You are indeed greater than I, O Makoma; take me with you to be your slave!' So Makoma picked him up and dropped him into the sack that he carried upon his back.

He was greater than ever now, for all the giant's strength had gone into him; and he resumed his journey, carrying his burden with as little difficulty as an eagle might carry a hare.

Before long he came to a country broken up with huge stones and immense clods of earth. Looking over one of the heaps he saw a giant wrapped in dust dragging out the very earth and hurling it in handfuls on either side of him.

'Who are you,' cried Makoma, 'that pulls up the earth in this way?'

'I am Chi-dubula-taka,' said he, 'and I am making the river-beds.'

'Do you know who I am?' said Makoma. 'I am he that is called "greater"!'

'Greater than who?' thundered the giant.

'Greater than you!' answered Makoma.

With a shout, Chi-dubula-taka seized a great clod of earth and launched it at Makoma. But the hero had his sack held over his left arm and the stones and earth fell harmlessly upon it, and, tightly gripping his iron hammer, he rushed in and struck the giant to the ground. Chi-dubula-taka grovelled before him, all the while growing smaller and smaller; and when he had become a convenient size Makoma picked him up and put him into the sack beside Chi-eswa-mapiri.

He went on his way even greater than before, as all the river-maker's power had become his; and at last he came to a forest of bao-babs and thorn trees. He was astonished at their size, for every one was full grown and larger than any trees he had ever seen, and close by he saw Chi-gwisa-miti, the giant who was planting the forest.

Chi-gwisa-miti was taller than either of his brothers, but Makoma was not afraid, and called out to him: 'Who are you, O Big One?'

'I,' said the giant, 'am Chi-gwisa-miti, and I am planting these bao-babs and thorns as food for my children the elephants.'

'Leave off!' shouted the hero, 'for I am Makoma, and would like to exchange a blow with thee!'

The giant, plucking up a monster bao-bab by the roots, struck heavily at Makoma; but the hero sprang aside, and as the weapon sank deep into the soft earth, whirled Nu-endo the hammer round his head and felled the giant with one blow.

So terrible was the stroke that Chi-gwisa-miti shrivelled up as the other giants had done; and when he had got back his breath he begged Makoma to take him as his servant. 'For,' said he, 'it is honourable to serve a man so great as thou.'

Makoma, after placing him in his sack, proceeded upon his journey, and travelling for many days he at last reached a country so barren and rocky that not a single living thing grew upon it--everywhere reigned grim desolation. And in the midst of this dead region he found a man eating fire.

'What are you doing?' demanded Makoma.

'I am eating fire,' answered the man, laughing; 'and my name is Chi-idea-moto, for I am the flame-spirit, and can waste and destroy what I like.'

'You are wrong,' said Makoma; 'for I am Makoma, who is "greater" than you--and you cannot destroy me!'

The fire-eater laughed again, and blew a flame at Makoma. But the hero sprang behind a rock--just in time, for the ground upon which he had been standing was turned to molten glass, like an overbaked pot, by the heat of the flame-spirit's breath.

Then the hero flung his iron hammer at Chi-idea-moto, and, striking him, it knocked him helpless; so Makoma placed him in the sack, Woro-nowu, with the other great men that he had overcome.

And now, truly, Makoma was a very great hero; for he had the strength to make hills, the industry to lead rivers over dry wastes, foresight and wisdom in planting trees, and the power of producing fire when he wished.

Wandering on he arrived one day at a great plain, well watered and full of game; and in the very middle of it, close to a large river, was a grassy spot, very pleasant to make a home upon.

Makoma was so delighted with the little meadow that he sat down under a large tree and removing the sack from his shoulder, took out all the giants and set them before him. 'My friends,' said he, 'I have travelled far and am weary. Is not this such a place as would suit a hero for his home? Let us then go, to-morrow, to bring in timber to make a kraal.'

So the next day Makoma and the giants set out to get poles to build the kraal, leaving only Chi-eswa-mapiri to look after the place and cook some venison which they had killed. In the evening, when they returned, they found the giant helpless and tied to a tree by one enormous hair!

'How is it,' said Makoma, astonished, 'that we find you thus bound and helpless?'

'O Chief,' answered Chi-eswa-mapiri, 'at mid-day a man came out of the river; he was of immense statue, and his grey moustaches were of such length that I could not see where they ended! He demanded of me "Who is thy master?" And I answered: "Makoma, the greatest of heroes." Then the man seized me, and pulling a hair from his moustache, tied me to this tree--even as you see me.'

Makoma was very wroth, but he said nothing, and drawing his finger-nail across the hair (which was as thick and strong as palm rope) cut it, and set free the mountain-maker.

The three following days exactly the same thing happened, only each time with a different one of the party; and on the fourth day Makoma stayed in camp when the others went to cut poles, saying that he would see for himself what sort of man this was that lived in the river and whose moustaches were so long that they extended beyond men's sight.

So when the giants had gone he swept and tidied the camp and put some venison on the fire to roast. At midday, when the sun was right overhead, he heard a rumbling noise from the river, and looking up he saw the head and shoulders of an enormous man emerging from it. And behold! right down the river-bed and up the river-bed, till they faded into the blue distance, stretched the giant's grey moustaches!

'Who are you?' bellowed the giant, as soon as he was out of the water.

'I am he that is called Makoma,' answered the hero; 'and, before I slay thee, tell me also what is thy name and what thou doest in the river?'

'My name is Chin-debou Mau-giri,' said the giant. 'My home is in the river, for my moustache is the grey fever-mist that hangs above the water, and with which I bind all those that come unto me so that they die.'

'You cannot bind me!' shouted Makoma, rushing upon him and striking with his hammer. But the river giant was so slimy that the blow slid harmlessly off his green chest, and as Makoma stumbled and tried to regain his balance, the giant swung one of his long hairs around him and tripped him up.

For a moment Makoma was helpless, but remembering the power of the flame-spirit which had entered into him, he breathed a fiery breath upon the giant's hair and cut himself free.

As Chin-debou Mau-giri leaned forward to seize him the hero flung his sack Woronowu over the giant's slippery head, and gripping his iron hammer, struck him again; this time the blow alighted upon the dry sack and Chin-debou Mau-giri fell dead.

When the four giants returned at sunset with the poles, they rejoiced to find that Makoma had overcome the fever-spirit, and they feasted on the roast venison till far into the night; but in the morning, when they awoke, Makoma was already warming his hands to the fire, and his face was gloomy.

'In the darkness of the night, O my friends,' he said presently, 'the white spirits of my fathers came upon me and spoke, saying: "Get thee hence, Makoma, for thou shalt have no rest until thou hast found and fought with Sakatirina, who had five heads, and is very great and strong; so take leave of thy friends, for thou must go alone."'

Then the giants were very sad, and bewailed the loss of their hero; but Makoma comforted them, and gave back to each the gifts he had taken from them. Then bidding them 'Farewell,' he went on his way.

Makoma travelled far towards the west; over rough mountains and water-logged morasses, fording deep rivers, and tramping for days across dry deserts where most men would have died, until at length he arrived at a hut standing near some large peaks, and inside the hut were two beautiful women.

'Greeting!' said the hero. 'Is this the country of Sakatirina of five heads, whom I am seeking?'

'We greet you, O Great One!' answered the women. 'We are the wives of Sakatirina; your search is at an end, for there stands he whom you seek!' And they pointed to what Makoma had thought were two tall mountain peaks. 'Those are his legs,' they said; 'his body you cannot see, for it is hidden in the clouds.'

Makoma was astonished when he beheld how tall was the giant; but, nothing daunted, he went forward until he reached one of Sakatirina's legs, which he struck heavily with Nu-endo. Nothing happened, so he hit again and then again until, presently, he heard a tired, far-away voice saying: 'Who is it that scratches my feet?'

And Makoma shouted as loud as he could, answering: 'It is I, Makoma, who is called "Greater"!' And he listened, but there was no answer.

Then Makoma collected all the dead brushwood and trees that he could find, and making an enormous pile round the giant's legs, set a light to it.

This time the giant spoke; his voice was very terrible, for it was the rumble of thunder in the clouds. 'Who is it,' he said, 'making that fire smoulder around my feet?'

'It is I, Makoma!' shouted the hero. 'And I have come from far away to see thee, O Sakatirina, for the spirits of my fathers bade me go seek and fight with thee, lest I should grow fat, and weary of myself.'

There was silence for a while, and then the giant spoke softly: 'It is good, O Makoma!' he said. 'For I too have grown weary. There is no man so great as I, therefore I am all alone. Guard thyself!' and bending suddenly he seized the hero in his hands and dashed him upon the ground. And lo! instead of death, Makoma had found life, for he sprang to his feet mightier in strength and stature than before, and rushing in he gripped the giant by the waist and wrestled with him.

Hour by hour they fought, and mountains rolled beneath their feet like pebbles in a flood; now Makoma would break away, and summoning up his strength, strike the giant with Nu-endo his iron hammer, and Sakatirina would pluck up the mountains and hurl them upon the hero, but neither one could slay the other. At last, upon the second day, they grappled so strongly that they could not break away; but their strength was failing, and, just as the sun was sinking, they fell together to the ground, insensible.

In the morning when they awoke, Mulimo the Great Spirit was standing by them; and he said: 'O Makoma and Sakatirina! Ye are heroes so great that no man may come against you. Therefore ye will leave the world and take up your home with me in the clouds.' And as he spake the heroes became invisible to the people of the Earth, and were no more seen among them.

[Native Rhodesian Tale.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

The Magic Mirror From the Senna

A long, long while ago, before ever the White Men were seen in Senna, there lived a man called Gopani-Kufa.

One day, as he was out hunting, he came upon a strange sight. An enormous python had caught an antelope and coiled itself around it; the antelope, striking out in despair with its horns, had pinned the python's neck to a tree, and so deeply had its horns sunk in the soft wood that neither creature could get away.

'Help!' cried the antelope, 'for I was doing no harm, yet I have been caught, and would have been eaten, had I not defended myself.'

'Help me,' said the python, 'for I am Insato, King of all the Reptiles, and will reward you well!'

Gopani-Kufa considered for a moment, then stabbing the antelope with his assegai, he set the python free.

'I thank you,' said the python; 'come back here with the new moon, when I shall have eaten the antelope, and I will reward you as I promised.'

'Yes,' said the dying antelope, 'he will reward you, and lo! your reward shall be your own undoing!'

Gopani-Kufa went back to his kraal, and with the new moon he returned again to the spot where he had saved the python.

Insato was lying upon the ground, still sleepy from the effects of his huge meal, and when he saw the man he thanked him again, and said: 'Come with me now to Pita, which is my own country, and I will give you what you will of all my possessions.'

Gopani-Kufa at first was afraid, thinking of what the antelope had said, but finally he consented and followed Insato into the forest.

For several days they travelled, and at last they came to a hole leading deep into the earth. It was not very wide, but large enough to admit a man. 'Hold on to my tail,' said Insato, 'and I will go down first, drawing you after me.' The man did so, and Insato entered.

Down, down, down they went for days, all the while getting deeper and deeper into the earth, until at last the darkness ended and they dropped into a beautiful country; around them grew short green grass, on which browsed herds of cattle and sheep and goats. In the distance Gopani-Kufa saw a great collection of houses all square, built of stone and very tall, and their roofs were shining with gold and burnished iron.

Gopani-Kufa turned to Insato, but found, in the place of the python, a man, strong and handsome, with the great snake's skin wrapped round him for covering; and on his arms and neck were rings of pure gold.

The man smiled. 'I am Insato,' said he, 'but in my own country I take man's shape--even as you see me--for this is Pita, the land over which I am king.' He then took Gopani-Kufa by the hand and led him towards the town.

On the way they passed rivers in which men and women were bathing and fishing and boating; and farther on they came to gardens covered with heavy crops of rice and maize, and many other grains which Gopani-Kufa did not even know the name of. And as they passed, the people who were singing at their work in the fields, abandoned their labours and saluted Insato with delight, bringing also palm wine and green cocoanuts for refreshment, as to one returned from a long journey.

'These are my children!' said Insato, waving his hand towards the people. Gopani-Kufa was much astonished at all that he saw, but he said nothing. Presently they came to the town; everything here, too, was beautiful, and everything that a man might desire he could obtain. Even the grains of dust in the streets were of gold and silver.

Insato conducted Gopani-Kufa to the palace, and showing him his rooms, and the maidens who would wait upon him, told him that they would have a great feast that night, and on the morrow he might name his choice of the riches of Pita and it should be given him. Then he was away.

Now Gopani-Kufa had a wasp called Zengi-mizi. Zengi-mizi was not an ordinary wasp, for the spirit of the father of Gopani-Kufa had entered it, so that it was exceedingly wise. In times of doubt Gopani-Kufa always consulted the wasp as to what had better be done, so on this occasion he took it out of the little rush basket in which he carried it, saying: 'Zengi-mizi, what gift shall I ask of Insato to-morrow when he would know the reward he shall bestow on me for saving his life?'

'Biz-z-z,' hummed Zengi-mizi, 'ask him for Sipao the Mirror.' And it flew back into its basket.

Gopani-Kufa was astonished at this answer; but knowing that the words of Zengi-mizi were true words, he determined to make the request. So that night they feasted, and on the morrow Insato came to Gopani-Kufa and, giving him greeting joyfully, he said:

'Now, O my friend, name your choice amongst my possessions and you shall have it!'

'O king!' answered Gopani-Kufa, 'out of all your possessions I will have the Mirror, Sipao.'

The king started. 'O friend, Gopani-Kufa,' he said, 'ask anything but that! I did not think that you would request that which is most precious to me.'

'Let me think over it again then, O king,' said Gopani-Kufa, 'and to-morrow I will let you know if I change my mind.'

But the king was still much troubled, fearing the loss of Sipao, for the mirror had magic powers, so that he who owned it had but to ask and his wish would be fulfilled; to it Insato owed all that he possessed.

As soon as the king left him, Gopani-Kufa again took Zengi-mizi, out of his basket. 'Zengi-mizi,' he said, 'the king seems loth to grant my request for the Mirror--is there not some other thing of equal value for which I might ask?'

And the wasp answered: 'There is nothing in the world, O Gopani-Kufa, which is of such value as this Mirror, for it is a Wishing Mirror, and accomplishes the desires of him who owns it. If the king hesitates, go to him the next day, and the day after, and in the end he will bestow the Mirror upon you, for you saved his life.'

And it was even so. For three days Gopani-Kufa returned the same answer to the king, and, at last, with tears in his eyes, Insato gave him the Mirror, which was of polished iron, saying: 'Take Sipao, then, O Gopani-Kufa, and may thy wishes come true. Go back now to thine own country; Sipao will show you the way.'

Gopani-Kufa was greatly rejoiced, and, taking farewell of the king, said to the Mirror:

'Sipao, Sipao, I wish to be back upon the Earth again!'

Instantly he found himself standing upon the upper earth; but, not knowing the spot, he said again to the Mirror:

'Sipao, Sipao, I want the path to my own kraal!'

And behold! right before him lay the path!

When he arrived home he found his wife and daughter mourning for him, for they thought that he had been eaten by lions; but he comforted them, saying that while following a wounded antelope he had missed his way and had wandered for a long time before he had found the path again.

That night he asked Zengi-mizi, in whom sat the spirit of his father, what he had better ask Sipao for next?

'Biz-z-z,' said the wasp, 'would you not like to be as great a chief as Insato?'

And Gopani-Kufa smiled, and took the Mirror and said to it:

'Sipao, Sipao, I want a town as great as that of Insato, the King of Pita; and I wish to be chief over it!'

Then all along the banks of the Zambesi river, which flowed near by, sprang up streets of stone buildings, and their roofs shone with gold and burnished iron like those in Pita; and in the streets men and women were walking, and young boys were driving out the sheep and cattle to pasture; and from the river came shouts and laughter from the young men and maidens who had launched their canoes and were fishing. And when the people of the new town beheld Gopani-Kufa they rejoiced greatly and hailed him as chief.

Gopani-Kufa was now as powerful as Insato the King of the Reptiles had been, and he and his family moved into the palace that stood high above the other buildings right in the middle of the town. His wife was too astonished at all these wonders to ask any questions, but his daughter Shasasa kept begging him to tell her how he had suddenly become so great; so at last he revealed the whole secret, and even entrusted Sipao the Mirror to her care, saying:

'It will be safer with you, my daughter, for you dwell apart; whereas men come to consult me on affairs of state, and the Mirror might be stolen.'

Then Shasasa took the Magic Mirror and hid it beneath her pillow, and after that for many years Gopani-Kufa ruled his people both well and wisely, so that all men loved him, and never once did he need to ask Sipao to grant him a wish.

Now it happened that, after many years, when the hair of Gopani-Kufa was turning grey with age, there came white men to that country. Up the Zambesi they came, and they fought long and fiercely with Gopani-Kufa; but, because of the power of the Magic Mirror, he beat them, and they fled to the sea-coast. Chief among them was one Rei, a man of much cunning, who sought to discover whence sprang Gopani-Kufa's power. So one day he called to him a trusty servant named Butou, and said: 'Go you to the town and find out for me what is the secret of its greatness.'

And Butou, dressing himself in rags, set out, and when he came to Gopani-Kufa's town he asked for the chief; and the people took him into the presence of Gopani-Kufa. When the white man saw him he humbled himself, and said: 'O Chief! take pity on me, for I have no home! When Rei marched against you I alone stood apart, for I knew that all the strength of the Zambesi lay in your hands, and because I would not fight against you he turned me forth into the forest to starve!'

And Gopani-Kufa believed the white man's story, and he took him in and feasted him, and gave him a house.

In this way the end came. For the heart of Shasasa, the daughter of Gopani-Kufa, went forth to Butou the traitor, and from her he learnt the secret of the Magic Mirror. One night, when all the town slept, he felt beneath her pillow and, finding the Mirror, he stole it and fled back with it to Rei, the chief of the white men.

So it befell that, one day, as Gopani-Kufa was gazing up at the river from a window of the palace he again saw the war-canoes of the white men; and at the sight his spirit misgave him.

'Shasasa! my daughter!' he cried wildly, 'go fetch me the mirror, for the white men are at hand.'

'Woe is me, my father!' she sobbed. 'The Mirror is gone! For I loved Butou the traitor, and he has stolen Sipao from me!'

Then Gopani-Kufa calmed himself, and drew out Zengi-mizi from its rush basket.

'O spirit of my father!' he said, 'what now shall I do?'

'O Gopani-Kufa!' hummed the wasp, 'there is nothing now that can be done, for the words of the antelope which you slew are being fulfilled.'

'Alas! I am an old man--I had forgotten!' cried the chief. 'The words of the antelope were true words--my reward shall be my undoing--they are being fulfilled!'

Then the white men fell upon the people of Gopani-Kufa and slew them together with the chief and his daughter Shasasa; and since then all the power of the Earth has rested in the hands of the white men, for they have in their possession Sipao, the Magic Mirror.

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

Story of the King Who Would See Paradise

Once upon a time there was king who, one day out hunting, came upon a fakeer in a lonely place in the mountains. The fakeer was seated on a little old bedstead reading the Koran, with his patched cloak thrown over his shoulders.

The king asked him what he was reading; and he said he was reading about Paradise, and praying that he might be worthy to enter there. Then they began to talk, and, by-and-bye, the king asked the fakeer if he could show him a glimpse of Paradise, for he found it very difficult to believe in what he could not see. The fakeer replied that he was asking a very difficult, and perhaps a very dangerous, thing; but that he would pray for him, and perhaps he might be able to do it; only he warned the king both against the dangers of his unbelief, and against the curiosity which prompted him to ask this thing. However, the king was not to be turned from his purpose, and he promised the fakeer always to provided him with food, if he, in return, would pray for him. To this the fakeer agreed, and so they parted.

Time went on, and the king always sent the old fakeer his food according to his promise; but, whenever he sent to ask him when he was going to show him Paradise, the fakeer always replied: 'Not yet, not yet!'

After a year or two had passed by, the king heard one day that the fakeer was very ill-- indeed, he was believed to be dying. Instantly he hurried off himself, and found that it was really true, and that the fakeer was even then breathing his last. There and then the king besought him to remember his promise, and to show him a glimpse of Paradise. The dying fakeer replied that if the king would come to his funeral, and, when the grave was filled in, and everyone else was gone away, he would come and lay his hand upon the grave, he would keep his word, and show him a glimpse of Paradise. At the same time he implored the king not to do this thing, but to be content to see Paradise when God called him there. Still the king's curiosity was so aroused that he would not give way.

Accordingly, after the fakeer was dead, and had been buried, he stayed behind when all the rest went away; and then, when he was quite alone, he stepped forward, and laid his hand upon the grave! Instantly the ground opened, and the astonished king, peeping in, saw a flight of rough steps, and, at the bottom of them, the fakeer sitting, just as he used to sit, on his rickety bedstead, reading the Koran!

At first the king was so surprised and frightened that he could only stare; but the fakeer beckoned to him to come down, so, mustering up his courage, he boldly stepped down into the grave.

The fakeer rose, and, making a sign to the king to follow, walked a few paces along a dark passage. Then he stopped, turned solemnly to his companion, and, with a movement of his hand, drew aside as it were a heavy curtain, and revealed--what? No one knows what was there shown to the king, nor did he ever tell anyone; but, when the fakeer at length dropped the curtain, and the king turned to leave the place, he had had his glimpse of Paradise! Trembling in every limb, he staggered back along the passage, and stumbled up the steps out of the tomb into the fresh air again.

The dawn was breaking. It seemed odd to the king that he had been so long in the grave. It appeared but a few minutes ago that he had descended, passed along a few steps to the place where he had peeped beyond the veil, and returned again after perhaps five minutes of that wonderful view! And what WAS it he had seen? He racked his brains to remember, but he could not call to mind a single thing! How curious everything looked too! Why, his own city, which by now he was entering, seemed changed and strange to him! The sun was already up when he turned into the palace gate and entered the public durbar hall. It was full; and there upon the throne sat another king! The poor king, all bewildered, sat down and stared about him. Presently a chamberlain came across and asked him why he sat unbidden in the king's presence. 'But I am the king!' he cried.

'What king?' said the chamberlain.

'The true king of this country,' said he indignantly.

Then the chamberlain went away, and spoke to the king who sat on the throne, and the old king heard words like 'mad,' 'age,' 'compassion.' Then the king on the throne called him to come forward, and, as he went, he caught sight of himself reflected in the polished steel shield of the bodyguard, and started back in horror! He was old, decrepit, dirty, and ragged! His long white beard and locks were unkempt, and straggled all over his chest and shoulders. Only one sign of royalty remained to him, and that was the signet ring upon his right hand. He dragged it off with shaking fingers and held it up to the king.

'Tell me who I am,' he cried; 'there is my signet, who once sat where you sit--even yesterday!'

The king looked at him compassionately, and examined the signet with curiosity. Then he commanded, and they brought out dusty records and archives of the kingdom, and old coins of previous reigns, and compared them faithfully. At last the king turned to the old man, and said: 'Old man, such a king as this whose signet thou hast, reigned seven hundred years ago; but he is said to have disappeared, none know whither; where got you the ring?'

Then the old man smote his breast, and cried out with a loud lamentation; for he understood that he, who was not content to wait patiently to see the Paradise of the faithful, had been judged already. And he turned and left the hall without a word, and went into the jungle, where he lived for twenty-five years a life of prayer and meditations, until at last the Angel of Death came to him, and mercifully released him, purged and purified through his punishment.

[A Pathan story told to Major Campbell.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

How Isuro the Rabbit Tricked Gudu

Far away in a hot country, where the forests are very thick and dark, and the rivers very swift and strong, there once lived a strange pair of friends. Now one of the friends was a big white rabbit named Isuro, and the other was a tall baboon called Gudu, and so fond were they of each other that they were seldom seen apart.

One day, when the sun was hotter even than usual, the rabbit awoke from his midday sleep, and saw Gudu the baboon standing beside him.

'Get up,' said Gudu; 'I am going courting, and you must come with me. So put some food in a bag, and sling it round your neck, for we may not be able to find anything to eat for a long while.'

Then the rabbit rubbed his eyes, and gathered a store of fresh green things from under the bushes, and told Gudu that he was ready for the journey.

They went on quite happily for some distance, and at last they came to a river with rocks scattered here and there across the stream.

'We can never jump those wide spaces if we are burdened with food,' said Gudu, 'we must throw it into the river, unless we wish to fall in ourselves.' And stooping down, unseen by Isuro, who was in front of him, Gudu picked up a big stone, and threw it into the water with a loud splash.

'It is your turn now,' he cried to Isuro. And with a heavy sigh, the rabbit unfastened his bag of food, which fell into the river.

The road on the other side led down an avenue of trees, and before they had gone very far Gudu opened the bag that lay hidden in the thick hair about his neck, and began to eat some delicious-looking fruit.

'Where did you get that from?' asked Isuro enviously.

'Oh, I found after all that I could get across the rocks quite easily, so it seemed a pity not to keep my bag,' answered Gudu.

'Well, as you tricked me into throwing away mine, you ought to let me share with you,' said Isuro. But Gudu pretended not to hear him, and strode along the path.

By-and-bye they entered a wood, and right in front of them was a tree so laden with fruit that its branches swept the ground. And some of the fruit was still green, and some yellow. The rabbit hopped forward with joy, for he was very hungry; but Gudu said to him: 'Pluck the green fruit, you will find it much the best. I will leave it all for you, as you have had no dinner, and take the yellow for myself.' So the rabbit took one of the green oranges and began to bite it, but its skin was so hard that he could hardly get his teeth through the rind.

'It does not taste at all nice,' he cried, screwing up his face; 'I would rather have one of the yellow ones.'

'No! no! I really could not allow that,' answered Gudu. 'They would only make you ill. Be content with the green fruit.' And as they were all he could get, Isuro was forced to put up with them.

After this had happened two or three times, Isuro at last had his eyes opened, and made up his mind that, whatever Gudu told him, he would do exactly the opposite. However, by this time they had reached the village where dwelt Gudu's future wife, and as they entered Gudu pointed to a clump of bushes, and said to Isuro: 'Whenever I am eating, and you hear me call out that my food has burnt me, run as fast as you can and gather some of those leaves that they may heal my mouth.'

The rabbit would have liked to ask him why he ate food that he knew would burn him, only he was afraid, and just nodded in reply; but when they had gone on a little further, he said to Gudu:

'I have dropped my needle; wait here a moment while I go and fetch it.'

'Be quick then,' answered Gudu, climbing into a tree. And the rabbit hastened back to the bushes, and gathered a quantity of the leaves, which he hid among his fur, 'For,' thought he, 'if I get them now I shall save myself the trouble of a walk by-and-by.'

When he had plucked as many as he wanted he returned to Gudu, and they went on together.

The sun was almost setting by the time they reached their journey's end and being very tired they gladly sat down by a well. Then Gudu's betrothed, who had been watching for him, brought out a pitcher of water--which she poured over them to wash off the dust of the road--and two portions of food. But once again the rabbit's hopes were dashed to the ground, for Gudu said hastily:

'The custom of the village forbids you to eat till I have finished.' And Isuro did not know that Gudu was lying, and that he only wanted more food. So he saw hungrily looking on, waiting till his friend had had enough.

In a little while Gudu screamed loudly: 'I am burnt! I am burnt!' though he was not burnt at all. Now, though Isuro had the leaves about him, he did not dare to produce them at the last moment lest the baboon should guess why he had stayed behind. So he just went round a corner for a short time, and then came hopping back in a great hurry. But, quick though he was, Gudu had been quicker still, and nothing remained but some drops of water.

'How unlucky you are,' said Gudu, snatching the leaves; 'no sooner had you gone than ever so many people arrived, and washed their hands, as you see, and ate your portion.' But, though Isuro knew better than to believe him, he said nothing, and went to bed hungrier than he had ever been in his life.

Early next morning they started for another village, and passed on the way a large garden where people were very busy gathering monkey-nuts.

'You can have a good breakfast at last,' said Gudu, pointing to a heap of empty shells; never doubting but that Isuro would meekly take the portion shown him, and leave the real nuts for himself. But what was his surprise when Isuro answered:

'Thank you; I think I should prefer these.' And, turning to the kernels, never stopped as long as there was one left. And the worst of it was that, with so many people about, Gudu could not take the nuts from him.

It was night when they reached the village where dwelt the mother of Gudu's betrothed, who laid meat and millet porridge before them.

'I think you told me you were fond of porridge,' said Gudu; but Isuro answered: 'You are mistaking me for somebody else, as I always eat meat when I can get it.' And again Gudu was forced to be content with the porridge, which he hated.

While he was eating it, however a sudden thought darted into his mind, and he managed to knock over a great pot of water which was hanging in front of the fire, and put it quite out.

'Now,' said the cunning creature to himself, 'I shall be able in the dark to steal his meat!' But the rabbit had grown as cunning as he, and standing in a corner hid the meat behind him, so that the baboon could not find it.

'O Gudu!' he cried, laughing aloud, 'it is you who have taught me to be clever.' And calling to the people of the house, he bade them kindle the fire, for Gudu would sleep by it, but that he would pass the night with some friends in another hut.

It was still quite dark when Isuro heard his name called very softly, and, on opening his eyes, beheld Gudu standing by him. Laying his finger on his nose, in token of silence, he signed to Isuro to get up and follow him, and it was not until they were some distance from the hut that Gudu spoke.

'I am hungry and want something to eat better than that nasty porridge that I had for supper. So I am going to kill one of those goats, and as you are a good cook you must boil the flesh for me.' The rabbit nodded, and Gudu disappeared behind a rock, but soon returned dragging the dead goat with him. The two then set about skinning it, after which they stuffed the skin with dried leaves, so that no one would have guessed it was not alive, and set it up in the middle of a lump of bushes, which kept it firm on its feet. While he was doing this, Isuro collected sticks for a fire, and when it was kindled, Gudu hastened to another hut to steal a pot which he filled with water from the river, and, planting two branches in the ground, they hung the pot with the meat in it over the fire.

'It will not be fit to eat for two hours at least,' said Gudu, 'so we can both have a nap.' And he stretched himself out on the ground, and pretended to fall fast asleep, but, in reality, he was only waiting till it was safe to take all the meat for himself. 'Surely I hear him snore,' he thought; and he stole to the place where Isuro was lying on a pile of wood, but the rabbit's eyes were wide open.

'How tiresome,' muttered Gudu, as he went back to his place; and after waiting a little longer he got up, and peeped again, but still the rabbit's pink eyes stared widely. If Gudu had only known, Isuro was asleep all the time; but this he never guessed, and by-and-bye he grew so tired with watching that he went to sleep himself. Soon after, Isuro woke up, and he too felt hungry, so he crept softly to the pot and ate all the meat, while he tied the bones together and hung them in Gudu's fur. After that he went back to the wood-pile and slept again.

In the morning the mother of Gudu's betrothed came out to milk her goats, and on going to the bushes where the largest one seemed entangled, she found out the trick. She made such lament that the people of the village came running, and Gudu and Isuro jumped up also, and pretended to be as surprised and interested as the rest. But they must have looked guilty after all, for suddenly an old man pointed to them, and cried:

'Those are thieves.' And at the sound of his voice the big Gudu trembled all over.

'How dare you say such things? I defy you to prove it,' answered Isuro boldly. And he danced forward, and turned head over heels, and shook himself before them all.

'I spoke hastily; you are innocent,' said the old man; 'but now let the baboon do likewise.' And when Gudu began to jump the goat's bones rattled and the people cried: 'It is Gudu who is the goat-slayer!' But Gudu answered:

'Nay, I did not kill your goat; it was Isuro, and he ate the meat, and hung the bones round my neck. So it is he who should die!' And the people looked at each other, for they knew not what to believe. At length one man said:

'Let them both die, but they may choose their own deaths.'

Then Isuro answered:

'If we must die, put us in the place where the wood is cut, and heap it up all round us, so that we cannot escape, and set fire to the wood; and if one is burned and the other is not, then he that is burned is the goat-slayer.'

And the people did as Isuro had said. But Isuro knew of a hole under the wood-pile, and when the fire was kindled he ran into the hole, but Gudu died there.

When the fire had burned itself out and only ashes were left where the wood had been, Isuro came out of his hole, and said to the people:

'Lo! did I not speak well? He who killed your goat is among those ashes.'

[Mashona Story.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

Ian, the Soldier's Son

There dwelt a knight in Grianaig of the land of the West, who had three daughters, and for goodness and beauty they had not their like in all the isles. All the people loved them, and loud was the weeping when one day, as the three maidens sat on the rocks on the edge of the sea, dipping their feet in the water, there arose a great beast from under the waves and swept them away beneath the ocean. And none knew whither they had gone, or how to seek them.

Now there lived in a town a few miles off a soldier who had three sons, fine youths and strong, and the best players at shinny in that country. At Christmastide that year, when families met together and great feasts were held, Ian, the youngest of the three brothers, said:

'Let us have a match at shinny on the lawn of the knight of Grianaig, for his lawn is wider and the grass smoother than ours.'

But the others answered:

'Nay, for he is in sorrow, and he will think of the games that we have played there when his daughters looked on.'

'Let him be pleased or angry as he will,' said Ian; 'we will drive our ball on his lawn to-day.'

And so it was done, and Ian won three games from his brothers. But the knight looked out of his window, and was wroth; and bade his men bring the youths before him. When he stood in his hall and beheld them, his heart was softened somewhat; but his face was angry as he asked:

'Why did you choose to play shinny in front of my castle when you knew full well that the remembrance of my daughters would come back to me? The pain which you have made me suffer you shall suffer also.'

'Since we have done you wrong,' answered Ian, the youngest, 'build us a ship, and we will go and seek your daughters. Let them be to windward, or to leeward, or under the four brown boundaries of the sea, we will find them before a year and a day goes by, and will carry them back to Grianaig.'

In seven days the ship was built, and great store of food and wine placed in her. And the three brothers put her head to the sea and sailed away, and in seven days the ship ran herself on to a beach of white sand, and they all went ashore. They had none of them ever seen that land before, and looked about them. Then they saw that, a short way from them, a number of men were working on a rock, with one man standing over them.

'What place is this?' asked the eldest brother. And the man who was standing by made answer:

'This is the place where dwell the three daughters of the knight of Grianaig, who are to be wedded to-morrow to three giants.'

'How can we find them?' asked the young man again. And the overlooker answered:

'To reach the daughters of the knight of Grianaig you must get into this basket, and be drawn by a rope up the face of this rock.'

'Oh, that is easily done,' said the eldest brother, jumping into the basket, which at once began to move--up, and up, and up--till he had gone about half-way, when a fat black raven flew at him and pecked him till he was nearly blind, so that he was forced to go back the way he had come.

After that the second brother got into the creel; but he fared no better, for the raven flew upon him, and he returned as his brother had done.

'Now it is my turn,' said Ian. But when he was halfway up the raven set upon him also.

'Quick! quick!' cried Ian to the men who held the rope. 'Quick! quick! or I shall be blinded!' And the men pulled with all their might, and in another moment Ian was on top, and the raven behind him. 'Will you give me a piece of tobacco?' asked the raven, who was now quite quiet.

'You rascal! Am I to give you tobacco for trying to peck my eyes out?' answered Ian.

'That was part of my duty,' replied the raven; 'but give it to me, and I will prove a good friend to you.' So Ian broke off a piece of tobacco and gave it to him. The raven hid it under his wing, and then went on; 'Now I will take you to the house of the big giant, where the knight's daughter sits sewing, sewing, till even her thimble is wet with tears.' And the raven hopped before him till they reached a large house, the door of which stood open. They entered and passed through one hall after the other, until they found the knight's daughter, as the bird had said.

'What brought you here?' asked she. And Ian made answer:

'Why may I not go where you can go?'

'I was brought hither by a giant,' replied she.

'I know that,' said Ian; 'but tell me where the giant is, that I may find him.'

'He is on the hunting hill,' answered she; 'and nought will bring him home save a shake of the iron chain which hangs outside the gate. But, there, neither to leeward, nor to windward, nor in the four brown boundaries of the sea, is there any man that can hold battle against him, save only Ian, the soldier's son, and he is now but sixteen years old, and how shall he stand against the giant?'

'In the land whence I have come there are many men with the strength of Ian,' answered he. And he went outside and pulled at the chain, but he could not move it, and fell on to his knees. At that he rose swiftly, and gathering up his strength, he seized the chain, and this time he shook it so that the link broke. And the giant heard it on the hunting hill, and lifted his head, thinking--

'It sounds like the noise of Ian, the soldier's son,' said he; 'but as yet he is only sixteen years old. Still, I had better look to it.' And home he came.

'Are you Ian, the soldier's son?' he asked, as he entered the castle.

'No, of a surety,' answered the youth, who had no wish that they should know him.

'Then who are you in the leeward, or in the windward, or in the four brown boundaries of the sea, who are able to move my battle-chain?'

'That will be plain to you after wrestling with me as I wrestle with my mother. And one time she got the better of me, and two times she did not.'

So they wrestled, and twisted and strove with each other till the giant forced Ian to his knee.

'You are the stronger,' said Ian; and the giant answered:

'All men know that!' And they took hold of each other once more, and at last Ian threw the giant, and wished that the raven were there to help him. No sooner had he wished his wish than the raven came.

'Put your hand under my right wing and you will find a knife sharp enough to take off his head,' said the raven. And the knife was so sharp that it cut off the giant's head with a blow.

'Now go and tell the daughter of the king of Grianaig; but take heed lest you listen to her words, and promise to go no further, for she will seek to help you. Instead, seek the middle daughter, and when you have found her, you shall give me a piece of tobacco for reward.'

'Well have you earned the half of all I have,' answered Ian. But the raven shook his head.

'You know only what has passed, and nothing of what lies before. If you would not fail, wash yourself in clean water, and take balsam from a vessel on top of the door, and rub it over your body, and to-morrow you will be as strong as many men, and I will lead you to the dwelling of the middle one.'

Ian did as the raven bade him, and in spite of the eldest daughter's entreaties, he set out to seek her next sister. He found her where she was seated sewing, her very thimble wet from the tears which she had shed.

'What brought you here?' asked the second sister.

'Why may I not go where you can go?' answered he; 'and why are you weeping?'

'Because in one day I shall be married to the giant who is on the hunting hill.'

'How can I get him home?' asked Ian.

'Nought will bring him but a shake of that iron chain which hangs outside the gate. But there is neither to leeward, nor to westward, nor in the four brown boundaries of the sea, any man that can hold battle with him, save Ian, the soldier's son, and he is now but sixteen years of age.'

'In the land whence I have come there are many men with the strength of Ian,' said he. And he went outside and pulled at the chain, but he could not move it, and fell on his knees. At that he rose to his feet, and gathering up his strength mightily, he seized the chain, and this time he shook it so that three links broke. And the second giant heard it on the hunting hill, and lifted his head, thinking--

'It sounds like the noise of Ian, the soldier's son,' said he; 'but as yet he is only sixteen years old. Still, I had better look to it.' And home he came.

'Are you Ian, the soldier's son?' he asked, as he entered the castle.

'No, of a surety,' answered the youth, who had no wish that this giant should know him either; 'but I will wrestle with you as if I were he.'

Then they seized each other by the shoulder, and the giant threw him on his two knees. 'You are the stronger,' cried Ian; 'but I am not beaten yet.' And rising to his feet, he threw his arms round the giant.

Backwards and forwards they swayed, and first one was uppermost and then the other; but at length Ian worked his leg round the giant's and threw him to the ground. Then he called to the raven, and the raven came flapping towards him, and said: 'Put your hand under my right wing, and you will find there a knife sharp enough to take off his head.' And sharp indeed it was, for with a single blow, the giant's head rolled from his body.

'Now wash yourself with warm water, and rub yourself over with oil of balsam, and to-morrow you will be as strong as many men. But beware of the words of the knight's daughter, for she is cunning, and will try to keep you at her side. So farewell; but first give me a piece of tobacco.'

'That I will gladly,' answered Ian breaking off a large bit.

He washed and rubbed himself that night, as the raven had told him, and the next morning he entered the chamber where the knight's daughter was sitting.

'Abide here with me,' she said, 'and be my husband. There is silver and gold in plenty in the castle.' But he took no heed, and went on his way till he reached the castle where the knight's youngest daughter was sewing in the hall. And tears dropped from her eyes on to her thimble.

'What brought you here?' asked she. And Ian made answer:

'Why may I not go where you can go?'

'I was brought hither by a giant.'

'I know full well,' said he.

'Are you Ian, the soldier's son?' asked she again. And again he answered:

'Yes, I am; but tell me, why are you weeping?'

'To-morrow the giant will return from the hunting hill, and I must marry him,' she sobbed. And Ian took no heed, and only said: 'How can I bring him home?'

'Shake the iron chain that hangs outside the gate.'

And Ian went out, and gave such a pull to the chain that he fell down at full length from the force of the shake. But in a moment he was on his feet again, and seized the chain with so much strength that four links came off in his hand. And the giant heard him in the hunting hill, as he was putting the game he had killed into a bag.

'In the leeward, or the windward, or in the four brown boundaries of the sea, there is none who could give my chain a shake save only Ian, the soldier's son. And if he has reached me, then he has left my two brothers dead behind him.' With that he strode back to the castle, the earth trembling under him as he went.

'Are you Ian, the soldier's son?' asked he. And the youth answered:

'No, of a surety.'

'Then who are you in the leeward, or the windward, or in the four brown boundaries of the sea, who are able to shake my battle chain? There is only Ian, the soldier's son, who can do this, and he is but now sixteen years old.

'I will show you who I am when you have wrestled with me,' said Ian. And they threw their arms round each other, and the giant forced Ian on to his knees; but in a moment he was up again, and crooking his leg round the shoulders of the giant, he threw him heavily to the ground. 'Stumpy black raven, come quick!' cried he; and the raven came, and beat the giant about the head with his wings, so that he could not get up. Then he bade Ian take out a sharp knife from under his feathers, which he carried with him for cutting berries, and Ian smote off the giant's head with it. And so sharp was that knife that, with one blow, the giant's head rolled on the ground.

'Rest now this night also,' said the raven, 'and to-morrow you shall take the knight's three daughters to the edge of the rock that leads to the lower world. But take heed to go down first yourself, and let them follow after you. And before I go you shall give me a piece of tobacco.'

'Take it all,' answered Ian, 'for well have you earned it.'

'No; give me but a piece. You know what is behind you, but you have no knowledge of what is before you.' And picking up the tobacco in his beak, the raven flew away.

So the next morning the knight's youngest daughter loaded asses with all the silver and gold to be found in the castle, and she set out with Ian the soldier's son for the house where her second sister was waiting to see what would befall. She also had asses laden with precious things to carry away, and so had the eldest sister, when they reached the castle where she had been kept a prisoner. Together they all rode to the edge of the rock, and then Ian lay down and shouted, and the basket was drawn up, and in it they got one by one, and were let down to the bottom. When the last one was gone, Ian should have gone also, and left the three sisters to come after him; but he had forgotten the raven's warning, and bade them go first, lest some accident should happen. Only, he begged the youngest sister to let him keep the little gold cap which, like the others, she wore on her head; and then he helped them, each in her turn, into the basket.

Long he waited, but wait as he might, the basket never came back, for in their joy at being free the knight's daughters had forgotten all about Ian, and had set sail in the ship that had brought him and his brothers to the land of Grianaig.

At last he began to understand what had happened to him, and while he was taking counsel with himself what had best be done, the raven came to him.

'You did not heed my words,' he said gravely.

'No, I did not, and therefore am I here,' answered Ian, bowing his head.

'The past cannot be undone,' went on the raven. 'He that will not take counsel will take combat. This night, you will sleep in the giant's castle. And now you shall give me a piece of tobacco.'

'I will. But, I pray you, stay in the castle with me.'

'That I may not do, but on the morrow I will come.'

And on the morrow he did, and he bade Ian go to the giant's stable where stood a horse to whom it mattered nothing if she journeyed over land or sea.

'But be careful,' he added, 'how you enter the stable, for the door swings without ceasing to and fro, and if it touches you, it will cause you to cry out. I will go first and show you the way.'

'Go,' said Ian. And the raven gave a bob and a hop, and thought he was quite safe, but the door slammed on a feather of his tail, and he screamed loudly.

Then Ian took a run backwards, and a run forwards, and made a spring; but the door caught one of his feet, and he fell fainting on the stable floor. Quickly the raven pounced on him, and picked him up in his beak and claws, and carried him back to the castle, where he laid ointments on his foot till it was as well as ever it was.

'Now come out to walk,' said the raven, 'but take heed that you wonder not at aught you may behold; neither shall you touch anything. And, first, give me a piece of tobacco.'

Many strange things did Ian behold in that island, more than he had thought for. In a glen lay three heroes stretched on their backs, done to death by three spears that still stuck in their breasts. But he kept his counsel and spake nothing, only he pulled out the spears, and the men sat up and said:

'You are Ian the soldier's son, and a spell is laid upon you to travel in our company, to the cave of the black fisherman.'

So together they went till they reached the cave, and one of the men entered, to see what should be found there. And he beheld a hag, horrible to look upon, seated on a rock, and before he could speak, she struck him with her club, and changed him into a stone; and in like manner she dealt with the other three. At the last Ian entered.

'These men are under spells,' said the witch, 'and alive they can never be till you have anointed them with the water which you must fetch from the island of Big Women. See that you do not tarry.' And Ian turned away with a sinking heart, for he would fain have followed the youngest daughter of the knight of Grianaig.

'You did not obey my counsel,' said the raven, hopping towards him, 'and so trouble has come upon you. But sleep now, and to-morrow you shall mount the horse which is in the giant's stable, that can gallop over sea and land. When you reach the island of Big Women, sixteen boys will come to meet you, and will offer the horse food, and wish to take her saddle and bridle from her. But see that they touch her not, and give her food yourself, and yourself lead her into the stable, and shut the door. And be sure that for every turn of the lock given by the sixteen stable lads you give one. And now you shall break me off a piece of tobacco.'

The next morning Ian arose, and led the horse from the stable, without the door hurting him, and he rode across the sea to the island of the Big Women, where the sixteen stable lads met him, and each one offered to take his horse, and to feed her, and to put her into the stable. But Ian only answered:

'I myself will put her in and will see to her.' And thus he did. And while he was rubbing her sides the horse said to him:

'Every kind of drink will they offer you, but see you take none, save whey and water only.' And so it fell out; and when the sixteen stable-boys saw that he would drink nothing, they drank it all themselves, and one by one lay stretched around the board.

Then Ian felt pleased in his heart that he had withstood their fair words, and he forgot the counsel that the horse had likewise given him saying:

'Beware lest you fall asleep, and let slip the chance of getting home again'; for while the lads were sleeping sweet music reached his ears, and he slept also.

When this came to pass the steed broke through the stable door, and kicked him and woke him roughly.

'You did not heed my counsel,' said she; 'and who knows if it is not too late to win over the sea? But first take that sword which hangs on the wall, and cut off the heads of the sixteen grooms.'

Filled with shame at being once more proved heedless, Ian arose and did as the horse bade him. Then he ran to the well and poured some of the water into a leather bottle, and jumping on the horse's back rode over the sea to the island where the raven was waiting for him.

'Lead the horse into the stable,' said the raven, 'and lie down yourself to sleep, for to-morrow you must make the heroes to live again, and must slay the hag. And have a care not to be so foolish to-morrow as you were to-day.'

'Stay with me for company,' begged Ian; but the raven shook his head, and flew away.

In the morning Ian awoke, and hastened to the cave where the old hag was sitting, and he struck her dead as she was, before she could cast spells on him. Next he sprinkled the water over the heroes, who came to life again, and together they all journeyed to the other side of the island, and there the raven met them.

'At last you have followed the counsel that was given you,' said the raven; 'and now, having learned wisdom, you may go home again to Grianaig. There you will find that the knight's two eldest daughters are to be wedded this day to your two brothers, and the youngest to the chief of the men at the rock. But her gold cap you shall give to me and, if you want it, you have only to think of me and I will bring it to you. And one more warning I give you. If anyone asks you whence you came, answer that you have come from behind you; and if anyone asks you whither you are going, say that you are going before you.'

So Ian mounted the horse and set her face to the sea and her back to the shore, and she was off, away and away till she reached the church of Grianaig, and there, in a field of grass, beside a well of water, he leaped down from his saddle.

'Now,' the horse said to him, 'draw your sword and cut off my head.' But Ian answered:

'Poor thanks would that be for all the help I have had from you.'

'It is the only way that I can free myself from the spells that were laid by the giants on me and the raven; for I was a girl and he was a youth wooing me! So have no fears, but do as I have said.'

Then Ian drew his sword as she bade him, and cut off her head, and went on his way without looking backwards. As he walked he saw a woman standing at her house door. She asked him whence he had come, and he answered as the raven had told him, that he came from behind. Next she inquired whither he was going, and this time he made reply that he was going on before him, but that he was thirsty and would like a drink.

'You are an impudent fellow,' said the woman; 'but you shall have a drink.' And she gave him some milk, which was all she had till her husband came home.

'Where is your husband?' asked Ian, and the woman answered him:

'He is at the knight's castle trying to fashion gold and silver into a cap for the youngest daughter, like unto the caps that her sisters wear, such as are not to be found in all this land. But, see, he is returning; and now we shall hear how he has sped.'

At that the man entered the gate, and beholding a strange youth, he said to him: 'What is your trade, boy?'

'I am a smith,' replied Ian. And the man answered:

'Good luck has befallen me, then, for you can help me to make a cap for the knight's daughter.'

'You cannot make that cap, and you know it,' said Ian.

'Well, I must try,' replied the man, 'or I shall be hanged on a tree; so it were a good deed to help me.'

'I will help you if I can,' said Ian; 'but keep the gold and silver for yourself, and lock me into the smithy to-night, and I will work my spells.' So the man, wondering to himself, locked him in.

As soon as the key was turned in the lock Ian wished for the raven, and the raven came to him, carrying the cap in his mouth.

'Now take my head off,' said the raven. But Ian answered:

'Poor thanks were that for all the help you have given me.'

'It is the only thanks you can give me,' said the raven, 'for I was a youth like yourself before spells were laid on me.'

Then Ian drew his sword and cut off the head of the raven, and shut his eyes so that he might see nothing. After that he lay down and slept till morning dawned, and the man came and unlocked the door and shook the sleeper.

'Here is the cap,' said Ian drowsily, drawing it from under his pillow. And he fell asleep again directly.

The sun was high in the heavens when he woke again, and this time he beheld a tall, brown-haired youth standing by him.

'I am the raven,' said the youth, 'and the spells are broken. But now get up and come with me.'

Then they two went together to the place where Ian had left the dead horse; but no horse was there now, only a beautiful maiden.

'I am the horse,' she said, 'and the spells are broken'; and she and the youth went away together.

In the meantime the smith had carried the cap to the castle, and bade a servant belonging to the knight's youngest daughter bear it to her mistress. But when the girl's eyes fell on it, she cried out:

'He speaks false; and if he does not bring me the man who really made the cap I will hang him on the tree beside my window.'

The servant was filled with fear at her words, and hastened and told the smith, who ran as fast as he could to seek for Ian. And when he found him and brought him into the castle, the girl was first struck dumb with joy; then she declared that she would marry nobody else. At this some one fetched to her the knight of Grianaig, and when Ian had told his tale, he vowed that the maiden was right, and that his elder daughters should never wed with men who had not only taken glory to themselves which did not belong to them, but had left the real doer of the deeds to his fate.

And the wedding guests said that the knight had spoken well; and the two elder brothers were fain to leave the country, for no one would converse with them.

[From Tales of the West Highlands.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

The Fox and the Wolf

At the foot of some high mountains there was, once upon a time, a small village, and a little way off two roads met, one of them going to the east and the other to the west. The villagers were quiet, hard-working folk, who toiled in the fields all day, and in the evening set out for home when the bell began to ring in the little church. In the summer mornings they led out their flocks to pasture, and were happy and contented from sunrise to sunset.

One summer night, when a round full moon shone down upon the white road, a great wolf came trotting round the corner.

'I positively must get a good meal before I go back to my den,' he said to himself; 'it is nearly a week since I have tasted anything but scraps, though perhaps no one would think it to look at my figure! Of course there are plenty of rabbits and hares in the mountains; but indeed one needs to be a greyhound to catch them, and I am not so young as I was! If I could only dine off that fox I saw a fortnight ago, curled up into a delicious hairy ball, I should ask nothing better; I would have eaten her then, but unluckily her husband was lying beside her, and one knows that foxes, great and small, run like the wind. Really it seems as if there was not a living creature left for me to prey upon but a wolf, and, as the proverb says: "One wolf does not bite another." However, let us see what this village can produce. I am as hungry as a schoolmaster.'

Now, while these thoughts were running through the mind of the wolf, the very fox he had been thinking of was galloping along the other road.

'The whole of this day I have listened to those village hens clucking till I could bear it no longer,' murmured she as she bounded along, hardly seeming to touch the ground. 'When you are fond of fowls and eggs it is the sweetest of all music. As sure as there is a sun in heaven I will have some of them this night, for I have grown so thin that my very bones rattle, and my poor babies are crying for food.' And as she spoke she reached a little plot of grass, where the two roads joined, and flung herself under a tree to take a little rest, and to settle her plans. At this moment the wolf came up.

At the sight of the fox lying within his grasp his mouth began to water, but his joy was somewhat checked when he noticed how thin she was. The fox's quick ears heard the sound of his paws, though they were soft as velvet, and turning her head she said politely:

'Is that you, neighbour? What a strange place to meet in! I hope you are quite well?'

'Quite well as regards my health,' answered the wolf, whose eye glistened greedily, 'at least, as well as one can be when one is very hungry. But what is the matter with you? A fortnight ago you were as plump as heart could wish!'

'I have been ill--very ill,' replied the fox, 'and what you say is quite true. A worm is fat in comparison with me.'

'He is. Still, you are good enough for me; for "to the hungry no bread is hard."'

'Oh, you are always joking! I'm sure you are not half as hungry as I!'

'That we shall soon see,' cried the wolf, opening his huge mouth and crouching for a spring.

'What are you doing?' exclaimed the fox, stepping backwards.

'What am I doing? What I am going to do is to make my supper off you, in less time than a cock takes to crow.'

'Well, I suppose you must have your joke,' answered the fox lightly, but never removing her eye from the wolf, who replied with a snarl which showed all his teeth:

'I don't want to joke, but to eat!'

'But surely a person of your talents must perceive that you might eat me to the very last morsel and never know that you had swallowed anything at all!'

'In this world the cleverest people are always the hungriest,' replied the wolf.

'Ah! how true that is; but--'

'I can't stop to listen to your "buts" and "yets,"' broke in the wolf rudely; 'let us get to the point, and the point is that I want to eat you and not talk to you.'

'Have you no pity for a poor mother?' asked the fox, putting her tail to her eyes, but peeping slily out of them all the same.

'I am dying of hunger,' answered the wolf, doggedly; 'and you know,' he added with a grin, 'that charity begins at home.'

'Quite so,' replied the fox; 'it would be unreasonable of me to object to your satisfying your appetite at my expense. But if the fox resigns herself to the sacrifice, the mother offers you one last request.'

'Then be quick and don't waste my time, for I can't wait much longer. What is it you want?'

'You must know,' said the fox, 'that in this village there is a rich man who makes in the summer enough cheeses to last him for the whole year, and keeps them in an old well, now dry, in his courtyard. By the well hang two buckets on a pole that were used, in former days, to draw up water. For many nights I have crept down to the palace, and have lowered myself in the bucket, bringing home with me enough cheese to feed the children. All I beg of you is to come with me, and, instead of hunting chickens and such things, I will make a good meal off cheese before I die.'

'But the cheeses may be all finished by now?'

'If you were only to see the quantities of them!' laughed the fox. 'And even if they were finished, there would always be ME to eat.'

'Well, I will come. Lead the way, but I warn you that if you try to escape or play any tricks you are reckoning without your host-- that is to say, without my legs, which are as long as yours!'

All was silent in the village, and not a light was to be seen but that of the moon, which shone bright and clear in the sky. The wolf and the fox crept softly along, when suddenly they stopped and looked at each other; a savoury smell of frying bacon reached their noses, and reached the noses of the sleeping dogs, who began to bark greedily.

'Is it safe to go on, think you?' asked the wolf in a whisper. And the fox shook her head.

'Not while the dogs are barking,' said she; 'someone might come out to see if anything was the matter.' And she signed to the wolf to curl himself up in the shadow beside her.

In about half an hour the dogs grew tired of barking, or perhaps the bacon was eaten up and there was no smell to excite them. Then the wolf and the fox jumped up, and hastened to the foot of the wall.

'I am lighter than he is,' thought the fox to herself, 'and perhaps if I make haste I can get a start, and jump over the wall on the other side before he manages to spring over this one.' And she quickened her pace. But if the wolf could not run he could jump, and with one bound he was beside his companion.

'What were you going to do, comrade?'

'Oh, nothing,' replied the fox, much vexed at the failure of her plan.

'I think if I were to take a bit out of your haunch you would jump better,' said the wolf, giving a snap at her as he spoke. The fox drew back uneasily.

'Be careful, or I shall scream,' she snarled. And the wolf, understanding all that might happen if the fox carried out her threat, gave a signal to his companion to leap on the wall, where he immediately followed her.

Once on the top they crouched down and looked about them. Not a creature was to be seen in the courtyard, and in the furthest corner from the house stood the well, with its two buckets suspended from a pole, just as the fox had described it. The two thieves dragged themselves noiselessly along the wall till they were opposite the well, and by stretching out her neck as far as it would go the fox was able to make out that there was only very little water in the bottom, but just enough to reflect the moon, big, and round and yellow.

'How lucky!' cried she to the wolf. 'There is a huge cheese about the size of a mill wheel. Look! look! did you ever see anything so beautiful!'

'Never!' answered the wolf, peering over in his turn, his eyes glistening greedily, for he imagined that the moon's reflection in the water was really a cheese.

'And now, unbeliever, what have you to say?' and the fox laughed gently.

'That you are a woman--I mean a fox--of your word,' replied the wolf.

'Well, then, go down in that bucket and eat your fill,' said the fox.

'Oh, is that your game?' asked the wolf, with a grin. 'No! no! The person who goes down in the bucket will be you! And if you don't go down your head will go without you!'

'Of course I will go down, with the greatest pleasure,' answered the fox, who had expected the wolf's reply.

'And be sure you don't eat all the cheese, or it will be the worse for you,' continued the wolf. But the fox looked up at him with tears in her eyes.

'Farewell, suspicious one!' she said sadly. And climbed into the bucket.

In an instant she had reached the bottom of the well, and found that the water was not deep enough to cover her legs.

'Why, it is larger and richer than I thought,' cried she, turning towards the wolf, who was leaning over the wall of the well.

'Then be quick and bring it up,' commanded the wolf.

'How can I, when it weighs more than I do?' asked the fox.

'If it is so heavy bring it in two bits, of course,' said he.

'But I have no knife,' answered the fox. 'You will have to come down yourself, and we will carry it up between us.'

'And how am I to come down?' inquired the wolf.

'Oh, you are really very stupid! Get into the other bucket that is nearly over your head.'

The wolf looked up, and saw the bucket hanging there, and with some difficulty he climbed into it. As he weighed at least four times as much as the fox the bucket went down with a jerk, and the other bucket, in which the fox was seated, came to the surface.

As soon as he understood what was happening, the wolf began to speak like an angry wolf, but was a little comforted when he remembered that the cheese still remained to him.

'But where is the cheese?' he asked of the fox, who in her turn was leaning over the parapet watching his proceedings with a smile.

'The cheese?' answered the fox; 'why I am taking it home to my babies, who are too young to get food for themselves.'

'Ah, traitor!' cried the wolf, howling with rage. But the fox was not there to hear this insult, for she had gone off to a neighbouring fowl-house, where she had noticed some fat young chickens the day before.

'Perhaps I did treat him rather badly,' she said to herself. 'But it seems getting cloudy, and if there should be heavy rain the other bucket will fill and sink to the bottom, and his will go up--at least it may!'

[From Cuentos Populares, por Antonio de Trueba.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

How Ian Direach Got the Blue Falcon

Long ago a king and queen ruled over the islands of the west, and they had one son, whom they loved dearly. The boy grew up to be tall and strong and handsome, and he could run and shoot, and swim and dive better than any lad of his own age in the country. Besides, he knew how to sail about, and sing songs to the harp, and during the winter evenings, when everyone was gathered round the huge hall fire shaping bows or weaving cloth, Ian Direach would tell them tales of the deeds of his fathers.

So the time slipped by till Ian was almost a man, as they reckoned men in those days, and then his mother the queen died. There was great mourning throughout all the isles, and the boy and his father mourned her bitterly also; but before the new year came the king had married another wife, and seemed to have forgotten his old one. Only Ian remembered.

On a morning when the leaves were yellow in the trees of the glen, Ian slung his bow over his shoulder, and filling his quiver with arrows, went on to the hill in search of game. But not a bird was to be seen anywhere, till at length a blue falcon flew past him, and raising his bow he took aim at her. His eye was straight and his hand steady, but the falcon's flight was swift, and he only shot a feather from her wing. As the sun was now low over the sea he put the feather in his game bag, and set out homewards.

'Have you brought me much game to-day?' asked his stepmother as he entered the hall.

'Nought save this,' he answered, handing her the feather of the blue falcon, which she held by the tip and gazed at silently. Then she turned to Ian and said:

'I am setting it on you as crosses and as spells, and as the fall of the year! That you may always be cold, and wet and dirty, and that your shoes may ever have pools in them, till you bring me hither the blue falcon on which that feather grew.'

'If it is spells you are laying I can lay them too,' answered Ian Direach; 'and you shall stand with one foot on the great house and another on the castle, till I come back again, and your face shall be to the wind, from wheresoever it shall blow.' Then he went away to seek the bird, as his stepmother bade him; and, looking homewards from the hill, he saw the queen standing with one foot on the great house, and the other on the castle, and her face turned towards whatever tempest should blow.

On he journeyed, over hills, and through rivers till he reached a wide plain, and never a glimpse did he catch of the falcon. Darker and darker it grew, and the small birds were seeking their nests, and at length Ian Direach could see no more, and he lay down under some bushes and sleep came to him. And in his dream a soft nose touched him, and a warm body curled up beside him, and a low voice whispered to him:

'Fortune is against you, Ian Direach; I have but the cheek and the hoof of a sheep to give you, and with these you must be content.' With that Ian Direach awoke, and beheld Gille Mairtean the fox.

Between them they kindled a fire, and ate their supper. Then Gille Mairtean the fox bade Ian Direach lie down as before, and sleep till morning. And in the morning, when he awoke, Gille Mairtean said:

'The falcon that you seek is in the keeping of the Giant of the Five Heads, and the Five Necks, and the Five Humps. I will show you the way to his house, and I counsel you to do his bidding, nimbly and cheerfully, and, above all, to treat his birds kindly, for in this manner he may give you his falcon to feed and care for. And when this happens, wait till the giant is out of his house; then throw a cloth over the falcon and bear her away with you. Only see that not one of her feathers touches anything within the house, or evil will befall you.'

'I thank you for your counsel,' spake Ian Direach, 'and I will be careful to follow it.' Then he took the path to the giant's house.

'Who is there?' cried the giant, as someone knocked loudly on the door of his house.

'One who seeks work as a servant,' answered Ian Direach.

'And what can you do?' asked the giant again.

'I can feed birds and tend pigs; I can feed and milk a cow, and also goats and sheep, if you have any of these,' replied Ian Direach.

'Then enter, for I have great need of such a one,' said the giant.

So Ian Direach entered, and tended so well and carefully all the birds and beasts, that the giant was better satisfied than ever he had been, and at length he thought that he might even be trusted to feed the falcon. And the heart of Ian was glad, and he tended the blue falcon till his fathers shone like the sky, and the giant was well pleased; and one day he said to him:

'For long my brothers on the other side of the mountain have besought me to visit them, but never could I go for fear of my falcon. Now I think I can leave her with you for one day, and before nightfall I shall be back again.'

Scarcely was the giant out of sight next morning when Ian Direach seized the falcon, and throwing a cloth over her head hastened with her to the door. But the rays of the sun pierced through the thickness of the cloth, and as they passed the doorpost she gave a spring, and the tip of one of her feathers touched the post, which gave a scream, and brought the giant back in three strides. Ian Direach trembled as he saw him; but the giant only said:

'If you wish for my falcon you must first bring me the White Sword of Light that is in the house of the Big Women of Dhiurradh.'

'And where do they live?' asked Ian. But the giant answered:

'Ah, that is for you to discover.' And Ian dared say no more, and hastened down to the waste. There, as he hoped, he met his friend Gille Mairtean the fox, who bade him eat his supper and lie down to sleep. And when he had wakened next morning the fox said to him:

'Let us go down to the shore of the sea.' And to the shore of the sea they went. And after they had reached the shore, and beheld the sea stretching before them, and the isle of Dhiurradh in the midst of it, the soul of Ian sank, and he turned to Gille Mairtean and asked why he had brought him thither, for the giant, when he had sent him, had known full well that without a boat he could never find the Big Women.

'Do not be cast down,' answered the fox, 'it is quite easy! I will change myself into a boat, and you shall go on board me, and I will carry you over the sea to the Seven Big Women of Dhiurradh. Tell them that you are skilled in brightening silver and gold, and in the end they will take you as servant, and if you are careful to please them they will give you the White Sword of Light to make bright and shining. But when you seek to steal it, take heed that its sheath touches nothing inside the house, or ill will befall you.'

So Ian Direach did all things as the fox had told him, and the Seven Big Women of Dhiurradh took him for their servant, and for six weeks he worked so hard that his seven mistresses said to each other: 'Never has a servant had the skill to make all bright and shining like this one. Let us give him the White Sword of Light to polish like the rest.'

Then they brought forth the White Sword of Light from the iron closet where it hung, and bade him rub it till he could see his face in the shining blade; and he did so. But one day, when the Seven Big Women were out of the way, he bethought him that the moment had come for him to carry off the sword, and, replacing it in its sheath, he hoisted it on his shoulder. But just as he was passing through the door the tip of the sheath touched it, and the door gave a loud shriek. And the Big Women heard it, and came running back, and took the sword from him, and said:

'If it is our sword you want, you must first bring us the bay colt of the King of Erin.'

Humbled and ashamed, Ian Direach left the house, and sat by the side of the sea, and soon Gille Mairtean the fox came to him.

'Plainly I see that you have taken no heed to my words, Ian Direach,' spoke the fox. 'But eat first, and yet once more will I help you.'

At these words the heart returned again to Ian Direach, and he gathered sticks and made a fire and ate with Gille Mairtean the fox, and slept on the sand. At dawn next morning Gille Mairtean said to Ian Direach:

'I will change myself into a ship, and will bear you across the seas to Erin, to the land where dwells the king. And you shall offer yourself to serve in his stable, and to tend his horses, till at length so well content is he, that he gives you the bay colt to wash and brush. But when you run away with her see that nought except the soles of her hoofs touch anything within the palace gates, or it will go ill with you.'

After he had thus counselled Ian Direach, the fox changed himself into a ship, and set sail for Erin. And the king of that country gave into Ian Direach's hands the care of his horses, and never before did their skins shine so brightly or was their pace so swift. And the king was well pleased, and at the end of a month he sent for Ian and said to him:

'You have given me faithful service, and now I will entrust you with the most precious thing that my kingdom holds.' And when he had spoken, he led Ian Direach to the stable where stood the bay colt. And Ian rubbed her and fed her, and galloped with her all round the country, till he could leave one wind behind him and catch the other which was in front.

'I am going away to hunt,' said the king one morning while he was watching Ian tend the bay colt in her stable. 'The deer have come down from the hill, and it is time for me to give them chase.' Then he went away; and when he was no longer in sight, Ian Direach led the bay colt out of the stable, and sprang on her back. But as they rode through the gate, which stood between the palace and the outer world, the colt swished her tail against the post, which shrieked loudly. In a moment the king came running up, and he seized the colt's bridle.

'If you want my bay colt, you must first bring me the daughter of the king of the Franks.'

With slow steps went Ian Direach down to the shore where Gille Mairtean the fox awaited him.

'Plainly I see that you have not done as I bid you, nor will you ever do it,' spoke Gille Mairtean the fox; 'but I will help you yet again. for a third time I will change myself into a ship, and we will sail to France.'

And to France they sailed, and, as he was the ship, the Gille Mairtean sailed where he would, and ran himself into the cleft of a rock, high on to the land. Then, he commanded Ian Direach to go up to the king's palace, saying that he had been wrecked, that his ship was made fast in a rock, and that none had been saved but himself only.

Ian Direach listened to the words of the fox, and he told a tale so pitiful, that the king and queen, and the princess their daughter, all came out to hear it. And when they had heard, nought would please them except to go down to the shore and visit the ship, which by now was floating, for the tide was up. Torn and battered was she, as if she had passed through many dangers, yet music of a wondrous sweetness poured forth from within.

'Bring hither a boat,' cried the princess, 'that I may go and see for myself the harp that gives forth such music.' And a boat was brought, and Ian Direach stepped in to row it to the side of the ship.

To the further side he rowed, so that none could see, and when he helped the princess on board he gave a push to the boat, so that she could not get back to it again. And the music sounded always sweeter, though they could never see whence it came, and sought it from one part of the vessel to another. When at last they reached the deck and looked around them, nought of land could they see, or anything save the rushing waters.

The princess stood silent, and her face grew grim. At last she said:

'An ill trick have you played me! What is this that you have done, and whither are we going?'

'It is a queen you will be,' answered Ian Direach, 'for the king of Erin has sent me for you, and in return he will give me his bay colt, that I may take him to the Seven Big Women of Dhiurradh, in exchange for the White Sword of Light. This I must carry to the giant of the Five Heads and Five Necks and Five Humps, and, in place of it, he will bestow on me the blue falcon, which I have promised my stepmother, so that she may free me from the spell which she has laid on me.'

'I would rather be wife to you,' answered the princess.

By-and-by the ship sailed into a harbour on the coast of Erin, and cast anchor there. And Gille Mairtean the fox bade Ian Direach tell the princess that she must bide yet a while in a cave amongst the rocks, for they had business on land, and after a while they would return to her. Then they took a boat and rowed up to some rocks, and as they touched the land Gille Mairtean changed himself into a fair woman, who laughed, and said to Ian Direach, 'I will give the king a fine wife.'

Now the king of Erin had been hunting on the hill, and when he saw a strange ship sailing towards the harbour, he guessed that it might be Ian Direach, and left his hunting, and ran down to the hill to the stable. Hastily he led the bay colt from his stall, and put the golden saddle on her back, and the silver bridle over his head, and with the colt's bridle in his hand, he hurried to meet the princess.

'I have brought you the king of France's daughter,' said Ian Direach. And the king of Erin looked at the maiden, and was well pleased, not knowing that it was Gille Mairtean the fox. And he bowed low, and besought her to do him the honour to enter the palace; and Gille Mairtean, as he went in, turned to look back at Ian Direach, and laughed.

In the great hall the king paused and pointed to an iron chest which stood in a corner.

'In that chest is the crown that has waited for you for many years,' he said, 'and at last you have come for it.' And he stooped down to unlock the box.

In an instant Gille Mairtean the fox had sprung on his back, and gave him such a bite that he fell down unconscious. Quickly the fox took his own shape again, and galloped away to the sea shore, where Ian Direach and the princess and the bay colt awaited him.

'I will become a ship,' cried Gille Mairtean, 'and you shall go on board me.' And so he did, and Ian Direach let the bay colt into the ship and the princess went after them, and they set sail for Dhiurradh. The wind was behind them, and very soon they saw the rocks of Dhiurradh in front. Then spoke Gille Mairtean the fox:

'Let the bay colt and the king's daughter hide in these rocks, and I will change myself into the colt, and go with you to the house of the Seven Big Women.'

Joy filed the hearts of the Big Women when they beheld the bay colt led up to their door by Ian Direach. And the youngest of them fetched the White Sword of Light, and gave it into the hands of Ian Direach, who took off the golden saddle and the silver bridle, and went down the hill with the sword to the place where the princess and the real colt awaited him.

'Now we shall have the ride that we have longed for!' cried the Seven Big Women; and they saddled and bridled the colt, and the eldest one got upon the saddle. Then the second sister sat on the back of the first, and the third on the back of the second, and so on for the whole seven. And when they were all seated, the eldest struck her side with a whip and the colt bounded forward. Over the moors she flew, and round and round the mountains, and still the Big Women clung to her and snorted with pleasure. At last she leapt high in the air, and came down on top of Monadh the high hill, where the crag is. And she rested her fore feet on the crag, and threw up her hind legs, and the Seven Big Women fell over the crag, and were dead when they reached the bottom. And the colt laughed, and became a fox again and galloped away to the sea shore, where Ian Direach, and the princess and the real colt and the White Sword of Light were awaiting him.

'I will make myself into a ship,' said Gille Mairtean the fox, 'and will carry you and the princess, and the bay colt and the White Sword of Light, back to the land.' And when the shore was reached, Gille Mairtean the fox took back his own shape, and spoke to Ian Direach in this wise:

'Let the princess and the White Sword of Light, and the bay colt, remain among the rocks, and I will change myself into the likeness of the White Sword of Light, and you shall bear me to the giant, and, instead, he will give you the blue falcon.' And Ian Direach did as the fox bade him, and set out for the giant's castle. From afar the giant beheld the blaze of the White Sword of Light, and his heart rejoiced; and he took the blue falcon and put it in a basket, and gave it to Ian Direach, who bore it swiftly away to the place where the princess, and the bay colt, and the real Sword of Light were awaiting him.

So well content was the giant to possess the sword he had coveted for many a year, that he began at once to whirl it through the air, and to cut and slash with it. For a little while Gille Mairtean let the giant play with him in this manner; then he turned in the giant's hand, and cut through the Five Necks, so that the Five Heads rolled on the ground. Afterwards he went back to Ian Direach and said to him:

'Saddle the colt with the golden saddle, and bridle her with the silver bridle, and sling the basket with the falcon over your shoulders, and hold the White Sword of Light with its back against your nose. Then mount the colt, and let the princess mount behind you, and ride thus to your father's palace. But see that the back of the sword is ever against your nose, else when your stepmother beholds you, she will change you into a dry faggot. If, however, you do as I bid you, she will become herself a bundle of sticks.'

Ian Direach hearkened to the words of Gille Mairtean, and his stepmother fell as a bundle of sticks before him; and he set fire to her, and was free from her spells for ever. After that he married the princess, who was the best wife in all the islands of the West. Henceforth he was safe from harm, for had he not the bay colt who could leave one wind behind her and catch the other wind, and the blue falcon to bring him game to eat, and the White Sword of Light to pierce through his foes?

And Ian Direach knew that all this he owed to Gille Mairtean the fox, and he made a compact with him that he might choose any beast out of his herds, whenever hunger seized him, and that henceforth no arrow should be let fly at him or at any of his race. But Gille Mairtean the fox would take no reward for the help he had given to Ian Direach, only his friendship. Thus all things prospered with Ian Direach till he died.

[From Tales of the West Highlands.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

The Ugly Duckling

It was summer in the land of Denmark, and though for most of the year the country looks flat and ugly, it was beautiful now. The wheat was yellow, the oats were green, the hay was dry and delicious to roll in, and from the old ruined house which nobody lived in, down to the edge of the canal, was a forest of great burdocks, so tall that a whole family of children might have dwelt in them and never have been found out.

It was under these burdocks that a duck had built herself a warm nest, and was not sitting all day on six pretty eggs. Five of them were white, but the sixth, which was larger than the others, was of an ugly grey colour. The duck was always puzzled about that egg, and how it came to be so different from the rest. Other birds might have thought that when the duck went down in the morning and evening to the water to stretch her legs in a good swim, some lazy mother might have been on the watch, and have popped her egg into the nest. But ducks are not clever at all, and are not quick at counting, so this duck did not worry herself about the matter, but just took care that the big egg should be as warm as the rest.

This was the first set of eggs that the duck had ever laid, and, to begin with, she was very pleased and proud, and laughed at the other mothers, who were always neglecting their duties to gossip with each other or to take little extra swims besides the two in the morning and evening that were necessary for health. But at length she grew tired of sitting there all day. 'Surely eggs take longer hatching than they did,' she said to herself; and she pined for a little amusement also. Still, she knew that if she left her eggs and the ducklings in them to die none of her friends would ever speak to her again; so there she stayed, only getting off the eggs several times a day to see if the shells were cracking--which may have been the very reason why they did not crack sooner.

She had looked at the eggs at least a hundred and fifty times, when, to her joy, she saw a tiny crack on two of them, and scrambling back to the nest she drew the eggs closer the one to the other, and never moved for the whole of that day. Next morning she was rewarded by noticing cracks in the whole five eggs, and by midday two little yellow heads were poking out from the shells. This encouraged her so much that, after breaking the shells with her bill, so that the little creatures could get free of them, she sat steadily for a whole night upon the nest, and before the sun arose the five white eggs were empty, and ten pairs of eyes were gazing out upon the green world.

Now the duck had been carefully brought up, and did not like dirt, and, besides, broken shells are not at all comfortable things to sit or walk upon; so she pushed the rest out over the side, and felt delighted to have some company to talk to till the big egg hatched. But day after day went on, and the big egg showed no signs of cracking, and the duck grew more and more impatient, and began to wish to consult her husband, who never came.

'I can't think what is the matter with it,' the duck grumbled to her neighbour who had called in to pay her a visit. 'Why I could have hatched two broods in the time that this one has taken!'

'Let me look at it,' said the old neighbour. 'Ah, I thought so; it is a turkey's egg. Once, when I was young, they tricked me to sitting on a brood of turkey's eggs myself, and when they were hatched the creatures were so stupid that nothing would make them learn to swim. I have no patience when I think of it.'

'Well, I will give it another chance,' sighed the duck, 'and if it does not come out of its shell in another twenty-four hours, I will just leave it alone and teach the rest of them to swim properly and to find their own food. I really can't be expected to do two things at once.' And with a fluff of her feathers she pushed the egg into the middle of the nest.

All through the next day she sat on, giving up even her morning bath for fear that a blast of cold might strike the big egg. In the evening, when she ventured to peep, she thought she saw a tiny crack in the upper part of the shell. Filled with hope, she went back to her duties, though she could hardly sleep all night for excitement. When she woke with the first steaks of light she felt something stirring under her. Yes, there it was at last; and as she moved, a big awkward bird tumbled head foremost on the ground.

There was no denying it was ugly, even the mother was forced to admit that to herself, though she only said it was 'large' and 'strong.' 'You won't need any teaching when you are once in the water,' she told him, with a glance of surprise at the dull brown which covered his back, and at his long naked neck. And indeed he did not, though he was not half so pretty to look at as the little yellow balls that followed her.

When they returned they found the old neighbour on the bank waiting for them to take them into the duckyard. 'No, it is not a young turkey, certainly,' whispered she in confidence to the mother, 'for though it is lean and skinny, and has no colour to speak of, yet there is something rather distinguished about it, and it holds its head up well.'

'It is very kind of you to say so,' answered the mother, who by this time had some secret doubts of its loveliness. 'Of course, when you see it by itself it is all right, though it is different, somehow, from the others. But one cannot expect all one's children to be beautiful!'

By this time they had reached the centre of the yard, where a very old duck was sitting, who was treated with great respect by all the fowls present.

'You must go up and bow low before her,' whispered the mother to her children, nodding her head in the direction of the old lady, 'and keep your legs well apart, as you see me do. No well-bred duckling turns in its toes. It is a sign of common parents.'

The little ducks tried hard to make their small fat bodies copy the movements of their mother, and the old lady was quite pleased with them; but the rest of the ducks looked on discontentedly, and said to each other:

'Oh, dear me, here are ever so many more! The yard is full already; and did you ever see anything quite as ugly as that great tall creature? He is a disgrace to any brood. I shall go and chase him out!' So saying she put up her feathers, and running to the big duckling bit his neck.

The duckling gave a loud quack; it was the first time he had felt any pain, and at the sound his mother turned quickly. 'Leave him alone,' she said fiercely, 'or I will send for his father. He was not troubling you.'

'No; but he is so ugly and awkward no one can put up with him,' answered the stranger. And though the duckling did not understand the meaning of the words, he felt he was being blamed, and became more uncomfortable still when the old Spanish duck who ruled the fowlyard struck in:

'It certainly is a great pity he is so different from these beautiful darlings. If he could only be hatched over again!'

The poor little fellow drooped his head, and did not know where to look, but was comforted when his mother answered:

'He may not be quite as handsome as the others, but he swims better, and is very strong; I am sure he will make his way in the world as well as anybody.'

'Well, you must feel quite at home here,' said the old duck waddling off. And so they did, all except the duckling, who was snapped at by everyone when they thought his mother was not looking. Even the turkey-cock, who was so big, never passed him without mocking words, and his brothers and sisters, who would not have noticed any difference unless it had been put into their heads, soon became as rude and unkind as the rest.

At last he could bear it no longer, and one day he fancied he saw signs of his mother turning against him too; so that night, when the ducks and hens were still asleep, he stole away through an open door, and under cover of the burdock leaves scrambled on by the bank of the canal, till he reached a wide grassy moor, full of soft marshy places where the reeds grew. Here he lay down, but he was too tired and too frightened to fall asleep, and with the earliest peep of the sun the reeds began to rustle, and he saw that he had blundered into a colony of wild ducks. But as he could not run away again he stood up and bowed politely.

'You are ugly,' said the wild ducks, when they had looked him well over; 'but, however, it is no business of ours, unless you wish to marry one of our daughters, and that we should not allow.' And the duckling answered that he had no idea of marrying anybody, and wanted nothing but to be left alone after his long journey.

So for two whole days he lay quietly among the reeds, eating such food as he could find, and drinking the water of the moorland pool, till he felt himself quite strong again. He wished he might stay were he was for ever, he was so comfortable and happy, away from everyone, with nobody to bite him and tell him how ugly he was.

He was thinking these thoughts, when two young ganders caught sight of him as they were having their evening splash among the reeds, looking for their supper.

'We are getting tired of this moor,' they said, 'and to-morrow we think of trying another, where the lakes are larger and the feeding better. Will you come with us?'

'Is it nicer than this?' asked the duckling doubtfully. And the words were hardly out of his mouth, when 'Pif! pah!' and the two new-comers were stretched dead beside him.

At the sound of the gun the wild ducks in the rushes flew into the air, and for a few minutes the firing continued.

Luckily for himself the duckling could not fly, and he floundered along through the water till he could hide himself amidst some tall ferns which grew in a hollow. But before he got there he met a huge creature on four legs, which he afterwards knew to be a dog, who stood and gazed at him with a long red tongue hanging out of his mouth. The duckling grew cold with terror, and tried to hide his head beneath his little wings; but the dog snuffed at him and passed on, and he was able to reach his place of shelter.

'I am too ugly even for a dog to eat,' said he to himself. 'Well, that is a great mercy.' And he curled himself up in the soft grass till the shots died away in the distance.

When all had been quiet for a long time, and there were only stars to see him, he crept out and looked about him.

He would never go near a pool again, never, thought he; and seeing that the moor stretched far away in the opposite direction from which he had come, he marched bravely on till he got to a small cottage, which seemed too tumbledown for the stones to hold together many hours longer. Even the door only hung upon one hinge, and as the only light in the room sprang from a tiny fire, the duckling edged himself cautiously in, and lay down under a chair close to the broken door, from which he could get out if necessary. But no one seemed to see him or smell him; so he spend the rest of the night in peace.

Now in the cottage dwelt an old woman, her cat, and a hen; and it was really they, and not she, who were masters of the house. The old woman, who passed all her days in spinning yarn, which she sold at the nearest town, loved both the cat and the hen as her own children, and never contradicted them in any way; so it was their grace, and not hers, that the duckling would have to gain.

It was only next morning, when it grew light, that they noticed their visitor, who stood trembling before them, with his eye on the door ready to escape at any moment. They did not, however, appear very fierce, and the duckling became less afraid as they approached him.

'Can you lay eggs?' asked the hen. And the duckling answered meekly:

'No; I don't know how.' Upon which the hen turned her back, and the cat came forward.

'Can you ruffle your fur when you are angry, or purr when you are pleased?' said she. And again the duckling had to admit that he could do nothing but swim, which did not seem of much use to anybody.

So the cat and the hen went straight off to the old woman, who was still in bed.

'Such a useless creature has taken refuge here,' they said. 'It calls itself a duckling; but it can neither lay eggs nor purr! What had we better do with it?'

'Keep it, to be sure!' replied the old woman briskly. 'It is all nonsense about it not laying eggs. Anyway, we will let it stay here for a bit, and see what happens.'

So the duckling remained for three weeks, and shared the food of the cat and the hen; but nothing in the way of eggs happened at all. Then the sun came out, and the air grew soft, and the duckling grew tired of being in a hut, and wanted with all his might to have a swim. And one morning he got so restless that even his friends noticed it.

'What is the matter?' asked the hen; and the duckling told her.

'I am so longing for the water again. You can't think how delicious it is to put your head under the water and dive straight to the bottom.'

'I don't think I should enjoy it,' replied the hen doubtfully. 'And I don't think the cat would like it either.' And the cat, when asked, agreed there was nothing she would hate so much.

'I can't stay here any longer, I Must get to the water,' repeated the duck. And the cat and the hen, who felt hurt and offended, answered shortly:

'Very well then, go.'

The duckling would have liked to say good-bye, and thank them for their kindness, as he was polite by nature; but they had both turned their backs on him, so he went out of the rickety door feeling rather sad. But, in spite of himself, he could not help a thrill of joy when he was out in the air and water once more, and cared little for the rude glances of the creatures he met. For a while he was quite happy and content; but soon the winter came on, and snow began to fall, and everything to grow very wet and uncomfortable. And the duckling soon found that it is one thing to enjoy being in the water, and quite another to like being damp on land.

The sun was setting one day, like a great scarlet globe, and the river, to the duckling's vast bewilderment, was getting hard and slippery, when he heard a sound of whirring wings, and high up in the air a flock of swans were flying. They were as white as snow which had fallen during the night, and their long necks with yellow bills were stretched southwards, for they were going--they did not quite know whither--but to a land where the sun shone all day. Oh, if he only could have gone with them! But that was not possible, of course; and besides, what sort of companion could an ugly thing like him be to those beautiful beings? So he walked sadly down to a sheltered pool and dived to the very bottom, and tried to think it was the greatest happiness he could dream of. But, all the same, he knew it wasn't!

And every morning it grew colder and colder, and the duckling had hard work to keep himself warm. Indeed, it would be truer to say that he never was warm at all; and at last, after one bitter night, his legs moved so slowly that the ice crept closer and closer, and when the morning light broke he was caught fast, as in a trap; and soon his senses went from him.

A few hours more and the poor duckling's life had been ended. But, by good fortune, a man was crossing the river on his way to his work, and saw in a moment what had happened. He had on thick wooden shoes, and he went and stamped so hard on the ice that it broke, and then he picked up the duckling and tucked him under his sheepskin coat, where his frozen bones began to thaw a little.

Instead of going on his work, the man turned back and took the bird to his children, who gave him a warm mess to eat and put him in a box by the fire, and when they came back from school he was much more comfortable than he had been since he had left the old woman's cottage. They were kind little children, and wanted to play with him; but, alas! the poor fellow had never played in his life, and thought they wanted to tease him, and flew straight into the milk-pan, and then into the butter-dish, and from that into the meal-barrel, and at last, terrified at the noise and confusion, right out of the door, and hid himself in the snow amongst the bushes at the back of the house.

He never could tell afterwards exactly how he had spent the rest of the winter. He only knew that he was very miserable and that he never had enough to eat. But by-and-by things grew better. The earth became softer, the sun hotter, the birds sang, and the flowers once more appeared in the grass. When he stood up, he felt different, somehow, from what he had done before he fell asleep among the reeds to which he had wandered after he had escaped from the peasant's hut. His body seemed larger, and his wings stronger. Something pink looked at him from the side of a hill. He thought he would fly towards it and see what it was.

Oh, how glorious it felt to be rushing through the air, wheeling first one way and then the other! He had never thought that flying could be like that! The duckling was almost sorry when he drew near the pink cloud and found it was made up of apple blossoms growing beside a cottage whose garden ran down to the banks of the canal. He fluttered slowly to the ground and paused for a few minutes under a thicket of syringas, and while he was gazing about him, there walked slowly past a flock of the same beautiful birds he had seen so many months ago. Fascinated, he watched them one by one step into the canal, and float quietly upon the waters as if they were part of them.

'I will follow them,' said the duckling to himself; 'ugly though I am, I would rather be killed by them than suffer all I have suffered from cold and hunger, and from the ducks and fowls who should have treated me kindly.' And flying quickly down to the water, he swam after them as fast as he could.

It did not take him long to reach them, for they had stopped to rest in a green pool shaded by a tree whose branches swept the water. And directly they saw him coming some of the younger ones swam out to meet him with cries of welcome, which again the duckling hardly understood. He approached them glad, yet trembling, and turning to one of the older birds, who by this time had left the shade of the tree, he said:

'If I am to die, I would rather you should kill me. I don't know why I was ever hatched, for I am too ugly to live.' And as he spoke, he bowed his head and looked down into the water.

Reflected in the still pool he saw many white shapes, with long necks and golden bills, and, without thinking, he looked for the dull grey body and the awkward skinny neck. But no such thing was there. Instead, he beheld beneath him a beautiful white swan!

'The new one is the best of all,' said the children when they came down to feed the swans with biscuit and cake before going to bed. 'His feathers are whiter and his beak more golden than the rest.' And when he heard that, the duckling thought that it was worth while having undergone all the persecution and loneliness that he had passed through, as otherwise he would never have known what it was to be really happy.

[Hans Andersen.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

The Two Caskets

Far, far away, in the midst of a pine forest, there lived a woman who had both a daughter and a stepdaughter. Ever since her own daughter was born the mother had given her all that she cried for, so she grew up to be as cross and disagreeable as she was ugly. Her stepsister, on the other hand, had spent her childhood in working hard to keep house for her father, who died soon after his second marriage; and she was as much beloved by the neighbours for her goodness and industry as she was for her beauty.

As the years went on, the difference between the two girls grew more marked, and the old woman treated her stepdaughter worse than ever, and was always on the watch for some pretext for beating her, or depriving her of her food. Anything, however foolish, was good enough for this, and one day, when she could think of nothing better, she set both the girls to spin while sitting on the low wall of the well.

'And you had better mind what you do,' said she, 'for the one whose thread breaks first shall be thrown to the bottom.'

But of course she took good care that her own daughter's flax was fine and strong, while the stepsister had only some coarse stuff, which no one would have thought of using. As might be expected, in a very little while the poor girl's thread snapped, and the old woman, who had been watching from behind a door, seized her stepdaughter by her shoulders, and threw her into the well.

'That is an end of you!' she said. But she was wrong, for it was only the beginning.

Down, down, down went the girl--it seemed as if the well must reach to the very middle of the earth; but at last her feet touched the ground, and she found herself in a field more beautiful than even the summer pastures of her native mountains. Trees waved in the soft breeze, and flowers of the brightest colours danced in the grass. And though she was quite alone, the girl's heart danced too, for she felt happier than she had since her father died. So she walked on through the meadow till she came to an old tumbledown fence--so old that it was a wonder it managed to stand up at all, and it looked as if it depended for support on the old man's beard that climbed all over it.

The girl paused for a moment as she came up, and gazed about for a place where she might safely cross. But before she could move a voice cried from the fence:

'Do not hurt me, little maiden; I am so old, so old, I have not much longer to live.'

And the maiden answered:

'No, I will not hurt you; fear nothing.' And then seeing a spot where the clematis grew less thickly than in other places, she jumped lightly over.

'May all go well with thee,' said the fence, as the girl walked on.

She soon left the meadow and turned into a path which ran between two flowery hedges. Right in front of her stood an oven, and through its open door she could see a pile of white loaves.

'Eat as many loaves as you like, but do me no harm, little maiden,' cried the oven. And the maiden told her to fear nothing, for she never hurt anything, and was very grateful for the oven's kindness in giving her such a beautiful white loaf. When she had finished it, down to the last crumb, she shut the oven door and said: 'Good-morning.'

'May all go well with thee,' said the oven, as the girl walked on.

By-and-by she became very thirsty, and seeing a cow with a milk-pail hanging on her horn, turned towards her.

'Milk me and drink as much as you will, little maiden,' cried the cow, 'but be sure you spill none on the ground; and do me no harm, for I have never harmed anyone.'

'Nor I,' answered the girl; 'fear nothing.' So she sat down and milked till the pail was nearly full. Then she drank it all up except a little drop at the bottom.

'Now throw any that is left over my hoofs, and hang the pail on my horns again,' said the cow. And the girl did as she was bid, and kissed the cow on her forehead and went her way.

Many hours had now passed since the girl had fallen down the well, and the sun was setting.

'Where shall I spend the night?' thought she. And suddenly she saw before her a gate which she had not noticed before, and a very old woman leaning against it.

'Good evening,' said the girl politely; and the old woman answered:

'Good evening, my child. Would that everyone was as polite as you. Are you in search of anything?'

'I am in search of a place,' replied the girl; and the woman smiled and said:

'Then stop a little while and comb my hair, and you shall tell me all the things you can do.'

'Willingly, mother,' answered the girl. And she began combing out the old woman's hair, which was long and white.

Half an hour passed in this way, and then the old woman said:

'As you did not think yourself too good to comb me, I will show you where you may take service. Be prudent and patient and all will go well.'

So the girl thanked her, and set out for a farm at a little distance, where she was engaged to milk the cows and sift the corn.

As soon as it was light next morning the girl got up and went into the cow-house. 'I'm sure you must be hungry,' said she, patting each in turn. And then she fetched hay from the barn, and while they were eating it, she swept out the cow-house, and strewed clean straw upon the floor. The cows were so pleased with the care she took of them that they stood quite still while she milked them, and did not play any of the tricks on her that they had played on other dairymaids who were rough and rude. And when she had done, and was going to get up from her stool, she found sitting round her a whole circle of cats, black and white, tabby and tortoise-shell, who all cried with one voice:

'We are very thirsty, please give us some milk!'

'My poor little pussies,' said she, 'of course you shall have some.' And she went into the dairy, followed by all the cats, and gave each one a little red saucerful. But before they drank they all rubbed themselves against her knees and purred by way of thanks.

The next thing the girl had to do was to go to the storehouse, and to sift the corn through a sieve. While she was busy rubbing the corn she heard a whirr of wings, and a flock of sparrows flew in at the window.

'We are hungry; give us some corn! give us some corn!' cried they; and the girl answered:

'You poor little birds, of course you shall have some!' and scattered a fine handful over the floor. When they had finished they flew on her shoulders and flapped their wings by way of thanks.

Time went by, and no cows in the whole country-side were so fat and well tended as hers, and no dairy had so much milk to show. The farmer's wife was so well satisfied that she gave her higher wages, and treated her like her own daughter. At length, one day, the girl was bidden by her mistress to come into the kitchen, and when there, the old woman said to her: 'I know you can tend cows and keep a diary; now let me see what you can do besides. Take this sieve to the well, and fill it with water, and bring it home to me without spilling one drop by the way.'

The girl's heart sank at this order; for how was it possible for her to do her mistress's bidding? However, she was silent, and taking the sieve went down to the well with it. Stopping over the side, she filled it to the brim, but as soon as she lifted it the water all ran out of the holes. Again and again she tried, but not a drop would remaining in the sieve, and she was just turning away in despair when a flock of sparrows flew down from the sky.

'Ashes! ashes!' they twittered; and the girl looked at them and said:

'Well, I can't be in a worse plight than I am already, so I will take your advice.' And she ran back to the kitchen and filled her sieve with ashes. Then once more she dipped the sieve into the well, and, behold, this time not a drop of water disappeared!

'Here is the sieve, mistress,' cried the girl, going to the room where the old woman was sitting.

'You are cleverer than I expected,' answered she; 'or else someone helped you who is skilled in magic.' But the girl kept silence, and the old woman asked her no more questions.

Many days passed during which the girl went about her work as usual, but at length one day the old woman called her and said:

'I have something more for you to do. There are here two yarns, the one white, the other black. What you must do is to wash them in the river till the black one becomes white and the white black.' And the girl took them to the river and washed hard for several hours, but wash as she would they never changed one whit.

'This is worse than the sieve,' thought she, and was about to give up in despair when there came a rush of wings through the air, and on every twig of the birch trees which grew by the bank was perched a sparrow.

'The black to the east, the white to the west!' they sang, all at once; and the girl dried her tears and felt brave again. Picking up the black yarn, she stood facing the east and dipped it in the river, and in an instant it grew white as snow, then turning to the west, she held the white yarn in the water, and it became as black as a crow's wing. She looked back at the sparrows and smiled and nodded to them, and flapping their wings in reply they flew swiftly away.

At the sight of the yarn the old woman was struck dumb; but when at length she found her voice she asked the girl what magician had helped her to do what no one had done before. But she got no answer, for the maiden was afraid of bringing trouble on her little friends.

For many weeks the mistress shut herself up in her room, and the girl went about her work as usual. She hoped that there was an end to the difficult tasks which had been set her; but in this she was mistaken, for one day the old woman appeared suddenly in the kitchen, and said to her:

'There is one more trial to which I must put you, and if you do not fail in that you will be left in peace for evermore. Here are the yarns which you washed. Take them and weave them into a web that is as smooth as a king's robe, and see that it is spun by the time that the sun sets.'

'This is the easiest thing I have been set to do,' thought the girl, who was a good spinner. But when she began she found that the skein tangled and broke every moment.

'Oh, I can never do it!' she cried at last, and leaned her head against the loom and wept; but at that instant the door opened, and there entered, one behind another, a procession of cats.

'What is the matter, fair maiden?' asked they. And the girl answered:

'My mistress has given me this yarn to weave into a piece of cloth, which must be finished by sunset, and I have not even begun yet, for the yarn breaks whenever I touch it.'

'If that is all, dry your eyes,' said the cats; 'we will manage it for you.' And they jumped on the loom, and wove so fast and so skilfully that in a very short time the cloth was ready and was as fine as any king ever wore. The girl was so delighted at the sight of it that she gave each cat a kiss on his forehead as they left the room behind one the other as they had come.

'Who has taught you this wisdom?' asked the old woman, after she had passed her hands twice or thrice over the cloth and could find no roughness anywhere. But the girl only smiled and did not answer. She had learned early the value of silence.

After a few weeks the old woman sent for her maid and told her that as her year of service was now up, she was free to return home, but that, for her part, the girl had served her so well that she hoped she might stay with her. But at these words the maid shook her head, and answered gently:

'I have been happy here, Madam, and I thank you for your goodness to me; but I have left behind me a stepsister and a stepmother, and I am fain to be with them once more.' The old woman looked at her for a moment, and then she said:

'Well, that must be as you like; but as you have worked faithfully for me I will give you a reward. Go now into the loft above the store house and there you will find many caskets. Choose the one which pleases you best, but be careful not to open it till you have set it in the place where you wish it to remain.'

The girl left the room to go to the loft, and as soon as she got outside, she found all the cats waiting for her. Walking in procession, as was their custom, they followed her into the loft, which was filled with caskets big and little, plain and splendid. She lifted up one and looked at it, and then put it down to examine another yet more beautiful. Which should she choose, the yellow or the blue, the red or the green, the gold or the silver? She hesitated long, and went first to one and then to another, when she heard the cats' voices calling: 'Take the black! take the black!'

The words make her look round--she had seen no black casket, but as the cats continued their cry she peered into several corners that had remained unnoticed, and at length discovered a little black box, so small and so black, that it might easily have been passed over.

'This is the casket that pleases me best, mistress,' said the girl, carrying it into the house. And the old woman smiled and nodded, and bade her go her way. So the girl set forth, after bidding farewell to the cows and the cats and the sparrows, who all wept as they said good-bye.

She walked on and on and on, till she reached the flowery meadow, and there, suddenly, something happened, she never knew what, but she was sitting on the wall of the well in her stepmother's yard. Then she got up and entered the house.

The woman and her daughter stared as if they had been turned into stone; but at length the stepmother gasped out:

'So you are alive after all! Well, luck was ever against me! And where have you been this year past?' Then the girl told how she had taken service in the under-world, and, beside her wages, had brought home with her a little casket, which she would like to set up in her room.

'Give me the money, and take the ugly little box off to the outhouse,' cried the woman, beside herself with rage, and the girl, quite frightened at her violence, hastened away, with her precious box clasped to her bosom.

The outhouse was in a very dirty state, as no one had been near it since the girl had fallen down the well; but she scrubbed and swept till everything was clean again, and then she placed the little casket on a small shelf in the corner.

'Now I may open it,' she said to herself; and unlocking it with the key which hung to its handle, she raised the lid, but started back as she did so, almost blinded by the light that burst upon her. No one would ever have guessed that that little black box could have held such a quantity of beautiful things! Rings, crowns, girdles, necklaces--all made of wonderful stones; and they shone with such brilliance that not only the stepmother and her daughter but all the people round came running to see if the house was on fire. Of course the woman felt quite ill with greed and envy, and she would have certainly taken all the jewels for herself had she not feared the wrath of the neighbours, who loved her stepdaughter as much as they hated her.

But if she could not steal the casket and its contents for herself, at least she could get another like it, and perhaps a still richer one. So she bade her own daughter sit on the edge of the well, and threw her into the water, exactly as she had done to the other girl; and, exactly as before, the flowery meadow lay at the bottom.

Every inch of the way she trod the path which her stepsister had trodden, and saw the things which she had seen; but there the likeness ended. When the fence prayed her to do it no harm, she laughed rudely, and tore up some of the stakes so that she might get over the more easily; when the oven offered her bread, she scattered the loaves onto the ground and stamped on them; and after she had milked the cow, and drunk as much as she wanted, she threw the rest on the grass, and kicked the pail to bits, and never heard them say, as they looked after her: 'You shall not have done this to me for nothing!'

Towards evening she reached the spot where the old woman was leaning against the gate-post, but she passed her by without a word.

'Have you no manners in your country?' asked the crone.

'I can't stop and talk; I am in a hurry,' answered the girl. 'It is getting late, and I have to find a place.'

'Stop and comb my hair for a little,' said the old woman, 'and I will help you to get a place.'

'Comb your hair, indeed! I have something better to do than that!' And slamming the gate in the crone's face she went her way. And she never heard the words that followed her: 'You shall not have done this to me for nothing!'

By-and-by the girl arrived at the farm, and she was engaged to look after the cows and sift the corn as her stepsister had been. But it was only when someone was watching her that she did her work; at other times the cow-house was dirty, and the cows ill-fed and beaten, so that they kicked over the pail, and tried to butt her; and everyone said they had never seen such thin cows or such poor milk. As for the cats, she chased them away, and ill-treated them, so that they had not even the spirit to chase the rats and mice, which nowadays ran about everywhere. And when the sparrows came to beg for some corn, they fared no better than the cows and the cats, for the girl threw her shoes at them, till they flew in a fright to the woods, and took shelter amongst the trees.

Months passed in this manner, when, one day, the mistress called the girl to her.

'All that I have given you to do you have done ill,' said she, 'yet will I give you another chance. For though you cannot tend cows, or divide the grain from the chaff, there may be other things that you can do better. Therefore take this sieve to the well, and fill it with water, and see that you bring it back without spilling a drop.'

The girl took the sieve and carried it to the well as her sister had done; but no little birds came to help her, and after dipping it in the well two or three times she brought it back empty.

'I thought as much,' said the old woman angrily; 'she that is useless in one thing is useless in another.'

Perhaps the mistress may have thought that the girl had learnt a lesson, but, if she did, she was quite mistaken, as the work was no better done than before. By-and-by she sent for her again, and gave her maid the black and white yarn to wash in the river; but there was no one to tell her the secret by which the black would turn white, and the white black; so she brought them back as they were. This time the old woman only looked at her grimly but the girl was too well pleased with herself to care what anyone thought about her.

After some weeks her third trial came, and the yarn was given her to spin, as it had been given to her stepsister before her.

But no procession of cats entered the room to weave a web of fine cloth, and at sunset she only brought back to her mistress an armful of dirty, tangled wool.

'There seems nothing in the world you can do,' said the old woman, and left her to herself.

Soon after this the year was up, and the girl went to her mistress to tell her that she wished to go home.

'Little desire have I to keep you,' answered the old woman, 'for no one thing have you done as you ought. Still, I will give you some payment, therefore go up into the loft, and choose for yourself one of the caskets that lies there. But see that you do not open it till you place it where you wish it to stay.'

This was what the girl had been hoping for, and so rejoiced was she, that, without even stopping to thank the old woman, she ran as fast as she could to the loft. There were the caskets, blue and red, green and yellow, silver and gold; and there in the corner stood a little black casket just like the one her stepsister had brought home.

'If there are so many jewels in that little black thing, this big red one will hold twice the number,' she said to herself; and snatching it up she set off on her road home without even going to bid farewell to her mistress.

'See, mother, see what I have brought!' cried she, as she entered the cottage holding the casket in both hands.

'Ah! you have got something very different from that little black box,' answered the old woman with delight. But the girl was so busy finding a place for it to stand that she took little notice of her mother.

'It will look best here--no, here,' she said, setting it first on one piece of furniture and then on another. 'No, after all it is to fine to live in a kitchen, let us place it in the guest chamber.'

So mother and daughter carried it proudly upstairs and put it on a shelf over the fireplace; then, untying the key from the handle, they opened the box. As before, a bright light leapt out directly the lid was raised, but it did not spring from the lustre of jewels, but from hot flames, which darted along the walls and burnt up the cottage and all that was in it and the mother and daughter as well.

As they had done when the stepdaughter came home, the neighbours all hurried to see what was the matter; but they were too late. Only the hen-house was left standing; and, in spite of her riches, there the stepdaughter lived happily to the end of her days.

[From Thorpe's Yule-Tide Stories.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

The Goldsmith's Fortune

Once upon a time there was a goldsmith who lived in a certain village where the people were as bad and greedy, and covetous, as they could possibly be; however, in spite of his surroundings, he was fat and prosperous. He had only one friend whom he liked, and that was a cowherd, who looked after cattle for one of the farmers in the village. Every evening the goldsmith would walk across to the cowherd's house and say: 'Come, let's go out for a walk!'

Now the cowherd didn't like walking in the evening, because, he said, he had been out grazing the cattle all day, and was glad to sit down when night came; but the goldsmith always worried him so that the poor man had to go against his will. This at last so annoyed him that he tried to think how he could pick a quarrel with the goldsmith, so that he should not beg him to walk with him any more. He asked another cowherd for advice, and he said the best thing he could do was to go across and kill the goldsmith's wife, for then the goldsmith would be sure to regard him as an enemy; so, being a foolish person, and there being no laws in that country by which a man would be certainly punished for such a crime, the cowherd one evening took a big stick and went across to the goldsmith's house when only Mrs. Goldsmith was at home, and banged her on the head so hard that she died then and there.

When the goldsmith came back and found his wife dead he said nothing, but just took her outside into the dark lane and propped her up against the wall of his house, and then went into the courtyard and waited. Presently a rich stranger came along the lane, and seeing someone there, as he supposed, he said:

'Good-evening, friend! a fine night to-night!' But the goldsmith's wife said nothing. The man then repeated his words louder; but still there was no reply. A third time he shouted:

'Good-evening, friend! are you deaf?' but the figure never replied. Then the stranger, being angry at what he thought very rude behaviour, picked up a big stone and threw it at Mrs. Goldsmith, crying:

'Let that teach you manners!'

Instantly poor Mrs. Goldsmith tumbled over; and the stranger, horrified at seeing what he had done, was immediately seized by the goldsmith, who ran out screaming:

'Wretch! you have killed my wife! Oh, miserable one; we will have justice done to thee!'

With many protestations and reproaches they wrangled together, the stranger entreating the goldsmith to say nothing and he would pay him handsomely to atone for the sad accident. At last the goldsmith quieted down, and agreed to accept one thousand gold pieces from the stranger, who immediately helped him to bury his poor wife, and then rushed off to the guest house, packed up his things and was off by daylight, lest the goldsmith should repent and accuse him as the murderer of his wife. Now it very soon appeared that the goldsmith had a lot of extra money, so that people began to ask questions, and finally demanded of him the reason for his sudden wealth.

'Oh,' said he, 'my wife died, and I sold her.'

'You sold your dead wife?' cried the people.

'Yes,' said the goldsmith.

'For how much?'

'A thousand gold pieces,' replied the goldsmith.

Instantly the villagers went away and each caught hold of his own wife and throttled her, and the next day they all went off to sell their dead wives. Many a weary mile did they tramp, but got nothing but hard words or laughter, or directions to the nearest cemetery, from people to whom they offered dead wives for sale. At last they perceived that they had been cheated somehow by that goldsmith. So off they rushed home, seized the unhappy man, and, without listening to his cries and entreaties, hurried him down to the river bank and flung him--plop!--into the deepest, weediest, and nastiest place they could find.

'That will teach him to play tricks on us,' said they. 'For as he can't swim he'll drown, and we sha'n't have any more trouble with him!'

Now the goldsmith really could not swim, and as soon as he was thrown into the deep river he sank below the surface; so his enemies went away believing that they had seen the last of him. But, in reality, he was carried down, half drowned, below the next bend in the river, where he fortunately came across a 'snag' floating in the water (a snag is, you know, a part of a tree or bush which floats very nearly under the surface of the water); and he held on to this snag, and by great good luck eventually came ashore some two or three miles down the river. At the place where he landed he came across a fine fat cow buffalo, and immediately he jumped on her back and rode home. When the village people saw him, they ran out in surprise, and said:

'Where on earth do you come from, and where did you get that buffalo?'

'Ah!' said the goldsmith, 'you little know what delightful adventures I have had! Why, down in that place in the river where you threw me in I found meadows, and trees, and fine pastures, and buffaloes, and all kinds of cattle. In fact, I could hardly tear myself away; but I thought that I must really let you all know about it.'

'Oh, oh!' thought the greedy village people; 'if there are buffaloes to be had for the taking we'll go after some too.' Encouraged by the goldsmith they nearly all ran off the very next morning to the river; and, in order that they might get down quickly to the beautiful place the goldsmith told them of, they tied great stones on to their feet and their necks, and one after another they jumped into the water as fast as the could, and were drowned. And whenever any one of them waved his hands about and struggled the goldsmith would cry out:

'Look! he's beckoning the rest of you to come; he's got a fine buffalo!' And others who were doubtful would jump in, until not one was left. Then the cunning goldsmith went back and took all the village for himself, and became very rich indeed. But do you think he was happy? Not a bit. Lies never made a man happy yet. Truly, he got the better of a set of wicked and greedy people, but only by being wicked and greedy himself; and, as it turned out, when he got so rich he got very fat; and at last was so fat that he couldn't move, and one day he got the apoplexy and died, and no one in the world cared the least bit.

[Told by a Pathan to Major Campbell.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

The Enchanted Wreath

Once upon a time there lived near a forest a man and his wife and two girls; one girl was the daughter of the man, and the other the daughter of his wife; and the man's daughter was good and beautiful, but the woman's daughter was cross and ugly. However, her mother did not know that, but thought her the most bewitching maiden that ever was seen.

One day the man called to his daughter and bade her come with him into the forest to cut wood. They worked hard all day, but in spite of the chopping they were very cold, for it rained heavily, and when they returned home, they were wet through. Then, to his vexation, the man found that he had left his axe behind him, and he knew that if it lay all night in the mud it would become rusty and useless. So he said to his wife:

'I have dropped my axe in the forest, bid your daughter go and fetch it, for mine has worked hard all day and is both wet and weary.'

But the wife answered:

'If your daughter is wet already, it is all the more reason that she should go and get the axe. Besides, she is a great strong girl, and a little rain will not hurt her, while my daughter would be sure to catch a bad cold.'

By long experience the man knew there was no good saying any more, and with a sigh he told the poor girl she must return to the forest for the axe.

The walk took some time, for it was very dark, and her shoes often stuck in the mud, but she was brave as well as beautiful and never thought of turning back merely because the path was both difficult and unpleasant. At last, with her dress torn by brambles that she could not see, and her fact scratched by the twigs on the trees, she reached the spot where she and her father had been cutting in the morning, and found the axe in the place he had left it. To her surprise, three little doves were sitting on the handle, all of them looking very sad.

'You poor little things,' said the girl, stroking them. 'Why do you sit there and get wet? Go and fly home to your nest, it will be much warmer than this; but first eat this bread, which I saved from my dinner, and perhaps you will feel happier. It is my father's axe you are sitting on, and I must take it back as fast as I can, or I shall get a terrible scolding from my stepmother.' She then crumbled the bread on the ground, and was pleased to see the doves flutter quite cheerfully towards it.

'Good-bye,' she said, picking up the axe, and went her way homewards.

By the time they had finished all the crumbs the doves felt must better, and were able to fly back to their nest in the top of a tree.

'That is a good girl,' said one; 'I really was too weak to stretch out a wing before she came. I should like to do something to show how grateful I am.'

'Well, let us give her a wreath of flowers that will never fade as long as she wears it,' cried another.

'And let the tiniest singing birds in the world sit amongst the flowers,' rejoined the third.

'Yes, that will do beautifully,' said the first. And when the girl stepped into her cottage a wreath of rosebuds was on her head, and a crowd of little birds were singing unseen.

The father, who was sitting by the fire, thought that, in spite of her muddy clothes, he had never seen his daughter looking so lovely; but the stepmother and the other girl grew wild with envy.

'How absurd to walk about on such a pouring night, dressed up like that,' she remarked crossly, and roughly pulled off the wreath as she spoke, to place it on her own daughter. As she did so the roses became withered and brown, and the birds flew out of the window.

'See what a trumpery thing it is!' cried the stepmother; 'and now take your supper and go to bed, for it is near upon midnight.'

But though she pretended to despise the wreath, she longed none the less for her daughter to have one like it.

Now it happened that the next evening the father, who had been alone in the forest, came back a second time without his axe. The stepmother's heart was glad when she saw this, and she said quite mildly:

'Why, you have forgotten your axe again, you careless man! But now your daughter shall stay at home, and mine shall go and bring it back'; and throwing a cloak over the girl's shoulders, she bade her hasten to the forest.

With a very ill grace the damsel set forth, grumbling to herself as she went; for though she wished for the wreath, she did not at all want the trouble of getting it.

By the time she reached the spot where her stepfather had been cutting the wood the girl was in a very bad temper indeed, and when she caught sight of the axe, there were the three little doves, with drooping heads and soiled, bedraggled feathers, sitting on the handle.

'You dirty creatures,' cried she, 'get away at once, or I will throw stones at you! And the doves spread their wings in a fright and flew up to the very top of a tree, their bodies shaking with anger.

'What shall we do to revenge ourselves on her?' asked the smallest of the doves, 'we were never treated like that before.'

'Never,' said the biggest dove. 'We must find some way of paying her back in her own coin!'

'I know,' answered the middle dove; 'she shall never be able to say anything but "dirty creatures" to the end of her life.'

'Oh, how clever of you! That will do beautifully,' exclaimed the other two. And they flapped their wings and clucked so loud with delight, and made such a noise, that they woke up all the birds in the trees close by.

'What in the world is the matter?' asked the birds sleepily.

'That is our secret,' said the doves.

Meanwhile the girl had reached home crosser than ever; but as soon as her mother heard her lift the latch of the door she ran out to hear her adventures. 'Well, did you get the wreath?' cried she.

'Dirty creatures!' answered her daughter.

'Don't speak to me like that! What do you mean?' asked the mother again.

'Dirty creatures!' repeated the daughter, and nothing else could she say.

Then the woman saw that something evil had befallen her, and turned in her rage to her stepdaughter.

'You are at the bottom of this, I know,' she cried; and as the father was out of the way she took a stick and beat the girl till she screamed with pain and went to bed sobbing.

If the poor girl's life had been miserable before, it was ten times worse now, for the moment her father's back was turned the others teased and tormented her from morning till night; and their fury was increased by the sight of her wreath, which the doves had placed again on her head.

Things went on like this for some weeks, when, one day, as the king's son was riding through the forest, he heard some strange birds singing more sweetly than birds had ever sung before. He tied his horse to a tree, and followed where the sound led him, and, to his surprise, he saw before him a beautiful girl chopping wood, with a wreath of pink rose-buds, out of which the singing came. Standing in the shelter of a tree, he watched her a long while, and then, hat in hand, he went up and spoke to her.

'Fair maiden, who are you, and who gave you that wreath of singing roses?' asked he, for the birds were so tiny that till you looked closely you never saw them.

'I live in a hut on the edge of the forest,' she answered, blushing, for she had never spoken to a prince before. 'As to the wreath, I know not how it came there, unless it may be the gift of some doves whom I fed when they were starving! The prince was delighted with this answer, which showed the goodness of the girl's heart, and besides he had fallen in love with her beauty, and would not be content till she promised to return with him to the palace, and become his bride. The old king was naturally disappointed at his son's choice of a wife, as he wished him to marry a neighbouring princess; but as from his birth the prince had always done exactly as he like, nothing was said and a splendid wedding feast was got ready.

The day after her marriage the bride sent a messenger, bearing handsome presents to her father, and telling him of the good fortune which had befallen her. As may be imagined, the stepmother and her daughter were so filled with envy that they grew quite ill, and had to take to their beds, and nobody would have been sorry it they had never got up again; but that did not happen. At length, however, they began to feel better, for the mother invented a plan by which she could be revenged on the girl who had never done her any harm.

Her plan was this. In the town where she had lived before she was married there was an old witch, who had more skill in magic that any other witch she knew. To this witch she would go and beg her to make her a mask with the face of her stepdaughter, and when she had the mask the rest would be easy. She told her daughter what she meant to do, and although the daughter could only say 'dirty creatures,' in answer, she nodded and smiled and looked well pleased.

Everything fell out exactly as the woman had hoped. By the aid of her magic mirror the witch beheld the new princess walking in her gardens in a dress of green silk, and in a few minutes had produced a mask so like her, that very few people could have told the difference. However, she counselled the woman that when her daughter first wore it-- for that, of course, was what she intended her to do--she had better pretend that she had a toothache, and cover her head with a lace veil. The woman thanked her and paid her well, and returned to her hut, carrying the mask under her cloak.

In a few days she heard that a great hunt was planned, and the prince would leave the palace very early in the morning, so that his wife would be alone all day. This was a chance not to be missed, and taking her daughter with her she went up to the palace, where she had never been before. The princess was too happy in her new home to remember all that she had suffered in the old one, and she welcomed them both gladly, and gave them quantities of beautiful things to take back with them. At last she took them down to the shore to see a pleasure boat which her husband had had made for her; and here, the woman seizing her opportunity, stole softly behind the girl and pushed her off the rock on which she was standing, into the deep water, where she instantly sank to the bottom. Then she fastened the mask on her daughter, flung over her shoulders a velvet cloak, which the princess had let fall, and finally arranged a lace veil over her head.

'Rest your cheek on your hand, as if you were in pain, when the prince returns,' said the mother; 'and be careful not to speak, whatever you do. I will go back to the witch and see if she cannot take off the spell laid on you by those horrible birds. Ah! why did I not think of it before!'

No sooner had the prince entered the palace than he hastened to the princess's apartments, where he found her lying on the sofa apparently in great pain.

'My dearest wife, what is the matter with you?' he cried, kneeling down beside her, and trying to take her hand; but she snatched it away, and pointing to her cheek murmured something he could not catch.

'What is it? tell me! Is the pain bad? When did it begin? Shall I send for your ladies to bath the place?' asked the prince, pouring out these and a dozen other questions, to which the girl only shook her head.

'But I can't leave you like this,' he continued, starting up, 'I must summon all the court physicians to apply soothing balsams to the sore place! And as he spoke he sprang to his feet to go in search of them. This so frightened the pretended wife, who knew that if the physicians once came near her the trick would at once be discovered, that she forgot her mother's counsel not to speak, and forgot even the spell that had been laid upon her, and catching hold of the prince's tunic, she cried in tones of entreaty: 'Dirty creatures!'

The young man stopped, not able to believe his ears, but supposed that pain had made the princess cross, as it sometimes does. However, he guessed somehow that she wised to be left alone, so he only said:

'Well, I dare say a little sleep will do you good, if you can manage to get it, and that you will wake up better to-morrow.'

Now, that night happened to be very hot and airless, and the prince, after vainly trying to rest, at length got up and went to the window. Suddenly he beheld in the moonlight a form with a wreath of roses on her head rise out of the sea below him and step on to the sands, holding out her arms as she did so towards the palace.

'That maiden is strangely like my wife,' thought he; 'I must see her closer! And he hastened down to the water. But when he got there, the princess, for she indeed it was, had disappeared completely, and he began to wonder if his eyes had deceived him.

The next morning he went to the false bride's room, but her ladies told him she would neither speak nor get up, though she ate everything they set before her. The prince was sorely perplexed as to what could be the matter with her, for naturally he could not guess that she was expecting her mother to return every moment, and to remove the spell the doves had laid upon her, and meanwhile was afraid to speak lest she should betray herself. At length he made up his mind to summon all the court physicians; he did not tell her what he was going to do, lest it should make her worse, but he went himself and begged the four learned leeches attached to the king's person to follow him to the princess's apartments. Unfortunately, as they entered, the princess was so enraged at the sight of them that she forgot all about the doves, and shrieked out: 'Dirty creatures! dirty creatures!' which so offended the physicians that they left the room at once, and nothing that the prince could say would prevail on them to remain. He then tried to persuade his wife to send them a message that she was sorry for her rudeness, but not a word would she say.

Late that evening, when he had performed all the tiresome duties which fall to the lot of every prince, the young man was leaning out of his window, refreshing himself with the cool breezes that blew off the sea. His thoughts went back to the scene of the morning, and he wondered if, after all, he had not made a great mistake in marrying a low-born wife, however beautiful she might be. How could he have imagined that the quiet, gentle girl who had been so charming a companion to him during the first days of their marriage, could have become in a day the rude, sulky woman, who could not control her temper even to benefit herself. One thing was clear, if she did not change her conduct very shortly he would have to send her away from court.

He was thinking these thoughts, when his eyes fell on the sea beneath him, and there, as before, was the figure that so closely resembled his wife, standing with her feet in the water, holding out her arms to him.

'Wait for me! Wait for me! Wait for me!' he cried; not even knowing he was speaking. But when he reached the shore there was nothing to be seen but the shadows cast by the moonlight.

A state ceremonial in a city some distance off caused the prince to ride away at daybreak, and he left without seeing his wife again.

'Perhaps she may have come to her senses by to-morrow,' said he to himself; 'and, anyhow, if I am going to send her back to her father, it might be better if we did not meet in the meantime! Then he put the matter from his mind, and kept his thoughts on the duty that lay before him.

It was nearly midnight before he returned to the palace, but, instead of entering, he went down to the shore and hid behind a rock. He had scarcely done so when the girl came out of the sea, and stretched out her arms towards his window. In an instant the prince had seized her hand, and though she made a frightened struggle to reach the water--for she in her turn had had a spell laid upon her--he held her fast.

'You are my own wife, and I shall never let you go,' he said. But the words were hardly out of his mouth when he found that it was a hare that he was holding by the paw. Then the hare changed into a fish, and the fish into a bird, and the bird into a slimy wriggling snake. This time the prince's hand nearly opened of itself, but with a strong effort he kept his fingers shut, and drawing his sword cut off its head, when the spell was broken, and the girl stood before him as he had seen her first, the wreath upon her head and the birds singing for joy.

The very next morning the stepmother arrived at the palace with an ointment that the old witch had given her to place upon her daughter's tongue, which would break the dove's spell, if the rightful bride had really been drowned in the sea; if not, then it would be useless. The mother assured her that she had seen her stepdaughter sink, and that there was no fear that she would ever come up again; but, to make all quite safe, the old woman might bewitch the girl; and so she did. After that the wicked stepmother travelled all through the night to get to the palace as soon as possible, and made her way straight into her daughter's room.

'I have got it! I have got it!' she cried triumphantly, and laid the ointment on her daughter's tongue.

'Now what do you say?' she asked proudly.

'Dirty creatures! dirty creatures!' answered the daughter; and the mother wrung her hands and wept, as she knew that all her plans had failed.

At this moment the prince entered with his real wife. 'You both deserved death,' he said, 'and if it were left to me, you should have it. But the princess has begged me to spare your lives, so you will be put into a ship and carried off to a desert island, where you will stay till you die.'

Then the ship was made ready and the wicked woman and her daughter were placed in it, and it sailed away, and no more was heard of them. But the prince and his wife lived together long and happily, and ruled their people well.

[Adapted from Thorpe's Yule-Tide Stories.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

The Foolish Weaver

Once a weaver, who was in want of work, took service with a certain farmer as a shepherd.

The farmer, knowing that the man was very slow-witted, gave him most careful instructions as to everything that he was to do.

Finally he said: 'If a wolf or any wild animal attempts to hurt the flock you should pick up a big stone like this' (suiting the action to the word) 'and throw a few such at him, and he will be afraid and go away.' The weaver said that he understood, and started with the flocks to the hillsides where they grazed all day.

By chance in the afternoon a leopard appeared, and the weaver instantly ran home as fast as he could to get the stones which the farmer had shown him, to throw at the creature. When he came back all the flock were scattered or killed, and when the farmer heard the tale he beat him soundly. 'Were there no stones on the hillside that you should run back to get them, you senseless one?' he cried; 'you are not fit to herd sheep. To-day you shall stay at home and mind my old mother who is sick, perhaps you will be able to drive flies off her face, if you can't drive beasts away from sheep!'

So, the next day, the weaver was left at home to take care of the farmer's old sick mother. Now as she lay outside on a bed, it turned out that the flies became very troublesome, and the weaver looked round for something to drive them away with; and as he had been told to pick up the nearest stone to drive the beasts away from the flock, he thought he would this time show how cleverly he could obey orders. Accordingly he seized the nearest stone, which was a big, heavy one, and dashed it at the flies; but, unhappily, he slew the poor old woman also; and then, being afraid of the wrath of the farmer, he fled and was not seen again in that neighbourhood.

All that day and all the next night he walked, and at length he came to a village where a great many weavers lived together.

'You are welcome,' said they. 'Eat and sleep, for to-morrow six of us start in search of fresh wool to weave, and we pray you to give us your company.'

'Willingly,' answered the weaver. So the next morning the seven weavers set out to go to the village where they could buy what they wanted. On the way they had to cross a ravine which lately had been full of water, but now was quite dry. The weavers, however, were accustomed to swim over this ravine; therefore, regardless of the fact that this time it was dry, they stripped, and, tying their clothes on their heads, they proceeded to swim across the dry sand and rocks that formed the bed of the ravine. Thus they got to the other side without further damage than bruised knees and elbows, and as soon as they were over, one of them began to count the party to make sure that all were safe there. He counted all except himself, and then cried out that somebody was missing! This set each of them counting; but each made the same mistake of counting all except himself, so that they became certain that one of their party was missing! They ran up and down the bank of the ravine wringing their hands in great distress and looking for signs of their lost comrade. There a farmer found them and asked what was the matter. 'Alas!' said one, 'seven of us started from the other bank and one must have been drowned on the crossing, as we can only find six remaining!' The farmer eyed them a minute, and then, picking up his stick, he dealt each a sounding blow, counting, as he did so, 'One! two! three!' and so on up to the seven. When the weavers found that there were seven of them they were overcome with gratitude to one whom they took for a magician as he could thus make seven out of an obvious six.

[From the Pushto.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

The Clever Cat

Once upon a time there lived an old man who dwelt with his son in a small hut on the edge of the plain. He was very old, and had worked very hard, and when at last he was struck down by illness he felt that he should never rise from his bed again.

So, one day, he bade his wife summon their son, when he came back from his journey to the nearest town, where he had been to buy bread.

'Come hither, my son,' said he; 'I know myself well to be dying, and I have nothing to leave you but my falcon, my cat and my greyhound; but if you make good use of them you will never lack food. Be good to your mother, as you have been to me. And now farewell!'

Then he turned his face to the wall and died.

There was great mourning in the hut for many days, but at length the son rose up, and calling to his greyhound, his cat and his falcon, he left the house saying that he would bring back something for dinner. Wandering over the plain, he noticed a troop of gazelles, and pointed to his greyhound to give chase. The dog soon brought down a fine fat beast, and slinging it over his shoulders, the young man turned homewards. On the way, however, he passed a pond, and as he approached a cloud of birds flew into the air. Shaking his wrist, the falcon seated on it darted into the air, and swooped down upon the quarry he had marked, which fell dead to the ground. The young man picked it up, and put it in his pouch and then went towards home again.

Near the hut was a small barn in which he kept the produce of the little patch of corn, which grew close to the garden. Here a rat ran out almost under his feet, followed by another and another; but quick as thought the cat was upon them and not one escaped her.

When all the rats were killed, the young man left the barn. He took the path leading to the door of the hut, but stopped on feeling a hand laid on his shoulder.

'Young man,' said the ogre (for such was the stranger), 'you have been a good son, and you deserve the piece of luck which has befallen you this day. Come with me to that shining lake yonder, and fear nothing.'

Wondering a little at what might be going to happen to him, the youth did as the ogre bade him, and when they reached the shore of the lake, the ogre turned and said to him:

'Step into the water and shut your eyes! You will find yourself sinking slowly to the bottom; but take courage, all will go well. Only bring up as much silver as you can carry, and we will divide it between us.'

So the young man stepped bravely into the lake, and felt himself sinking, sinking, till he reached firm ground at last. In front of him lay four heaps of silver, and in the midst of them a curious white shining stone, marked over with strange characters, such as he had never seen before. He picked it up in order to examine it more closely, and as he held it the stone spoke.

'As long as you hold me, all your wishes will come true,' it said. 'But hide me in your turban, and then call to the ogre that you are ready to come up.'

In a few minutes the young man stood again by the shores of the lake.

'Well, where is the silver?' asked the ogre, who was awaiting him.

'Ah, my father, how can I tell you! So bewildered was I, and so dazzled with the splendours of everything I saw, that I stood like a statue, unable to move. Then hearing steps approaching I got frightened, and called to you, as you know.'

'You are no better than the rest,' cried the ogre, and turned away in a rage.

When he was out of sight the young man took the stone from his turban and looked at it. 'I want the finest camel that can be found, and the most splendid garments,' said he.

'Shut your eyes then,' replied the stone. And he shut them; and when he opened them again the camel that he had wished for was standing before him, while the festal robes of a desert prince hung from his shoulders. Mounting the camel, he whistled the falcon to his wrist, and, followed by his greyhound and his cat, he started homewards.

His mother was sewing at her door when this magnificent stranger rode up, and, filled with surprise, she bowed low before him.

'Don't you know me, mother?' he said with a laugh. And on hearing his voice the good woman nearly fell to the ground with astonishment.

'How have you got that camel and those clothes?' asked she. 'Can a son of mine have committed murder in order to possess them?'

'Do not be afraid; they are quite honestly come by,' answered the youth. 'I will explain all by-and-by; but now you must go to the palace and tell the king I wish to marry his daughter.'

At these words the mother thought her son had certainly gone mad, and stared blankly at him. The young man guessed what was in her heart, and replied with a smile:

'Fear nothing. Promise all that he asks; it will be fulfilled somehow.'

So she went to the palace, where she found the king sitting in the Hall of Justice listening to the petitions of his people. The woman waited until all had been heard and the hall was empty, and then went up and knelt before the throne.

'My son has sent me to ask for the hand of the princess,' said she.

The king looked at her and thought that she was mad; but, instead of ordering his guards to turn her out, he answered gravely:

'Before he can marry the princess he must build me a palace of ice, which can be warmed with fires, and wherein the rarest singing-birds can live!'

'It shall be done, your Majesty,' said she, and got up and left the hall.

Her son was anxiously awaiting her outside the palace gates, dressed in the clothes that he wore every day.

'Well, what have I got to do?' he asked impatiently, drawing his mother aside so that no one could overhear them.

'Oh, something quite impossible; and I hope you will put the princess out of your head,' she replied.

'Well, but what is it?' persisted he.

'Nothing but to build a palace of ice wherein fires can burn that shall keep it so warm that the most delicate singing-birds can live in it!'

'I thought it would be something much harder than that,' exclaimed the young man. 'I will see about it at once.' And leaving his mother, he went into the country and took the stone from his turban.

'I want a palace of ice that can be warmed with fires and filled with the rarest singing-birds!'

'Shut your eyes, then,' said the stone; and he shut them, and when he opened them again there was the palace, more beautiful than anything he could have imagined, the fires throwing a soft pink glow over the ice.

'It is fit even for the princess,' thought he to himself.

As soon as the king awoke next morning he ran to the window, and there across the plain he beheld the palace.

'That young man must be a great wizard; he may be useful to me.' And when the mother came again to tell him that his orders had been fulfilled he received her with great honour, and bade her tell her son that the wedding was fixed for the following day.

The princess was delighted with her new home, and with her husband also; and several days slipped happily by, spent in turning over all the beautiful things that the palace contained. But at length the young man grew tired of always staying inside walls, and he told his wife that the next day he must leave her for a few hours, and go out hunting. 'You will not mind?' he asked. And she answered as became a good wife:

'Yes, of course I shall mind; but I will spend the day in planning out some new dresses; and then it will be so delightful when you come back, you know!'

So the husband went off to hunt, with the falcon on his wrist, and the greyhound and the cat behind him--for the palace was so warm that even the cat did not mind living in it.

No sooner had he gone, than the ogre who had been watching his chance for many days, knocked at the door of the palace.

'I have just returned from a far country,' he said, 'and I have some of the largest and most brilliant stones in the world with me. The princess is known to love beautiful things, perhaps she might like to buy some?'

Now the princess had been wondering for many days what trimming she should put on her dresses, so that they should outshine the dresses of the other ladies at the court balls. Nothing that she thought of seemed good enough, so, when the message was brought that the ogre and his wares were below, she at once ordered that he should be brought to her chamber.

Oh! what beautiful stones he laid before her; what lovely rubies, and what rare pearls! No other lady would have jewels like those--of that the princess was quite sure; but she cast down her eyes so that the ogre might not see how much she longed for them.

'I fear they are too costly for me,' she said carelessly; 'and besides, I have hardly need of any more jewels just now.'

'I have no particular wish to sell them myself,' answered the ogre, with equal indifference. 'But I have a necklace of shining stones which was left me by father, and one, the largest engraven with weird characters, is missing. I have heard that it is in your husband's possession, and if you can get me that stone you shall have any of these jewels that you choose. But you will have to pretend that you want it for yourself; and, above all, do not mention me, for he sets great store by it, and would never part with it to a stranger! To-morrow I will return with some jewels yet finer than those I have with me to-day. So, madam, farewell!'

Left alone, the princess began to think of many things, but chiefly as to whether she would persuade her husband to give her the stone or not. At one moment she felt he had already bestowed so much upon her that it was a shame to ask for the only object he had kept back. No, it would be mean; she could not do it! But then, those diamonds, and those string of pearls! After all, they had only been married a week, and the pleasure of giving it to her ought to be far greater than the pleasure of keeping it for himself. And she was sure it would be!

Well, that evening, when the young man had supped off his favourite dishes which the princess took care to have specially prepared for him, she sat down close beside him, and began stroking his head. For some time she did not speak, but listened attentively to all the adventures that had befallen him that day.

'But I was thinking of you all the time,' said he at the end, 'and wishing that I could bring you back something you would like. But, alas! what is there that you do not possess already?' 'How good of you not to forget me when you are in the midst of such dangers and hardships,' answered she. 'Yes, it is true I have many beautiful things; but if you want to give me a present--and to-morrow is my birthday--there IS one thing that I wish for very much.'

'And what is that? Of course you shall have it directly!' he asked eagerly.

'It is that bright stone which fell out of the folds of your turban a few days ago,' she answered, playing with his finger; 'the little stone with all those funny marks upon it. I never saw any stone like it before.'

The young man did not answer at first; then he said, slowly:

'I have promised, and therefore I must perform. But will you swear never to part from it, and to keep it safely about you always? More I cannot tell you, but I beg you earnestly to take heed to this.'

The princess was a little startled by his manner, and began to be sorry that she had every listened to the ogre. But she did not like to draw back, and pretended to be immensely delighted at her new toy, and kissed and thanked her husband for it.

'After all I needn't give it to the ogre,' thought she as she dropped off to sleep.

Unluckily the next morning the young man went hunting again, and the ogre, who was watching, knew this, and did not come till much later than before. At the moment that he knocked at the door of the palace the princess had tired of all her employments, and her attendants were at their wits' end how to amuse her, when a tall negro dressed in scarlet came to announce that the ogre was below, and desired to know if the princess would speak to him.

'Bring him hither at once!' cried she, springing up from her cushions, and forgetting all her resolves of the previous night. In another moment she was bending with rapture over the glittering gems.

'Have you got it?' asked the ogre in a whisper, for the princess's ladies were standing as near as they dared to catch a glimpse of the beautiful jewels.

'Yes, here,' she answered, slipping the stone from her sash and placing it among the rest. Then she raised her voice, and began to talk quickly of the prices of the chains and necklaces, and after some bargaining, to deceive the attendants, she declared that she liked one string of pearls better than all the rest, and that the ogre might take away the other things, which were not half as valuable as he supposed.

'As you please, madam,' said he, bowing himself out of the palace.

Soon after he had gone a curious thing happened. The princess carelessly touched the wall of her room, which was wont to reflect the warm red light of the fire on the hearth, and found her hand quite wet. She turned round, and--was it her fancy? or did the fire burn more dimly than before? Hurriedly she passed into the picture gallery, where pools of water showed here and there on the floor, and a cold chill ran through her whole body. At that instant her frightened ladies came running down the stairs, crying:

'Madam! madam! what has happened? The palace is disappearing under our eyes!'

'My husband will be home very soon,' answered the princess--who, though nearly as much frightened as her ladies, felt that she must set them a good example. 'Wait till then, and he will tell us what to do.'

So they waited, seated on the highest chairs they could find, wrapped in their warmest garments, and with piles of cushions under their feet, while the poor birds flew with numbed wings hither and thither, till they were so lucky as to discover an open window in some forgotten corner. Through this they vanished, and were seen no more.

At last, when the princess and her ladies had been forced to leave the upper rooms, where the walls and floors had melted away, and to take refuge in the hall, the young man came home. He had ridden back along a winding road from which he did not see the palace till he was close upon it, and stood horrified at the spectacle before him. He knew in an instant that his wife must have betrayed his trust, but he would not reproach her, as she must be suffering enough already. Hurrying on he sprang over all that was left of the palace walls, and the princess gave a cry of relief at the sight of him.

'Come quickly,' he said, 'or you will be frozen to death!' And a dreary little procession set out for the king's palace, the greyhound and the cat bringing up the rear.

At the gates he left them, though his wife besought him to allow her to enter.

'You have betrayed me and ruined me,' he said sternly; 'I go to seek my fortune alone.' And without another word he turned and left her.

With his falcon on his wrist, and his greyhound and cat behind him, the young man walked a long way, inquiring of everyone he met whether they had seen his enemy the ogre. But nobody had. Then he bade his falcon fly up into the sky--up, up, and up--and try if his sharp eyes could discover the old thief. The bird had to go so high that he did not return for some hours; but he told his master that the ogre was lying asleep in a splendid palace in a far country on the shores of the sea. This was delightful news to the young man, who instantly bought some meat for the falcon, bidding him make a good meal.

'To-morrow,' said he, 'you will fly to the palace where the ogre lies, and while he is asleep you will search all about him for a stone on which is engraved strange signs; this you will bring to me. In three days I shall expect you back here.'

'Well, I must take the cat with me,' answered the bird.

The sun had not yet risen before the falcon soared high into the air, the cat seated on his back, with his paws tightly clasping the bird's neck.

'You had better shut your eyes or you may get giddy,' said the bird; and the cat, you had never before been off the ground except to climb a tree, did as she was bid.

All that day and all that night they flew, and in the morning they saw the ogre's palace lying beneath them.

'Dear me,' said the cat, opening her eyes for the first time, 'that looks to me very like a rat city down there, let us go down to it; they may be able to help us.' So they alighted in some bushes in the heart of the rat city. The falcon remained where he was, but the cat lay down outside the principal gate, causing terrible excitement among the rats.

At length, seeing she did not move, one bolder than the rest put its head out of an upper window of the castle, and said, in a trembling voice:

'Why have you come here? What do you want? If it is anything in our power, tell us, and we will do it.'

'If you would have let me speak to you before, I would have told you that I come as a friend,' replied the cat; 'and I shall be greatly obliged if you would send four of the strongest and cunningest among you, to do me a service.'

'Oh, we shall be delighted,' answered the rat, much relieved. 'But if you will inform me what it is you wish them to do I shall be better able to judge who is most fitted for the post.'

'I thank you,' said the cat. 'Well, what they have to do is this: To-night they must burrow under the walls of the castle and go up to the room were an ogre lies asleep. Somewhere about him he has hidden a stone, on which are engraved strange signs. When they have found it they must take it from him without his waking, and bring it to me.'

'Your orders shall be obeyed,' replied the rat. And he went out to give his instructions.

About midnight the cat, who was still sleeping before the gate, was awakened by some water flung at her by the head rat, who could not make up his mind to open the doors.

'Here is the stone you wanted,' said he, when the cat started up with a loud mew; 'if you will hold up your paws I will drop it down.' And so he did. 'And now farewell,' continued the rat; 'you have a long way to go, and will do well to start before daybreak.'

'Your counsel is good,' replied the cat, smiling to itself; and putting the stone in her mouth she went off to seek the falcon.

Now all this time neither the cat nor the falcon had had any food, and the falcon soon got tired carrying such a heavy burden. When night arrived he declared he could go no further, but would spend it on the banks of a river.

'And it is my turn to take care of the stone,' said he, 'or it will seem as if you had done everything and I nothing.'

'No, I got it, and I will keep it,' answered the cat, who was tired and cross; and they began a fine quarrel. But, unluckily, in the midst of it, the cat raised her voice, and the stone fell into the ear of a big fish which happened to be swimming by, and though both the cat and the falcon sprang into the water after it, they were too late.

Half drowned, and more than half choked, the two faithful servants scrambled back to land again. The falcon flew to a tree and spread his wings in the sun to dry, but the cat, after giving herself a good shake, began to scratch up the sandy banks and to throw the bits into the stream.

'What are you doing that for?' asked a little fish. 'Do you know that you are making the water quite muddy?'

'That doesn't matter at all to me,' answered the cat. 'I am going to fill up all the river, so that the fishes may die.'

'That is very unkind, as we have never done you any harm,' replied the fish. 'Why are you so angry with us?'

'Because one of you has got a stone of mine-- a stone with strange signs upon it--which dropped into the water. If you will promise to get it back for me, why, perhaps I will leave your river alone.'

'I will certainly try,' answered the fish in a great hurry; 'but you must have a little patience, as it may not be an easy task.' And in an instant his scales might be seen flashing quickly along.

The fish swam as fast as he could to the sea, which was not far distant, and calling together all his relations who lived in the neighbourhood, he told them of the terrible danger which threatened the dwellers in the river.

'None of us has got it,' said the fishes, shaking their heads; 'but in the bay yonder there is a tunny who, although he is so old, always goes everywhere. He will be able to tell you about it, if anyone can.' So the little fish swam off to the tunny, and again related his story.

'Why I was up that river only a few hours ago!' cried the tunny; 'and as I was coming back something fell into my ear, and there it is still, for I went to sleep, when I got home and forgot all about it. Perhaps it may be what you want.' And stretching up his tail he whisked out the stone.

'Yes, I think that must be it,' said the fish with joy. And taking the stone in his mouth he carried it to the place where the cat was waiting for him.

'I am much obliged to you,' said the cat, as the fish laid the stone on the sand, 'and to reward you, I will let your river alone.' And she mounted the falcon's back, and they flew to their master.

Ah, how glad he was to see them again with the magic stone in their possession. In a moment he had wished for a palace, but this time it was of green marble; and then he wished for the princess and her ladies to occupy it. And there they lived for many years, and when the old king died the princess's husband reigned in his stead.

[Adapted from Contes Berberes.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

The Story of Manus

Far away over the sea of the West there reigned a king who had two sons; and the name of the one was Oireal, and the name of the other was Iarlaid. When the boys were still children, their father and mother died, and a great council was held, and a man was chosen from among them who would rule the kingdom till the boys were old enough to rule it themselves.

The years passed on, and by-and-by another council was held, and it was agreed that the king's sons were now of an age to take the power which rightly belonged to them. So the youths were bidden to appear before the council, and Oireal the elder was smaller and weaker than his brother.

'I like not to leave the deer on the hill and the fish in the rivers, and sit in judgment on my people,' said Oireal, when he had listened to the words of the chief of the council. And the chief waxed angry, and answered quickly:

'Not one clod of earth shall ever be yours if this day you do not take on yourself the vows that were taken by the king your father.'

Then spake Iarlaid, the younger, and he said: 'Let one half be yours, and the other give to me; then you will have fewer people to rule over.'

'Yes, I will do that,' answered Oireal.

After this, one half of the men of the land of Lochlann did homage to Oireal, and the other half to Iarlaid. And they governed their kingdoms as they would, and in a few years they became grown men with beards on their chins; and Iarlaid married the daughter of the king of Greece, and Oireal the daughter of the king of Orkney. The next year sons were born to Oireal and Iarlaid; and the son of Oireal was big and strong, but the son of Iarlaid was little and weak, and each had six foster brothers who went everywhere with the princes.

One day Manus, son of Oireal, and his cousin, the son of Iarlaid, called to their foster brothers, and bade them come and play a game at shinny in the great field near the school where they were taught all that princes and nobles should know. Long they played, and swiftly did the ball pass from one to another, when Manus drove the ball at his cousin, the son of Iarlaid. The boy, who was not used to be roughly handled, even in jest, cried out that he was sorely hurt, and went home with his foster brothers and told his tale to his mother. The wife of Iarlaid grew white and angry as she listened, and thrusting her son aside, sought the council hall where Iarlaid was sitting.

'Manus has driven a ball at my son, and fain would have slain him,' said she. 'Let an end be put to him and his ill deeds.'

But Iarlaid answered:

'Nay, I will not slay the son of my brother.'

'And he shall not slay my son,' said the queen. And calling to her chamberlain she ordered him to lead the prince to the four brown boundaries of the world, and to leave him there with a wise man, who would care for him, and let no harm befall him. And the wise man set the boy on the top of a hill where the sun always shone, and he could see every man, but no man could see him.

Then she summoned Manus to the castle, and for a whole year she kept him fast, and his own mother could not get speech of him. But in the end, when the wife of Oireal fell sick, Manus fled from the tower which was his prison, and stole back to his on home.

For a few years he stayed there in peace, and then the wife of Iarlaid his uncle sent for him.

'It is time that you were married,' she said, when she saw that Manus had grown tall and strong like unto Iarlaid. 'Tall and strong you are, and comely of face. I know a bride that will suit you well, and that is the daughter of the mighty earl of Finghaidh, that does homage for his lands to me. I myself will go with a great following to his house, and you shall go with me.'

Thus it was done; and though the earl's wife was eager to keep her daughter with her yet a while, she was fain to yield, as the wife of Iarlaid vowed that not a rood of land should the earl have, unless he did her bidding. But if he would give his daughter to Manus, she would bestow on him the third part of her own kingdom, with much treasure beside. This she did, not from love to Manus, but because she wished to destroy him. So they were married, and rode back with the wife of Iarlaid to her own palace. And that night, while he was sleeping, there came a wise man, who was his father's friend, and awoke him saying: 'Danger lies very close to you, Manus, son of Oireal. You hold yourself favoured because you have as a bride the daughter of a mighty earl; but do you know what bride the wife of Iarlaid sought for her own son? It was no worldly wife she found for him, but the swift March wind, and never can you prevail against her.'

'Is it thus?' answered Manu. And at the first streak of dawn he went to the chamber where the queen lay in the midst of her maidens.

'I have come,' he said, 'for the third part of the kingdom, and for the treasure which you promised me.' But the wife of Iarlaid laughed as she heard him.

'Not a clod shall you have here,' spake she. 'You must go to the Old Bergen for that. Mayhap under its stones and rough mountains you may find a treasure!'

'Then give me your son's six foster brothers as well as my own,' answered he. And the queen gave them to him, and they set out for Old Bergen.

A year passed by, and found them still in that wild land, hunting the reindeer, and digging pits for the mountain sheep to fall into. For a time Manus and his companions lived merrily, but at length Manus grew weary of the strange country, and they all took ship for the land of Lochlann. The wind was fierce and cold, and long was the voyage; but, one spring day, they sailed into the harbour that lay beneath the castle of Iarlaid. The queen looked from her window and beheld him mounting the hill, with the twelve foster brothers behind him. Then she said to her husband: 'Manus has returned with his twelve foster brothers. Would that I could put an end to him and his murdering and his slaying.'

'That were a great pity,' answered Iarlaid. 'And it is not I that will do it.'

'If you will not do it I will,' said she. And she called the twelve foster brothers and made them vow fealty to herself. So Manus was left with no man, and sorrowful was he when he returned alone to Old Bergen. It was late when his foot touched the shore, and took the path towards the forest. On his way there met him a man in a red tunic.

'Is it you, Manus, come back again?' asked he.

'It is I,' answered Manus; 'alone have I returned from the land of Lochlann.'

The man eyed him silently for a moment, and then he said:

'I dreamed that you were girt with a sword and became king of Lochlann.' But Manus answered:

'I have no sword and my bow is broken.'

'I will give you a new sword if you will make me a promise,' said the man once more.

'To be sure I will make it, if ever I am king,' answered Manus. 'But speak, and tell me what promise I am to make.'

'I was your grandfather's armourer,' replied the man, 'and I wish to be your armourer also.'

'That I will promise readily,' said Manus; and followed the man into his house, which was at a little distance. But the house was not like other houses, for the walls of every room were hung so thick with arms that you could not see the boards.

'Choose what you will,' said the man; and Manus unhooked a sword and tried it across his knee, and it broke, and so did the next, and the next.

'Leave off breaking the swords,' cried the man, 'and look at this old sword and helmet and tunic that I wore in the wars of your grandfather. Perhaps you may find them of stouter steel.' And Manus bent the sword thrice across his knee but he could not break it. So he girded it to his side, and put on the old helmet. As he fastened the strap his eye fell on a cloth flapping outside the window.

'What cloth is that?' asked he.

'It is a cloth that was woven by the Little People of the forest,' said the man; 'and when you are hungry it will give you food and drink, and if you meet a foe, he will not hurt you, but will stoop and kiss the back of your hand in token of submission. Take it, and use it well.' Manus gladly wrapped the shawl round his arm, and was leaving the house, when he heard the rattling of a chain blown by the wind.

'What chain is that?' asked he.

'The creature who has that chain round his neck, need not fear a hundred enemies,' answered the armourer. And Manus wound it round him and passed on into the forest.

Suddenly there sprang out from the bushes two lions, and a lion cub with them. The fierce beasts bounded towards him, roaring loudly, and would fain have eaten him, but quickly Manus stooped and spread the cloth upon the ground. At that the lions stopped, and bowing their great heads, kissed the back of his wrist and went their ways. But the cub rolled itself up in the cloth; so Manus picked them both up, and carried them with him to Old Bergen.

Another year went by, and then he took the lion cub and set forth to the land of Lochlann. And the wife of Iarlaid came to meet him, and a brown dog, small but full of courage, came with her. When the dog beheld the lion cub he rushed towards him, thinking to eat him; but the cub caught the dog by the neck, and shook him, and he was dead. And the wife of Iarlaid mourned him sore, and her wrath was kindled, and many times she tried to slay Manus and his cub, but she could not. And at last they two went back to Old Bergen, and the twelve foster brothers went also.

'Let them go,' said the wife of Iarlaid, when she heard of it. 'My brother the Red Gruagach will take the head off Manus as well in Old Bergen as elsewhere.'

Now these words were carried by a messenger to the wife of Oireal, and she made haste and sent a ship to Old Bergen to bear away her son before the Red Gruagach should take the head off him. And in the ship was a pilot. But the wife of Iarlaid made a thick fog to cover the face of the sea, and the rowers could not row, lest they should drive the ship on to a rock. And when night came, the lion cub, whose eyes were bright and keen, stole up to Manus, and Manus got on his back, and the lion cub sprang ashore and bade Manus rest on the rock and wait for him. So Manus slept, and by-and-by a voice sounded in his ears, saying: 'Arise!' And he saw a ship in the water beneath him, and in the ship sat the lion cup in the shape of the pilot.

Then they sailed away through the fog, and none saw them; and they reached the land of Lochlann, and the lion cub with the chain round his neck sprang from the ship and Manus followed after. And the lion cub killed all the men that guarded the castle, and Iarlaid and his wife also, so that, in the end, Manus son of Oireal was crowned king of Lochlann.

[Shortened from West Highland Tales.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

Pinkel the Thief

Long, long ago there lived a widow who had three sons. The two eldest were grown up, and though they were known to be idle fellows, some of the neighbours had given them work to do on account of the respect in which their mother was held. But at the time this story begins they had both been so careless and idle that their masters declared they would keep them no longer.

So home they went to their mother and youngest brother, of whom they thought little, because he made himself useful about the house, and looked after the hens, and milked the cow. 'Pinkel,' they called him in scorn, and by-and-by 'Pinkel' became his name throughout the village.

The two young men thought it was much nicer to live at home and be idle than to be obliged to do a quantity of disagreeable things they did not like, and they would have stayed by the fire till the end of their lives had not the widow lost patience with them and said that since they would not look for work at home they must seek it elsewhere, for she would not have them under her roof any longer. But she repented bitterly of her words when Pinkel told her that he too was old enough to go out into the world, and that when he had made a fortune he would send for his mother to keep house for him.

The widow wept many tears at parting from her youngest son, but as she saw that his heart was set upon going with his brothers, she did not try to keep him. So the young men started off one morning in high spirits, never doubting that work such as they might be willing to do would be had for the asking, as soon as their little store of money was spent.

But a very few days of wandering opened their eyes. Nobody seemed to want them, or, if they did, the young men declared that they were not able to undertake all that the farmers or millers or woodcutters required of them. The youngest brother, who was wiser, would gladly have done some of the work that the others refused, but he was small and slight, and no one thought of offering him any. Therefore they went from one place to another, living only on the fruit and nuts they could find in the woods, and getting hungrier every day.

One night, after they had been walking for many hours and were very tired, they came to a large lake with an island in the middle of it. From the island streamed a strong light, by which they could see everything almost as clearly as if the sun had been shining, and they perceived that, lying half hidden in the rushes, was a boat.

'Let us take it and row over to the island, where there must be a house,' said the eldest brother; 'and perhaps they will give us food and shelter.' And they all got in and rowed across in the direction of the light. As they drew near the island they saw that it came from a golden lantern hanging over the door of a hut, while sweet tinkling music proceeded from some bells attached to the golden horns of a goat which was feeding near the cottage. The young men's hearts rejoiced as they thought that at last they would be able to rest their weary limbs, and they entered the hut, but were amazed to see an ugly old woman inside, wrapped in a cloak of gold which lighted up the whole house. They looked at each other uneasily as she came forward with her daughter, as they knew by the cloak that this was a famous witch.

'What do you want?' asked she, at the same time signing to her daughter to stir the large pot on the fire.

'We are tired and hungry, and would fain have shelter for the night,' answered the eldest brother.

'You cannot get it here,' said the witch, 'but you will find both food and shelter in the palace on the other side of the lake. Take your boat and go; but leave this boy with me--I can find work for him, though something tells me he is quick and cunning, and will do me ill.'

'What harm can a poor boy like me do a great Troll like you?' answered Pinkel. 'Let me go, I pray you, with my brothers. I will promise never to hurt you.' And at last the witch let him go, and he followed his brothers to the boat.

The way was further than they thought, and it was morning before they reached the palace.

Now, at last, their luck seemed to have turned, for while the two eldest were given places in the king's stables, Pinkel was taken as page to the little prince. He was a clever and amusing boy, who saw everything that passed under his eyes, and the king noticed this, and often employed him in his own service, which made his brothers very jealous.

Things went on this way for some time, and Pinkel every day rose in the royal favour. At length the envy of his brothers became so great that they could bear it no longer, and consulted together how best they might ruin his credit with the king. They did not wish to kill him--though, perhaps, they would not have been sorry if they had heard he was dead--but merely wished to remind him that he was after all only a child, not half so old and wise as they.

Their opportunity soon came. It happened to be the king's custom to visit his stables once a week, so that he might see that his horses were being properly cared for. The next time he entered the stables the two brothers managed to be in the way, and when the king praised the beautiful satin skins of the horses under their charge, and remarked how different was their condition when his grooms had first come across the lake, the young men at once began to speak of the wonderful light which sprang from the lantern over the hut. The king, who had a passion for collection all the rarest things he could find, fell into the trap directly, and inquired where he could get this marvellous lantern.

'Send Pinkel for it, Sire,' said they. 'It belongs to an old witch, who no doubt came by it in some evil way. But Pinkel has a smooth tongue, and he can get the better of any woman, old or young.'

'Then bid him go this very night,' cried the king; 'and if he brings me the lantern I will make him one of the chief men about my person.'

Pinkel was much pleased at the thought of his adventure, and without more ado he borrowed a little boat which lay moored to the shore, and rowed over to the island at once. It was late by the time he arrived, and almost dark, but he knew by the savoury smell that reached him that the witch was cooking her supper. So he climbed softly on to the roof, and, peering, watched till the old woman's back was turned, when he quickly drew a handful of salt from his pocket and threw it into the pot. Scarcely had he done this when the witch called her daughter and bade her lift the pot off the fire and put the stew into a dish, as it had been cooking quite long enough and she was hungry. But no sooner had she tasted it than she put her spoon down, and declared that her daughter must have been meddling with it, for it was impossible to eat anything that was all made of salt.

'Go down to the spring in the valley, and get some fresh water, that I may prepare a fresh supper,' cried she, 'for I feel half-starved.'

'But, mother,' answered the girl, 'how can I find the well in this darkness? For you know that the lantern's rays shed no light down there.'

'Well, then, take the lantern with you,' answered the witch, 'for supper I must have, and there is no water that is nearer.'

So the girl took her pail in one hand and the golden lantern in the other, and hastened away to the well, followed by Pinkel, who took care to keep out of the way of the rays. When at last she stooped to fill her pail at the well Pinkel pushed her into it, and snatching up the lantern hurried back to his boat and rowed off from the shore.

He was already a long distance from the island when the witch, who wondered what had become of her daughter, went to the door to look for her. Close around the hut was thick darkness, but what was that bobbing light that streamed across the water? The witch's heart sank as all at once it flashed upon her what had happened.

'Is that you, Pinkel?' cried she; and the youth answered:

'Yes, dear mother, it is I!'

'And are you not a knave for robbing me?' said she.

'Truly, dear mother, I am,' replied Pinkel, rowing faster than ever, for he was half afraid that the witch might come after him. But she had no power on the water, and turned angrily into the hut, muttering to herself all the while:

'Take care! take care! A second time you will not escape so easily!'

The sun had not yet risen when Pinkel returned to the palace, and, entering the king's chamber, he held up the lantern so that its rays might fall upon the bed. In an instant the king awoke, and seeing the golden lantern shedding its light upon him, he sprang up, and embraced Pinkel with joy.

'O cunning one,' cried he, 'what treasure hast thou brought me!' And calling for his attendants he ordered that rooms next his own should be prepared for Pinkel, and that the youth might enter his presence at any hour. And besides this, he was to have a seat on the council.

It may easily be guessed that all this made the brothers more envious than they were before; and they cast about in their minds afresh how best they might destroy him. At length they remembered the goat with golden horns and the bells, and they rejoiced; 'For,' said they, 'THIS time the old woman will be on the watch, and let him be as clever as he likes, the bells on the horns are sure to warn her.' So when, as before, the king came down to the stables and praised the cleverness of their brother, the young men told him of that other marvel possessed by the witch, the goat with the golden horns.

From this moment the king never closed his eyes at night for longing after this wonderful creature. He understood something of the danger that there might be in trying to steal it, now that the witch's suspicions were aroused, and he spent hours in making plans for outwitting her. But somehow he never could think of anything that would do, and at last, as the brothers had foreseen, he sent for Pinkel.

'I hear,' he said, 'that the old witch on the island has a goat with golden horns from which hang bells that tinkle the sweetest music. That goat I must have! But, tell me, how am I to get it? I would give the third part of my kingdom to anyone who would bring it to me.'

'I will fetch it myself,' answered Pinkel.

This time it was easier for Pinkel to approach the island unseen, as there was no golden lantern to thrown its beams over the water. But, on the other hand, the goat slept inside the hut, and would therefore have to be taken from under the very eyes of the old woman. How was he to do it? All the way across the lake he thought and thought, till at length a plan came into his head which seemed as if it might do, though he knew it would be very difficult to carry out.

The first thing he did when he reached the shore was to look about for a piece of wood, and when he had found it he hid himself close to the hut, till it grew quite dark and near the hour when the witch and her daughter went to bed. Then he crept up and fixed the wood under the door, which opened outwards, in such a manner that the more you tried to shut it the more firmly it stuck. And this was what happened when the girl went as usual to bolt the door and make all fast for the night.

'What are you doing?' asked the witch, as her daughter kept tugging at the handle.

'There is something the matter with the door; it won't shut,' answered she.

'Well, leave it alone; there is nobody to hurt us,' said the witch, who was very sleepy; and the girl did as she was bid, and went to bed. Very soon they both might have been heard snoring, and Pinkel knew that his time was come. Slipping off his shoes he stole into the hut on tiptoe, and taking from his pocket some food of which the goat was particularly fond, he laid it under his nose. Then, while the animal was eating it, he stuffed each golden bell with wool which he had also brought with him, stopping every minute to listen, lest the witch should awaken, and he should find himself changed into some dreadful bird or beast. But the snoring still continued, and he went on with his work as quickly as he could. When the last bell was done he drew another handful of food out of his pocket, and held it out to the goat, which instantly rose to its feet and followed Pinkel, who backed slowly to the door, and directly he got outside he seized the goat in his arms and ran down to the place where he had moored his boat.

As soon as he had reached the middle of the lake, Pinkel took the wool out of the bells, which began to tinkle loudly. Their sound awoke the witch, who cried out as before:

'Is that you, Pinkel?'

'Yes, dear mother, it is I,' said Pinkel.

'Have you stolen my golden goat?' asked she.

'Yes, dear mother, I have,' answered Pinkel.

'Are you not a knave, Pinkel?'

'Yes, dear mother, I am,' he replied. And the old witch shouted in a rage:

'Ah! beware how you come hither again, for next time you shall not escape me!'

But Pinkel laughed and rowed on.

The king was so delighted with the goat that he always kept it by his side, night and day; and, as he had promised, Pinkel was made ruler over the third part of the kingdom. As may be supposed, the brothers were more furious than ever, and grew quite thin with rage.

'How can we get rid of him?' said one to the other. And at length they remembered the golden cloak.

'He will need to be clever if he is to steal that!' they cried, with a chuckle. And when next the king came to see his horses they began to speak of Pinkel and his marvellous cunning, and how he had contrived to steal the lantern and the goat, which nobody else would have been able to do.

'But as he was there, it is a pity he could not have brought away the golden cloak,' added they.

'The golden cloak! what is that?' asked the king. And the young men described its beauties in such glowing words that the king declared he should never know a day's happiness till he had wrapped the cloak round his own shoulders.

'And,' added he, 'the man who brings it to me shall wed my daughter, and shall inherit my throne.'

'None can get it save Pinkel,' said they; for they did not imagine that the witch, after two warnings, could allow their brother to escape a third time. So Pinkel was sent for, and with a glad heart he set out.

He passed many hours inventing first one plan and then another, till he had a scheme ready which he thought might prove successful.

Thrusting a large bag inside his coat, he pushed off from the shore, taking care this time to reach the island in daylight. Having made his boat fast to a tree, he walked up to the hut, hanging his head, and putting on a face that was both sorrowful and ashamed.

'Is that you, Pinkel?' asked the witch when she saw him, her eyes gleaming savagely.

'Yes, dear mother, it is I,' answered Pinkel.

'So you have dared, after all you have done, to put yourself in my power!' cried she. 'Well, you sha'n't escape me THIS time!' And she took down a large knife and began to sharpen it.'

'Oh! dear mother, spare me!' shrieked Pinkel, falling on his knees, and looking wildly about him.

'Spare you, indeed, you thief! Where are my lantern and my goat? No! not! there is only one fate for robbers!' And she brandished the knife in the air so that it glittered in the firelight.

'Then, if I must die,' said Pinkel, who, by this time, was getting really rather frightened, 'let me at least choose the manner of my death. I am very hungry, for I have had nothing to eat all day. Put some poison, if you like, into the porridge, but at least let me have a good meal before I die.'

'That is not a bad idea,' answered the woman; 'as long as you do die, it is all one to me.' And ladling out a large bowl of porridge, she stirred some poisonous herbs into it, and set about work that had to be done. Then Pinkel hastily poured all the contents of the bowl into his bag, and make a great noise with his spoon, as if he was scraping up the last morsel.

'Poisoned or not, the porridge is excellent. I have eaten it, every scrap; do give me some more,' said Pinkel, turning towards her.

'Well, you have a fine appetite, young man,' answered the witch; 'however, it is the last time you will ever eat it, so I will give you another bowlful.' And rubbing in the poisonous herbs, she poured him out half of what remained, and then went to the window to call her cat.

In an instant Pinkel again emptied the porridge into the bag, and the next minute he rolled on the floor, twisting himself about as if in agony, uttering loud groans the while. Suddenly he grew silent and lay still.

'Ah! I thought a second dose of that poison would be too much for you,' said the witch looking at him. 'I warned you what would happen if you came back. I wish that all thieves were as dead as you! But why does not my lazy girl bring the wood I sent her for, it will soon be too dark for her to find her way? I suppose I must go and search for her. What a trouble girls are!' And she went to the door to watch if there were any signs of her daughter. But nothing could be seen of her, and heavy rain was falling.

'It is no night for my cloak,' she muttered; 'it would be covered with mud by the time I got back.' So she took it off her shoulders and hung it carefully up in a cupboard in the room. After that she put on her clogs and started to seek her daughter. Directly the last sound of the clogs had ceased, Pinkel jumped up and took down the cloak, and rowed off as fast as he could.

He had not gone far when a puff of wind unfolded the cloak, and its brightness shed gleams across the water. The witch, who was just entering the forest, turned round at that moment and saw the golden rays. She forgot all about her daughter, and ran down to the shore, screaming with rage at being outwitted a third time.

'Is that you, Pinkel?' cried she.

'Yes, dear mother, it is I.'

'Have you taken my gold cloak?'

'Yes, dear mother, I have.'

'Are you not a great knave?'

'Yes, truly dear mother, I am.'

And so indeed he was!

But, all the same, he carried the cloak to the king's palace, and in return he received the hand of the king's daughter in marriage. People said that it was the bride who ought to have worn the cloak at her wedding feast; but the king was so pleased with it that he would not part from it; and to the end of his life was never seen without it. After his death, Pinkel became king; and let up hope that he gave up his bad and thievish ways, and ruled his subjects well. As for his brothers, he did not punish them, but left them in the stables, where they grumbled all day long.

[Thorpe's Yule-Tide Stories.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

The Adventures of a Jackal

In a country which is full of wild beasts of all sorts there once lived a jackal and a hedgehog, and, unlike though they were, the two animals made great friends, and were often seen in each other's company.

One afternoon they were walking along a road together, when the jackal, who was the taller of the two, exclaimed:

'Oh! there is a barn full of corn; let us go and eat some.'

'Yes, do let us!' answered the hedgehog. So they went to the barn, and ate till they could eat no more. Then the jackal put on his shoes, which he had taken off so as to make no noise, and they returned to the high road.

After they had gone some way they met a panther, who stopped, and bowing politely, said:

'Excuse my speaking to you, but I cannot help admiring those shoes of yours. Do you mind telling me who made them?'

'Yes, I think they are rather nice,' answered the jackal; 'I made them myself, though.'

'Could you make me a pair like them?' asked the panther eagerly.

'I would do my best, of course,' replied the jackal; 'but you must kill me a cow, and when we have eaten the flesh I will take the skin and make your shoes out of it.'

So the panther prowled about until he saw a fine cow grazing apart from the rest of the herd. He killed it instantly, and then gave a cry to the jackal and hedgehog to come to the place where he was. They soon skinned the dead beasts, and spread its skin out to dry, after which they had a grand feast before they curled themselves up for the night, and slept soundly.

Next morning the jackal got up early and set to work upon the shoes, while the panther sat by and looked on with delight. At last they were finished, and the jackal arose and stretched himself.

'Now go and lay them in the sun out there,' said he; 'in a couple of hours they will be ready to put on; but do not attempt to wear them before, or you will feel them most uncomfortable. But I see the sun is high in the heavens, and we must be continuing our journey.'

The panther, who always believed what everybody told him, did exactly as he was bid, and in two hours' time began to fasten on the shoes. They certainly set off his paws wonderfully, and he stretched out his forepaws and looked at them with pride. But when he tried to walk--ah! that was another story! They were so stiff and hard that he nearly shrieked every step he took, and at last he sank down where he was, and actually began to cry.

After some time some little partridges who were hopping about heard the poor panther's groans, and went up to see what was the matter. He had never tried to make his dinner off them, and they had always been quite friendly.

'You seem in pain,' said one of them, fluttering close to him, 'can we help you?'

'Oh, it is the jackal! He made me these shoes; they are so hard and tight that they hurt my feet, and I cannot manage to kick them off.'

'Lie still, and we will soften them,' answered the kind little partridge. And calling to his brothers, they all flew to the nearest spring, and carried water in their beaks, which they poured over the shoes. This they did till the hard leather grew soft, and the panther was able to slip his feet out of them.

'Oh, thank you, thank you,' he cried, skipping round with joy. 'I feel a different creature. Now I will go after the jackal and pay him my debts.' And he bounded away into the forest.

But the jackal had been very cunning, and had trotted backwards and forwards and in and out, so that it was very difficult to know which track he had really followed. At length, however, the panther caught sight of his enemy, at the same moment that the jackal had caught sight of him. The panther gave a loud roar, and sprang forward, but the jackal was too quick for him and plunged into a dense thicket, where the panther could not follow.

Disgusted with his failure, but more angry than ever, the panther lay down for a while to consider what he should do next, and as he was thinking, an old man came by.

'Oh! father, tell me how I can repay the jackal for the way he has served me!' And without more ado he told his story.

'If you take my advice,' answered the old man, 'you will kill a cow, and invite all the jackals in the forest to the feast. Watch them carefully while they are eating, and you will see that most of them keep their eyes on their food. But if one of them glances at you, you will know that is the traitor.'

The panther, whose manners were always good, thanked the old man, and followed his counsel. The cow was killed, and the partridges flew about with invitations to the jackals, who gathered in large numbers to the feast. The wicked jackal came amongst them; but as the panther had only seen him once he could not distinguish him from the rest. However, they all took their places on wooden seats placed round the dead cow, which was laid across the boughs of a fallen tree, and began their dinner, each jackal fixing his eyes greedily on the piece of meat before him. Only one of them seemed uneasy, and every now and then glanced in the direction of his host. This the panther noticed, and suddenly made a bound at the culprit and seized his tail; but again the jackal was too quick for him, and catching up a knife he cut off his tail and darted into the forest, followed by all the rest of the party. And before the panther had recovered from his surprise he found himself alone.

'What am I to do now?' he asked the old man, who soon came back to see how things had turned out.

'It is very unfortunate, certainly,' answered he; 'but I think I know where you can find him. There is a melon garden about two miles from here, and as jackals are very fond of melons they are nearly sure to have gone there to feed. If you see a tailless jackal you will know that he is the one you want.' So the panther thanked him and went his way.

Now the jackal had guessed what advice the old man would give his enemy, and so, while his friends were greedily eating the ripest melons in the sunniest corner of the garden, he stole behind them and tied their tails together. He had only just finished when his ears caught the sound of breaking branches; and he cried: 'Quick! quick! here comes the master of the garden!' And the jackals sprang up and ran away in all directions, leaving their tails behind them. And how was the panther to know which was his enemy?

'They none of them had any tails,' he said sadly to the old man, 'and I am tired of hunting them. I shall leave them alone and go and catch something for supper.'

Of course the hedgehog had not been able to take part in any of these adventures; but as soon as all danger was over, the jackal went to look for his friend, whom he was lucky enough to find at home.

'Ah, there you are,' he said gaily. 'I have lost my tail since I saw you last. And other people have lost theirs too; but that is no matter! I am hungry, so come with me to the shepherd who is sitting over there, and we will ask him to sell us one of his sheep.'

'Yes, that is a good plan,' answered the hedgehog. And he walked as fast as his little legs would go to keep up with the jackal. When they reached the shepherd the jackal pulled out his purse from under his foreleg, and made his bargain.

'Only wait till to-morrow,' said the shepherd, 'and I will give you the biggest sheep you ever saw. But he always feeds at some distance from the rest of the flock, and it would take me a long time to catch him.'

'Well, it is very tiresome, but I suppose I must wait,' replied the jackal. And he and the hedgehog looked about for a nice dry cave in which to make themselves comfortable for the night. But, after they had gone, the shepherd killed one of his sheep, and stripped off his skin, which he sewed tightly round a greyhound he had with him, and put a cord round its neck. Then he lay down and went to sleep.

Very, very early, before the sun was properly up, the jackal and the hedgehog were pulling at the shepherd's cloak.

'Wake up,' they said, 'and give us that sheep. We have had nothing to eat all night, and are very hungry.'

The shepherd yawned and rubbed his eyes. 'He is tied up to that tree; go and take him.' So they went to the tree and unfastened the cord, and turned to go back to the cave where they had slept, dragging the greyhound after them. When they reached the cave the jackal said to the hedgehog.

'Before I kill him let me see whether he is fat or thin.' And he stood a little way back, so that he might the better examine the animal. After looking at him, with his head on one side, for a minute or two, he nodded gravely.

'He is quite fat enough; he is a good sheep.'

But the hedgehog, who sometimes showed more cunning than anyone would have guessed, answered:

'My friend, you are talking nonsense. The wool is indeed a sheep's wool, but the paws of my uncle the greyhound peep out from underneath.'

'He is a sheep,' repeated the jackal, who did not like to think anyone cleverer than himself.

'Hold the cord while I look at him,' answered the hedgehog.

Very unwillingly the jackal held the rope, while the hedgehog walked slowly round the greyhound till he reached the jackal again. He knew quite well by the paws and tail that it was a greyhound and not a sheep, that the shepherd had sold them; and as he could not tell what turn affairs might take, he resolved to get out of the way.

'Oh! yes, you are right,' he said to the jackal; 'but I never can eat till I have first drunk. I will just go and quench my thirst from that spring at the edge of the wood, and then I shall be ready for breakfast.'

'Don't be long, then,' called the jackal, as the hedgehog hurried off at his best pace. And he lay down under a rock to wait for him.

More than an hour passed by and the hedgehog had had plenty of time to go to the spring and back, and still there was no sign of him. And this was very natural, as he had hidden himself in some long grass under a tree!

At length the jackal guessed that for some reason his friend had run away, and determined to wait for his breakfast no longer. So he went up to the place where the greyhound had been tethered and untied the rope. But just as he was about to spring on his back and give him a deadly bite, the jackal heard a low growl, which never proceeded from the throat of any sheep. Like a flash of lightning the jackal threw down the cord and was flying across the plain; but though his legs were long, the greyhound's legs were longer still, and he soon came up with his prey. The jackal turned to fight, but he was no match for the greyhound, and in a few minutes he was lying dead on the ground, while the greyhound was trotting peacefully back to the shepherd.

[Nouveaux Contes Berberes, par Rene Basset.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

The Adventures of the Jackal's Eldest Son

Now, though the jackal was dead, he had left two sons behind him, every whit as cunning and tricky as their father. The elder of the two was a fine handsome creature, who had a pleasant manner and made many friends. The animal he saw most of was a hyena; and one day, when they were taking a walk together, they picked up a beautiful green cloak, which had evidently been dropped by some one riding across the plain on a camel. Of course each wanted to have it, and they almost quarrelled over the matter; but at length it was settled that the hyena should wear the cloak by day and the jackal by night. After a little while, however, the jackal became discontented with this arrangement, declaring that none of his friends, who were quite different from those of the hyena, could see the splendour of the mantle, and that it was only fair that he should sometimes be allowed to wear it by day. To this the hyena would by no means consent, and they were on the eve of a quarrel when the hyena proposed that they should ask the lion to judge between them. The jackal agreed to this, and the hyena wrapped the cloak about him, and they both trotted off to the lion's den.

The jackal, who was fond of talking, at once told the story; and when it was finished the lion turned to the hyena and asked if it was true.

'Quite true, your majesty,' answered the hyena.

'Then lay the cloak on the ground at my feet,' said the lion, 'and I will give my judgment.' So the mantle was spread upon the red earth, the hyena and the jackal standing on each side of it.

There was silence for a few moments, and then the lion sat up, looking very great and wise.

'My judgment is that the garment shall belong wholly to whoever first rings the bell of the nearest mosque at dawn to-morrow. Now go; for much business awaits me!'

All that night the hyena sat up, fearing lest the jackal should reach the bell before him, for the mosque was close at hand. With the first streak of dawn he bounded away to the bell, just as the jackal, who had slept soundly all night, was rising to his feet. 'Good luck to you,' cried the jackal. And throwing the cloak over his back he darted away across the plain, and was seen no more by his friend the hyena.

After running several miles the jackal thought he was safe from pursuit, and seeing a lion and another hyena talking together, he strolled up to join them.

'Good morning,' he said; 'may I ask what is the matter? You seem very serious about something.'

'Pray sit down,' answered the lion. 'We were wondering in which direction we should go to find the best dinner. The hyena wishes to go to the forest, and I to the mountains. What do you say?'

'Well, as I was sauntering over the plain, just now, I noticed a flock of sheep grazing, and some of them had wandered into a little valley quite out of sight of the shepherd. If you keep among the rocks you will never be observed. But perhaps you will allow me to go with you and show you the way?'

'You are really very kind,' answered the lion. And they crept steadily along till at length they reached the mouth of the valley where a ram, a sheep and a lamb were feeding on the rich grass, unconscious of their danger.

'How shall we divide them?' asked the lion in a whisper to the hyena.

'Oh, it is easily done,' replied the hyena. 'The lamb for me, the sheep for the jackal, and the ram for the lion.'

'So I am to have that lean creature, which is nothing but horns, am I?' cried the lion in a rage. 'I will teach you to divide things in that manner!' And he gave the hyena two great blows, which stretched him dead in a moment. Then he turned to the jackal and said: 'How would you divide them?'

'Quite differently from the hyena,' replied the jackal. 'You will breakfast off the lamb, you will dine off the sheep, and you will sup off the ram.'

'Dear me, how clever you are! Who taught you such wisdom?' exclaimed the lion, looking at him admiringly.

'The fate of the hyena,' answered the jackal, laughing, and running off at his best speed; for he saw two men armed with spears coming close behind the lion!

The jackal continued to run till at last he could run no longer. He flung himself under a tree panting for breath, when he heard a rustle amongst the grass, and his father's old friend the hedgehog appeared before him.

'Oh, is it you?' asked the little creature; 'how strange that we should meet so far from home!'

'I have just had a narrow escape of my life,' gasped the jackal, 'and I need some sleep. After that we must think of something to do to amuse ourselves.' And he lay down again and slept soundly for a couple of hours.

'Now I am ready,' said he; 'have you anything to propose?'

'In a valley beyond those trees,' answered the hedgehog, 'there is a small farmhouse where the best butter in the world is made. I know their ways, and in an hour's time the farmer's wife will be off to milk the cows, which she keeps at some distance. We could easily get in at the window of the shed where she keeps the butter, and I will watch, lest some one should come unexpectedly, while you have a good meal. Then you shall watch, and I will eat.'

'That sounds a good plan,' replied the jackal; and they set off together.

But when they reached the farmhouse the jackal said to the hedgehog: 'Go in and fetch the pots of butter and I will hide them in a safe place.'

'Oh no,' cried the hedgehog, 'I really couldn't. They would find out directly! And, besides, it is so different just eating a little now and then.'

'Do as I bid you at once,' said the jackal, looking at the hedgehog so sternly that the little fellow dared say no more, and soon rolled the jars to the window where the jackal lifted them out one by one.

When they were all in a row before him he gave a sudden start.

'Run for your life,' he whispered to his companion; 'I see the woman coming over the hill!' And the hedgehog, his heart beating, set off as fast as he could. The jackal remained where he was, shaking with laughter, for the woman was not in sight at all, and he had only sent the hedgehog away because he did not want him to know where the jars of butter were buried. But every day he stole out to their hiding-place and had a delicious feast.

At length, one morning, the hedgehog suddenly said:

'You never told me what you did with those jars?'

'Oh, I hid them safely till the farm people should have forgotten all about them,' replied the jackal. 'But as they are still searching for them we must wait a little longer, and then I'll bring them home, and we will share them between us.'

So the hedgehog waited and waited; but every time he asked if there was no chance of getting jars of butter the jackal put him off with some excuse. After a while the hedgehog became suspicious, and said:

'I should like to know where you have hidden them. To-night, when it is quite dark, you shall show me the place.'

'I really can't tell you,' answered the jackal. 'You talk so much that you would be sure to confide the secret to somebody, and then we should have had our trouble for nothing, besides running the risk of our necks being broken by the farmer. I can see that he is getting disheartened, and very soon he will give up the search. Have patience just a little longer.'

The hedgehop said no more, and pretended to be satisfied; but when some days had gone by he woke the jackal, who was sleeping soundly after a hunt which had lasted several hours.

'I have just had notice,' remarked the hedgehog, shaking him, 'that my family wish to have a banquet to-morrow, and they have invited you to it. Will you come?'

'Certainly,' answered the jackal, 'with pleasure. But as I have to go out in the morning you can meet me on the road.'

'That will do very well,' replied the hedgehog. And the jackal went to sleep again, for he was obliged to be up early.

Punctual to the moment the hedgehog arrived at the place appointed for their meeting, and as the jackal was not there he sat down and waited for him.

'Ah, there you are!' he cried, when the dusky yellow form at last turned the corner. 'I had nearly given you up! Indeed, I almost wish you had not come, for I hardly know where I shall hide you.'

'Why should you hide me anywhere?' asked the jackal. 'What is the matter with you?'

'Well, so many of the guests have brought their dogs and mules with them, that I fear it may hardly be safe for you to go amongst them. No; don't run off that way,' he added quickly, 'because there is another troop that are coming over the hill. Lie down here, and I will throw these sacks over you; and keep still for your life, whatever happens.'

And what did happen was, that when the jackal was lying covered up, under a little hill, the hedgehog set a great stone rolling, which crushed him to death.

[Contes Berberes.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

The Adventures of the Younger Son of the Jackal

Now that the father and elder brother were both dead, all that was left of the jackal family was one son, who was no less cunning than the others had been. He did not like staying in the same place any better than they, and nobody ever knew in what part of the country he might be found next.

One day, when we was wandering about he beheld a nice fat sheep, which was cropping the grass and seemed quite contented with her lot.

'Good morning,' said the jackal, 'I am so glad to see you. I have been looking for you everywhere.'

'For ME?' answered the sheep, in an astonished voice; 'but we have never met before!'

'No; but I have heard of you. Oh! You don't know what fine things I have heard! Ah, well, some people have all the luck!'

'You are very kind, I am sure,' answered the sheep, not knowing which way to look. 'Is there any way in which I can help you?'

'There is something that I had set my heart on, though I hardly like to propose it on so short an acquaintance; but from what people have told me, I thought that you and I might keep house together comfortably, if you would only agree to try. I have several fields belonging to me, and if they are kept well watered they bear wonderful crops.'

'Perhaps I might come for a short time,' said the sheep, with a little hesitation; 'and if we do not get on, we can part company.'

'Oh, thank you, thank you,' cried the jackal; 'do not let us lose a moment.' And he held out his paw in such an inviting manner that the sheep got up and trotted beside him till they reached home.

'Now,' said the jackal, 'you go to the well and fetch the water, and I will pour it into the trenches that run between the patches of corn.' And as he did so he sang lustily. The work was very hard, but the sheep did not grumble, and by-and-by was rewarded at seeing the little green heads poking themselves through earth. After that the hot sun ripened them quickly, and soon harvest time was come. Then the grain was cut and ground and ready for sale.

When everything was complete, the jackal said to the sheep:

'Now let us divide it, so that we can each do what we like with his share.'

'You do it,' answered the sheep; 'here are the scales. You must weigh it carefully.'

So the jackal began to weigh it, and when he had finished, he counted out loud:

'One, two, three, four, five, six, seven parts for the jackal, and one part for the sheep. If she likes it she can take it, if not, she can leave it.'

The sheep looked at the two heaps in silence--one so large, the other so small; and then she answered:

'Wait for a minute, while I fetch some sacks to carry away my share.'

But it was not sacks that the sheep wanted; for as soon as the jackal could no longer see her she set forth at her best pace to the home of the greyhound, where she arrived panting with the haste she had made.

'Oh, good uncle, help me, I pray you!' she cried, as soon as she could speak.

'Why, what is the matter?' asked the greyhound, looking up with astonishment.

'I beg you to return with me, and frighten the jackal into paying me what he owes me,' answered the sheep. 'For months we have lived together, and I have twice every day drawn the water, while he only poured it into the trenches. Together we have reaped our harvest; and now, when the moment to divide our crop has come, he has taken seven parts for himself, and only left one for me.'

She finished, and giving herself a twist, passed her woolly tail across her eyes; while the greyhound watched her, but held his peace. Then he said:

'Bring me a sack.' And the sheep hastened away to fetch one. Very soon she returned, and laid the sack down before him.

'Open it wide, that I may get in,' cried he; and when he was comfortably rolled up inside he bade the sheep take him on her back, and hasten to the place where she had left the jackal.

She found him waiting for her, and pretending to be asleep, though she clearly saw him wink one of his eyes. However, she took no notice, but throwing the sack roughly on the ground, she exclaimed:

'Now measure!'

At this the jackal got up, and going to the heap of grain which lay close by, he divided it as before into eight portions--seven for himself and one for the sheep.

'What are you doing that for?' asked she indignantly. 'You know quite well that it was I who drew the water, and you who only poured it into the trenches.'

'You are mistaken,' answered the jackal. 'It was I who drew the water, and you who poured it into the trenches. Anybody will tell you that! If you like, I will ask those people who are digging there!'

'Very well,' replied the sheep. And the jackal called out:

'Ho! You diggers, tell me: Who was it you heard singing over the work?'

'Why, it was you, of course, jackal! You sang so loud that the whole world might have heard you!'

'And who it is that sings--he who draws the water, or he who empties it?'

'Why, certainly he who draws the water!'

'You hear?' said the jackal, turning to the sheep. 'Now come and carry away your own portion, or else I shall take it for myself.'

'You have got the better of me,' answered the sheep; 'and I suppose I must confess myself beaten! But as I bear no malice, go and eat some of the dates that I have brought in that sack.' And the jackal, who loved dates, ran instantly back, and tore open the mouth of the sack. But just as he was about to plunge his nose in he saw two brown eyes calmly looking at him. In an instant he had let fall the flap of the sack and bounded back to where the sheep was standing.

'I was only in fun; and you have brought my uncle the greyhound. Take away the sack, we will make the division over again.' And he began rearranging the heaps.

'One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, for my mother the sheep, and one for the jackal,' counted he; casting timid glances all the while at the sack.

'Now you can take your share and go,' said the sheep. And the jackal did not need twice telling! Whenever the sheep looked up, she still saw him flying, flying across the plain; and, for all I know, he may be flying across it still.

[Contes Berberes, par Rene Basset.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

The Three Treasures of the Giants

Long, long ago, there lived an old man and his wife who had three sons; the eldest was called Martin, the second Michael, while the third was named Jack.

One evening they were all seated round the table, eating their supper of bread and milk.

'Martin,' said the old man suddenly, 'I feel that I cannot live much longer. You, as the eldest, will inherit this hut; but, if you value my blessing, be good to your mother and brothers.'

'Certainly, father; how can you suppose I should do them wrong?' replied Martin indignantly, helping himself to all the best bits in the dish as he spoke. The old man saw nothing, but Michael looked on in surprise, and Jack was so astonished that he quite forgot to eat his own supper.

A little while after, the father fell ill, and sent for his sons, who were out hunting, to bid him farewell. After giving good advice to the two eldest, he turned to Jack.

'My boy,' he said, 'you have not got quite as much sense as other people, but if Heaven has deprived you of some of your wits, it was given you a kind heart. Always listen to what it says, and take heed to the words of your mother and brothers, as well as you are able!' So saying the old man sank back on his pillows and died.

The cries of grief uttered by Martin and Michael sounded through the house, but Jack remained by the bedside of his father, still and silent, as if he were dead also. At length he got up, and going into the garden, hid himself in some trees, and wept like a child, while his two brothers made ready for the funeral.

No sooner was the old man buried than Martin and Michael agreed that they would go into the world together to seek their fortunes, while Jack stayed at home with their mother. Jack would have liked nothing better than to sit and dream by the fire, but the mother, who was very old herself, declared that there was no work for him to do, and that he must seek it with his brothers.

So, one fine morning, all three set out; Martin and Michael carried two great bags full of food, but Jack carried nothing. This made his brothers very angry, for the day was hot and the bags were heavy, and about noon they sat down under a tree and began to eat. Jack was as hungry as they were, but he knew that it was no use asking for anything; and he threw himself under another tree, and wept bitterly.

'Another time perhaps you won't be so lazy, and will bring food for yourself,' said Martin, but to his surprise Jack answered:

'You are a nice pair! You talk of seeking your fortunes so as not to be a burden on our mother, and you begin by carrying off all the food she has in the house!'

This reply was so unexpected that for some moments neither of the brothers made any answer. Then they offered their brother some of their food, and when he had finished eating they went their way once more.

Towards evening they reached a small hut, and knocking at the door, asked if they might spend the night there. The man, who was a wood-cutter, invited them him, and begged them to sit down to supper. Martin thanked him, but being very proud, explained that it was only shelter they wanted, as they had plenty of food with them; and he and Michael at once opened their bags and began to eat, while Jack hid himself in a corner. The wife, on seeing this, took pity on him, and called him to come and share their supper, which he gladly did, and very good he found it. At this, Martin regretted deeply that he had been so foolish as to refuse, for his bits of bread and cheese seemed very hard when he smelt the savoury soup his brother was enjoying.

'He shan't have such a chance again,' thought he; and the next morning he insisted on plunging into a thick forest where they were likely to meet nobody.

For a long time they wandered hither and thither, for they had no path to guide them; but at last they came upon a wide clearing, in the midst of which stood a castle. Jack shouted with delight, but Martin, who was in a bad temper, said sharply:

'We must have taken a wrong turning! Let us go back.'

'Idiot!' replied Michael, who was hungry too, and, like many people when they are hungry, very cross also. 'We set out to travel through the world, and what does it matter if we go to the right or to the left?' And, without another word, took the path to the castle, closely followed by Jack, and after a moment by Martin likewise.

The door of the castle stood open, and they entered a great hall, and looked about them. Not a creature was to be seen, and suddenly Martin--he did not know why--felt a little frightened. He would have left the castle at once, but stopped when Jack boldly walked up to a door in the wall and opened it. He could not for very shame be outdone by his younger brother, and passed behind him into another splendid hall, which was filled from floor to ceiling with great pieces of copper money.

The sight quite dazzled Martin and Michael, who emptied all the provisions that remained out of their bags, and heaped them up instead with handfuls of copper.

Scarcely had they done this when Jack threw open another door, and this time it led to a hall filled with silver. In an instant his brothers had turned their bags upside down, so that the copper money tumbled out on to the floor, and were shovelling in handfuls of the silver instead. They had hardly finished, when Jack opened yet a third door, and all three fell back in amazement, for this room as a mass of gold, so bright that their eyes grew sore as they looked at it. However, they soon recovered from their surprise, and quickly emptied their bags of silver, and filled them with gold instead. When they would hold no more, Martin said:

'We had better hurry off now lest somebody else should come, and we might not know what to do'; and, followed by Michael, he hastily left the castle. Jack lingered behind for a few minutes to put pieces of gold, silver, and copper into his pocket, and to eat the food that his brothers had thrown down in the first room. Then he went after them, and found them lying down to rest in the midst of a forest. It was near sunset, and Martin began to feel hungry, so, when Jack arrived, he bade him return to the castle and bring the bread and cheese that they had left there.

'It is hardly worth doing that,' answered Jack; 'for I picked up the pieces and ate them myself.'

At this reply both brothers were beside themselves with anger, and fell upon the boy, beating him, and calling him names, till they were quite tired.

'Go where you like,' cried Martin with a final kick; 'but never come near us again.' And poor Jack ran weeping into the woods.

The next morning his brothers went home, and bought a beautiful house, where they lived with their mother like great lords.

Jack remained for some hours in hiding, thankful to be safe from his tormentors; but when no one came to trouble him, and his back did not ache so much, he began to think what he had better do. At length he made up his mind to go to the caste and take away as much money with him as would enable him to live in comfort for the rest of his life. This being decided, he sprang up, and set out along the path which led to the castle. As before, the door stood open, and he went on till he had reached the hall of gold, and there he took off his jacket and tied the sleeves together so that it might make a kind of bag. He then began to pour in the gold by handfuls, when, all at once, a noise like thunder shook the castle. This was followed by a voice, hoarse as that of a bull, which cried:

'I smell the smell of a man.' And two giants entered.

'So, little worm! it is you who steal our treasures!' exclaimed the biggest. 'Well, we have got you now, and we will cook you for supper!' But here the other giant drew him aside, and for a moment or two they whispered together. At length the first giant spoke:

'To please my friend I will spare your life on condition that, for the future, you shall guard our treasures. If you are hungry take this little table and rap on it, saying, as you do so: "The dinner of an emperor!" and you will get as much food as you want.'

With a light heart Jack promised all that was asked of him, and for some days enjoyed himself mightily. He had everything he could wish for, and did nothing from morning till night; but by-and-by he began to get very tired of it all.

'Let the giants guard their treasures themselves,' he said to himself at last; 'I am going away. But I will leave all the gold and silver behind me, and will take nought but you, my good little table.'

So, tucking the table under his arm, he started off for the forest, but he did not linger there long, and soon found himself in the fields on the other side. There he saw an old man, who begged Jack to give him something to eat.

'You could not have asked a better person,' answered Jack cheerfully. And signing to him to sit down with him under a tree, he set the table in front of them, and struck it three times, crying:

'The dinner of an emperor!' He had hardly uttered the words when fish and meat of all kinds appeared on it!

'That is a clever trick of yours,' said the old man, when he had eaten as much as he wanted. 'Give it to me in exchange for a treasure I have which is still better. Do you see this cornet? Well, you have only to tell it that you wish for an army, and you will have as many soldiers as you require.'

Now, since he had been left to himself, Jack had grown ambitious, so, after a moment's hesitation, he took the cornet and gave the table in exchange. The old man bade him farewell, and set off down one path, while Jack chose another, and for a long time he was quite pleased with his new possession. Then, as he felt hungry, he wished for his table back again, as no house was in sight, and he wanted some supper badly. All at once he remembered his cornet, and a wicked thought entered his mind.

'Two hundred hussars, forward!' cried he. And the neighing of horses and the clanking of swords were heard close at hand. The officer who rode at their head approached Jack, and politely inquired what he wished them to do.

'A mile or two along that road,' answered Jack, 'you will find an old man carrying a table. Take the table from him and bring it to me.'

The officer saluted and went back to his men, who started at a gallop to do Jack's bidding.

In ten minutes they had returned, bearing the table with them.

'That is all, thank you,' said Jack; and the soldiers disappeared inside the cornet.

Oh, what a good supper Jack had that night, quite forgetting that he owed it to a mean trick. The next day he breakfasted early, and then walked on towards the nearest town. On the way thither he met another old man, who begged for something to eat.

'Certainly, you shall have something to eat,' replied Jack. And, placing the table on the ground he cried:

'The dinner of an emperor!' when all sorts of food dishes appeared. At first the old man ate quite greedily, and said nothing; but, after his hunger was satisfied, he turned to Jack and said:

'That is a very clever trick of yours. Give the table to me and you shall have something still better.'

'I don't believe that there is anything better,' answered Jack.

'Yes, there is. Here is my bag; it will give you as many castles as you can possibly want.'

Jack thought for a moment; then he replied: 'Very well, I will exchange with you.' And passing the table to the old man, he hung the bag over his arm.

Five minutes later he summoned five hundred lancers out of the cornet and bade them go after the old man and fetch back the table.

Now that by his cunning he had obtained possession of the three magic objects, he resolved to return to his native place. Smearing his face with dirt, and tearing his clothes so as to look like a beggar, he stopped the passers by and, on pretence of seeking money or food, he questioned them about the village gossip. In this manner he learned that his brothers had become great men, much respected in all the country round. When he heard that, he lost no time in going to the door of their fine house and imploring them to give him food and shelter; but the only thing he got was hard words, and a command to beg elsewhere. At length, however, at their mother's entreaty, he was told that he might pass the night in the stable. Here he waited until everybody in the house was sound asleep, when he drew his bag from under his cloak, and desired that a castle might appear in that place; and the cornet gave him soldiers to guard the castle, while the table furnished him with a good supper. In the morning, he caused it all to vanish, and when his brothers entered the stable they found him lying on the straw.

Jack remained here for many days, doing nothing, and--as far as anybody knew--eating nothing. This conduct puzzled his brothers greatly, and they put such constant questions to him, that at length he told them the secret of the table, and even gave a dinner to them, which far outdid any they had ever seen or heard of. But though they had solemnly promised to reveal nothing, somehow or other the tale leaked out, and before long reached the ears of the king himself. That very evening his chamberlain arrived at Jack's dwelling, with a request from the king that he might borrow the table for three days.

'Very well,' answered Jack, 'you can take it back with you. But tell his majesty that if he does not return it at the end of the three days I will make war upon him.'

So the chamberlain carried away the table and took it straight to the king, telling him at the same time of Jack's threat, at which they both laughed till their sides ached.

Now the king was so delighted with the table, and the dinners it gave him, that when the three days were over he could not make up his mind to part with it. Instead, he sent for his carpenter, and bade him copy it exactly, and when it was done he told his chamberlain to return it to Jack with his best thanks. It happened to be dinner time, and Jack invited the chamberlain, who knew nothing of the trick, to stay and dine with him. The good man, who had eaten several excellent meals provided by the table in the last three days, accepted the invitation with pleasure, even though he was to dine in a stable, and sat down on the straw beside Jack.

'The dinner of an emperor!' cried Jack. But not even a morsel of cheese made its appearance.

'The dinner of an emperor!' shouted Jack in a voice of thunder. Then the truth dawned on him; and, crushing the table between his hands, he turned to the chamberlain, who, bewildered and half-frightened, was wondering how to get away.

'Tell your false king that to-morrow I will destroy his castle as easily as I have broken this table.'

The chamberlain hastened back to the palace, and gave the king Jack's message, at which he laughed more than before, and called all his courtiers to hear the story. But they were not quite so merry when they woke next morning and beheld ten thousand horsemen, and as many archers, surrounding the palace. The king saw it was useless to hold out, and he took the white flag of truce in one hand, and the real table in the other, and set out to look for Jack.

'I committed a crime,' said he; 'but I will do my best to make up for it. Here is your table, which I own with shame that I tried to steal, and you shall have besides, my daughter as your wife!'

There was no need to delay the marriage when the table was able to furnish the most splendid banquet that ever was seen, and after everyone had eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, Jack took his bag and commanded a castle filled with all sorts of treasures to arise in the park for himself and his bride.

At this proof of his power the king's heart died within him.

'Your magic is greater than mine,' he said; 'and you are young and strong, while I am old and tired. Take, therefore, the sceptre from my hand, and my crown from my head, and rule my people better than I have done.'

So at last Jack's ambition was satisfied. He could not hope to be more than king, and as long as he had his cornet to provide him with soldiers he was secure against his enemies. He never forgave his brothers for the way they had treated him, though he presented his mother with a beautiful castle, and everything she could possibly wish for. In the centre of his own palace was a treasure chamber, and in this chamber the table, the cornet, and the bag were kept as the most prized of all his possessions, and not a week passed without a visit from king John to make sure they were safe. He reigned long and well, and died a very old man, beloved by his people. But his good example was not followed by his sons and his grandsons. They grew so proud that they were ashamed to think that the founder of their race had once been a poor boy; and as they and all the world could not fail to remember it, as long as the table, the cornet, and the bag were shown in the treasure chamber, one king, more foolish than the rest, thrust them into a dark and damp cellar.

For some time the kingdom remained, though it became weaker and weaker every year that passed. Then, one day, a rumour reached the king that a large army was marching against him. Vaguely he recollected some tales he had heard about a magic cornet which could provide as many soldiers as would serve to conquer the earth, and which had been removed by his grandfather to a cellar. Thither he hastened that he might renew his power once more, and in that black and slimy spot he found the treasures indeed. But the table fell to pieces as he touched it, in the cornet there remained only a few fragments of leathern belts which the rats had gnawed, and in the bag nothing but broken bits of stone.

And the king bowed his head to the doom that awaited him, and in his heart cursed the ruin wrought by the pride and foolishness of himself and his forefathers.

[From Contes Populaires Slaves, par Louis Leger.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

The Rover of the Plain

A long way off, near the sea coast of the east of Africa, there dwelt, once upon a time, a man and his wife. They had two children, a son and a daughter, whom they loved very much, and, like parents in other countries, they often talked of the fine marriages the young people would make some day. Out there both boys and girls marry early, and very soon, it seemed to the mother, a message was sent by a rich man on the other side of the great hills offering a fat herd of oxen in exchange for the girl. Everyone in the house and in the village rejoiced, and the maiden was despatched to her new home. When all was quiet again the father said to his son:

'Now that we own such a splendid troop of oxen you had better hasten and get yourself a wife, lest some illness should overtake them. Already we have seen in the villages round about one or two damsels whose parents would gladly part with them for less than half the herd. Therefore tell us which you like best, and we will buy her for you.'

But the son answered:

'Not so; the maidens I have seen do not please me. If, indeed, I must marry, let me travel and find a wife for myself.'

'It shall be as you wish,' said the parents; 'but if by-and-by trouble should come of it, it will be your fault and not ours.'

The youth, however, would not listen; and bidding his father and mother farewell, set out on his search. Far, far away he wandered, over mountains and across rivers, till he reached a village where the people were quite different from those of his own race. He glanced about him and noticed that the girls were fair to look upon, as they pounded maize or stewed something that smelt very nice in earthen pots--especially if you were hot and tired; and when one of the maidens turned round and offered the stranger some dinner, he made up his mind that he would wed her and nobody else.

So he sent a message to her parents asking their leave to take her for his wife, and they came next day to bring their answer.

'We will give you our daughter,' said they, 'if you can pay a good price for her. Never was there so hardworking a girl; and how we shall do without her we cannot tell! Still-- no doubt your father and mother will come themselves and bring the price?'

'No; I have the price with me,' replied the young man; laying down a handful of gold pieces. 'Here it is--take it.'

The old couple's eyes glittered greedily; but custom forbade them to touch the price before all was arranged.

'At least,' said they, after a moment's pause, 'we may expect them to fetch your wife to her new home?'

'No; they are not used to travelling,' answered the bridegroom. 'Let the ceremony be performed without delay, and we will set forth at once. It is a long journey.'

Then the parents called in the girl, who was lying in the sun outside the hut, and, in the presence of all the village, a goat was killed, the sacred dance took place, and a blessing was said over the heads of the young people. After that the bride was led aside by her father, whose duty it was to bestow on her some parting advice as to her conduct in her married life.

'Be good to your husband's parents,' added he, 'and always do the will of your husband.' And the girl nodded her head obediently. Next it was the mother's turn; and, as was the custom of the tribe, she spoke to her daughter:

'Will you choose which of your sisters shall go with you to cut your wood and carry your water?'

'I do not want any of them,' answered she; 'they are no use. They will drop the wood and spill the water.'

'Then will you have any of the other children? There are enough to spare,' asked the mother again. But the bride said quickly:

'I will have none of them! You must give me our buffalo, the Rover of the Plain; he alone shall serve me.'

'What folly you talk!' cried the parents. 'Give you our buffalo, the Rover of the Plain? Why, you know that our life depends on him. Here he is well fed and lies on soft grass; but how can you tell what will befall him in another country? The food may be bad, he will die of hunger; and, if he dies we die also.'

'No, no,' said the bride; 'I can look after him as well as you. Get him ready, for the sun is sinking and it is time we set forth.'

So she went away and put together a small pot filled with healing herms, a horn that she used in tending sick people, a little knife, and a calabash containing deer fat; and, hiding these about her, she took leave of her father and mother and started across the mountains by the side of her husband.

But the young man did not see the buffalo that followed them, which had left his home to be the servant of his wife.

No one ever knew how the news spread to the kraal that the young man was coming back, bringing a wife with him; but, somehow or other, when the two entered the village, every man and woman was standing in the road uttering shouts of welcome.

'Ah, you are not dead after all,' cried they; 'and have found a wife to your liking, though you would have none of our girls. Well, well, you have chosen your own path; and if ill comes of it beware lest you grumble.'

Next day the husband took his wife to the fields and showed her which were his, and which belonged to his mother. The girl listened carefully to all he told her, and walked with him back to the hut; but close to the door she stopped, and said:

'I have dropped my necklace of beads in the field, and I must go and look for it.' But in truth she had done nothing of the sort, and it was only an excuse to go and seek the buffalo.

The beast was crouching under a tree when she came up, and snorted with pleasure at the sight of her.

'You can roam about this field, and this, and this,' she said, 'for they belong to my husband; and that is his wood, where you may hide yourself. But the other fields are his mother's, so beware lest you touch them.'

'I will beware,' answered the buffalo; and, patting his head, the girl left him.

Oh, how much better a servant he was than any of the little girls the bride had refused to bring with her! If she wanted water, she had only to cross the patch of maize behind the hut and seek out the place where the buffalo lay hidden, and put down her pail beside him. Then she would sit at her ease while he went to the lake and brought the bucket back brimming over. If she wanted wood, he would break the branches off the trees and lay them at her feet. And the villagers watched her return laden, and said to each other:

'Surely the girls of her country are stronger than our girls, for none of them could cut so quickly or carry so much!' But then, nobody knew that she had a buffalo for a servant.

Only, all this time she never gave the poor buffalo anything to eat, because she had just one dish, out of which she and her husband ate; while in her old home there was a dish put aside expressly for the Rover of the Plain. The buffalo bore it as long as he could; but, one day, when his mistress bade him go to the lake and fetch water, his knees almost gave way from hunger. He kept silence, however, till the evening, when he said to his mistress:

'I am nearly starved; I have not touched food since I came here. I can work no more.'

'Alas!' answered she, 'what can I do? I have only one dish in the house. You will have to steal some beans from the fields. Take a few here and a few there; but be sure not to take too many from one place, or the owner may notice it.'

Now the buffalo had always lived an honest life, but if his mistress did not feed him, he must get food for himself. So that night, when all the village was asleep, he came out from the wood and ate a few beans here and a few there, as his mistress had bidden him. And when at last his hunger was satisfied, he crept back to his lair. But a buffalo is not a fairy, and the next morning, when the women arrived to work in the fields, they stood still with astonishment, and said to each other:

'Just look at this; a savage beast has been destroying our crops, and we can see the traces of his feet!' And they hurried to their homes to tell their tale.

In the evening the girl crept out to the buffalo's hiding-place, and said to him:

'They perceived what happened, of course; so to-night you had better seek your supper further off.' And the buffalo nodded his head and followed her counsel; but in the morning, when these women also went out to work, the races of hoofs were plainly to be seen, and they hastened to tell their husbands, and begged them to bring their guns, and to watch for the robber.

It happened that the stranger girl's husband was the best marksman in all the village, and he hid himself behind the trunk of a tree and waited.

The buffalo, thinking that they would probably make a search for him in the fields he had laid waste the evening before, returned to the bean patch belonging to his mistress.

The young man saw him coming with amazement.

'Why, it is a buffalo!' cried he; 'I never have beheld one in this country before!' And raising his gun, he aimed just behind the ear.

The buffalo gave a leap into the air, and then fell dead.

'It was a good shot,' said the young man. And he ran to the village to tell them that the thief was punished.

When he entered his hut he found his wife, who had somehow heard the news, twisting herself to and fro and shedding tears.

'Are you ill?' asked he. And she answered: 'Yes; I have pains all over my body.' But she was not ill at all, only very unhappy at the death of the buffalo which had served her so well. Her husband felt anxious, and sent for the medicine man; but though she pretended to listen to him, she threw all his medicine out of the door directly he had gone away.

With the first rays of light the whole village was awake, and the women set forth armed with baskets and the men with knives in order to cut up the buffalo. Only the girl remained in her hut; and after a while she too went to join them, groaning and weeping as she walked along.

'What are you doing here?' asked her husband when he saw her. 'If you are ill you are better at home.'

'Oh! I could not stay alone in the village,' said she. And her mother-in-law left off her work to come and scold her, and to tell her that she would kill herself if she did such foolish things. But the girl would not listen and sat down and looked on.

When they had divided the buffalo's flesh, and each woman had the family portion in her basket, the stranger wife got up and said:

'Let me have the head.'

'You could never carry anything so heavy,' answered the men, 'and now you are ill besides.'

'You do not know how strong I am,' answered she. And at last they gave it her.

She did not walk to the village with the others, but lingered behind, and, instead of entering her hut, she slipped into the little shed where the pots for cooking and storing maize were kept. Then she laid down the buffalo's head and sat beside it. Her husband came to seek her, and begged her to leave the shed and go to bed, as she must be tired out; but the girl would not stir, neither would she attend to the words of her mother-in-law.

'I wish you would leave me alone!' she answered crossly. 'It is impossible to sleep if somebody is always coming in.' And she turned her back on them, and would not even eat the food they had brought. So they went away, and the young man soon stretched himself out on his mat; but his wife's odd conduct made him anxious, and he lay wake all night, listening.

When all was still the girl made a fire and boiled some water in a pot. As soon as it was quite hot she shook in the medicine that she had brought from home, and then, taking the buffalo's head, she made incisions with her little knife behind the ear, and close to the temple where the shot had struck him. Next she applied the horn to the spot and blew with all her force till, at length, the blood began to move. After that she spread some of the deer fat out of the calabash over the wound, which she held in the steam of the hot water. Last of all, she sang in a low voice a dirge over the Rover of the Plain.

As she chanted the final words the head moved, and the limbs came back. The buffalo began to feel alive again and shook his horns, and stood up and stretched himself. Unluckily it was just at this moment that the husband said to himself:

'I wonder if she is crying still, and what is the matter with her! Perhaps I had better go and see.' And he got up and, calling her by name, went out to the shed.

'Go away! I don't want you!' she cried angrily. But it was too late. The buffalo had fallen to the ground, dead, and with the wound in his head as before.

The young man who, unlike most of his tribe, was afraid of his wife, returned to his bed without having seen anything, but wondering very much what she could be doing all this time. After waiting a few minutes, she began her task over again, and at the end the buffalo stood on his feet as before. But just as the girl was rejoicing that her work was completed, in came the husband once more to see what his wife was doing; and this time he sat himself down in the hut, and said that he wished to watch whatever was going on. Then the girl took up the pitcher and all her other things and left the shed, trying for the third time to bring the buffalo back to life.

She was too late; the dawn was already breaking, and the head fell to the ground, dead and corrupt as it was before.

The girl entered the hut, where her husband and his mother were getting ready to go out.

'I want to go down to the lake, and bathe,' said she.

'But you could never walk so far,' answered they. 'You are so tired, as it is, that you can hardly stand!'

However, in spite of their warnings, the girl left the hut in the direction of the lake. Very soon she came back weeping, and sobbed out:

'I met some one in the village who lives in my country, and he told me that my mother is very, very ill, and if I do not go to her at once she will be dead before I arrive. I will return as soon as I can, and now farewell.' And she set forth in the direction of the mountains. But this story was not true; she knew nothing about her mother, only she wanted an excuse to go home and tell her family that their prophecies had come true, and that the buffalo was dead.

Balancing her basket on her head, she walked along, and directly she had left the village behind her she broke out into the song of the Rover of the Plain, and at last, at the end of the day, she came to the group of huts where her parents lived. Her friends all ran to meet her, and, weeping, she told them that the buffalo was dead.

This sad news spread like lightning through the country, and the people flocked from far and near to bewail the loss of the beast who had been their pride.

'If you had only listened to us,' they cried, 'he would be alive now. But you refused all the little girls we offered you, and would have nothing but the buffalo. And remember what the medicine-man said: "If the buffalo dies you die also!"'

So they bewailed their fate, one to the other, and for a while they did not perceive that the girl's husband was sitting in their midst, leaning his gun against a tree. Then one man, turning, beheld him, and bowed mockingly.

'Hail, murderer! hail! you have slain us all!'

The young man stared, not knowing what he meant, and answered, wonderingly:

'I shot a buffalo; is that why you call me a murderer?'

'A buffalo--yes; but the servant of your wife! It was he who carried the wood and drew the water. Did you not know it?'

'No; I did not know it,' replied the husband in surprise. 'Why did no one tell me? Of course I should not have shot him!'

'Well, he is dead,' answered they, 'and we must die too.'

At this the girl took a cup in which some poisonous herbs had been crushed, and holding it in her hands, she wailed: 'O my father, Rover of the Plain!' Then drinking a deep draught from it, fell back dead. One by one her parents, her brothers and her sisters, drank also and died, singing a dirge to the memory of the buffalo.

The girl's husband looked on with horror; and returned sadly home across the mountains, and, entering his hut, threw himself on the ground. At first he was too tired to speak; but at length he raised his head and told all the story to his father and mother, who sat watching him. When he had finished they shook their heads and said:

'Now you see that we spoke no idle words when we told you that ill would come of your marriage! We offered you a good and hard-working wife, and you would have none of her. And it is not only your wife you have lost, but your fortune also. For who will give you back your money if they are all dead?'

'It is true, O my father,' answered the young man. But in his heart he thought more of the loss of his wife than of the money he had given for her.

[From L'Etude Ethnographique sur les Baronga, par Henri Junod.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

The White Doe

Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who loved each other dearly, and would have been perfectly happy if they had only had a little son or daughter to play with. They never talked about it, and always pretended that there was nothing in the world to wish for; but, sometimes when they looked at other people's children, their faces grew sad, and their courtiers and attendants knew the reason why.

One day the queen was sitting alone by the side of a waterfall which sprung from some rocks in the large park adjoining the castle. She was feeling more than usually miserable, and had sent away her ladies so that no one might witness her grief. Suddenly she heard a rustling movement in the pool below the waterfall, and, on glancing up, she saw a large crab climbing on to a stone beside her.

'Great queen,' said the crab, 'I am here to tell you that the desire of your heart will soon be granted. But first you must permit me to lead you to the palace of the fairies, which, though hard by, has never been seen by mortal eyes because of the thick clouds that surround it. When there you will know more; that is, if you will trust yourself to me.'

The queen had never before heard an animal speak, and was struck dumb with surprise. However, she was so enchanted at the words of the crab that she smiled sweetly and held out her hand; it was taken, not by the crab, which had stood there only a moment before, but by a little old woman smartly dressed in white and crimson with green ribbons in her grey hair. And, wonderful to say, not a drop of water fell from her clothes.

The old woman ran lightly down a path along which the queen had been a hundred times before, but it seemed so different she could hardly believe it was the same. Instead of having to push her way through nettles and brambles, roses and jasmine hung about her head, while under her feet the ground was sweet with violets. The orange trees were so tall and thick that, even at mid-day, the sun was never too hot, and at the end of the path was a glimmer of something so dazzling that the queen had to shade her eyes, and peep at it only between her fingers.

'What can it be?' she asked, turning to her guide; who answered:

'Oh, that is the fairies' palace, and here are some of them coming to meet us.'

As she spoke the gates swung back and six fairies approached, each bearing in her hand a flower made of precious stones, but so like a real one that it was only by touching you could tell the difference.

'Madam,' they said, 'we know not how to thank you for this mark of your confidence, but have the happiness to tell you that in a short time you will have a little daughter.'

The queen was so enchanted at this news that she nearly fainted with joy; but when she was able to speak, she poured out all her gratitude to the fairies for their promised gift.

'And now,' she said, 'I ought not to stay any longer, for my husband will think that I have run away, or that some evil beast has devoured me.'

In a little while it happened just as the fairies had foretold, and a baby girl was born in the palace. Of course both the king and queen were delighted, and the child was called Desiree, which means 'desired,' for she had been 'desired' for five years before her birth.

At first the queen could think of nothing but her new plaything, but then she remembered the fairies who had sent it to her. Bidding her ladies bring her the posy of jewelled flowers which had been given her at the palace, she took each flower in her hand and called it by name, and, in turn, each fairy appeared before her. But, as unluckily often happens, the one to whom she owed the most, the crab-fairy, was forgotten, and by this, as in the case of other babies you have read about, much mischief was wrought.

However, for the moment all was gaiety in the palace, and everybody inside ran to the windows to watch the fairies' carriages, for no two were alike. One had a car of ebony, drawn by white pigeons, another was lying back in her ivory chariot, driving ten black crows, while the rest had chosen rare woods or many-coloured sea-shells, with scarlet and blue macaws, long-tailed peacocks, or green love-birds for horses. These carriages were only used on occasions of state, for when they went to war flying dragons, fiery serpents, lions or leopards, took the place of the beautiful birds.

The fairies entered the queen's chamber followed by little dwarfs who carried their presents and looked much prouder than their mistresses. One by one their burdens were spread upon the ground, and no one had ever seen such lovely things. Everything that a baby could possibly wear or play with was there, and besides, they had other and more precious gifts to give her, which only children who have fairies for godmothers can ever hope to possess.

They were all gathered round the heap of pink cushions on which the baby lay asleep, when a shadow seemed to fall between them and the sun, while a cold wind blew through the room. Everybody looked up, and there was the crab-fairy, who had grown as tall as the ceiling in her anger.

'So I am forgotten!' cried she, in a voice so loud that the queen trembled as she heard it. 'Who was it soothed you in your trouble? Who was it led you to the fairies? Who was it brought you back in safety to your home again? Yet I--I--am overlooked, while these who have done nothing in comparison, are petted and thanked.'

The queen, almost dumb with terror, in vain tried to think of some explanation or apology; but there was none, and she could only confess her fault and implore forgiveness. The fairies also did their best to soften the wrath of their sister, and knowing that, like many plain people who are not fairies, she was very vain, they entreated her to drop her crab's disguise, and to become once more the charming person they were accustomed to see.

For some time the enraged fairy would listen to nothing; but at length the flatteries began to take effect. The crab's shell fell from her, she shrank into her usual size, and lost some of her fierce expression.

'Well,' she said, 'I will not cause the princess's death, as I had meant to do, but at the same time she will have to bear the punishment of her mother's fault, as many other children have done before her. The sentence I pass upon her is, that if she is allowed to see one ray of daylight before her fifteenth birthday she will rue it bitterly, and it may perhaps cost her her life.' And with these words she vanished by the window through which she came, while the fairies comforted the weeping queen and took counsel how best the princess might be kept safe during her childhood.

At the end of half an hour they had made up their minds what to do, and at the command of the fairies, a beautiful palace sprang up, close to that of the king and queen, but different from every palace in the world in having no windows, and only a door right under the earth. However, once within, daylight was hardly missed, so brilliant were the multitudes of tapers that were burning on the walls.

Now up to this time the princess's history has been like the history of many a princess that you have read about; but, when the period of her imprisonment was nearly over, her fortunes took another turn. For almost fifteen years the fairies had taken care of her, and amused her and taught her, so that when she came into the world she might be no whit behind the daughters of other kings in all that makes a princess charming and accomplished. They all loved her dearly, but the fairy Tulip loved her most of all; and as the princess's fifteenth birthday drew near, the fairy began to tremble lest something terrible should happen--some accident which had not been foreseen. 'Do not let her out of your sight,' said Tulip to the queen, 'and meanwhile, let her portrait be painted and carried to the neighbouring Courts, as is the custom in order that the kings may see how far her beauty exceeds that of every other princess, and that they may demand her in marriage for their sons.'

And so it was done; and as the fairy had prophesied, all the young princes fell in love with the picture; but the last one to whom it was shown could think of nothing else, and refused to let it be removed from his chamber, where he spent whole days gazing at it.

The king his father was much surprised at the change which had come over his son, who generally passed all his time in hunting or hawking, and his anxiety was increased by a conversation he overheard between two of his courtiers that they feared the prince must be going out of his mind, so moody had he become. Without losing a moment the king went to visit his son, and no sooner had he entered the room than the young man flung himself at his father's feet. 'You have betrothed me already to a bride I can never love!' cried he; 'but if you will not consent to break off the match, and ask for the hand of the princess Desiree, I shall die of misery, thankful to be alive no longer.'

These words much displeased the king, who felt that, in breaking off the marriage already arranged he would almost certainly be bringing on his subjects a long and bloody war; so, without answering, he turned away, hoping that a few days might bring his son to reason. But the prince's condition grew rapidly so much worse that the king, in despair, promised to send an embassy at once to Desiree's father.

This news cured the young man in an instant of all his ills; and he began to plan out every detail of dress and of horses and carriages which were necessary to make the train of the envoy, whose name was Becasigue, as splendid as possible. He longed to form part of the embassy himself, if only in the disguise of a page; but this the king would not allow, and so the prince had to content himself with searching the kingdom for everything that was rare and beautiful to send to the princess. Indeed, he arrived, just as the embassy was starting, with his portrait, which had been painted in secret by the court painter.

The king and queen wished for nothing better than that their daughter marry into such a great and powerful family, and received the ambassador with every sign of welcome. They even wished him to see the princess Desiree, but this was prevented by the fairy Tulip, who feared some ill might come of it.

'And be sure you tell him,' added she, 'that the marriage cannot be celebrated till she is fifteen years old, or else some terrible misfortune will happen to the child.'

So when Becasigue, surround by his train, made a formal request that the princess Desiree might be given in marriage to his master's son, the king replied that he was much honoured, and would gladly give his consent; but that no one could even see the princess till her fifteenth birthday, as the spell laid upon her in her cradle by a spiteful fairy, would not cease to work till that was past. The ambassador was greatly surprised and disappointed, but he knew too much about fairies to venture to disobey them, therefore he had to content himself with presenting the prince's portrait to the queen, who lost no time in carrying it to the princess. As the girl took it in her hands it suddenly spoke, as it had been taught to do, and uttered a compliment of the most delicate and charming sort, which made the princess flush with pleasure.

'How would you like to have a husband like that?' asked the queen, laughing.

'As if I knew anything about husbands!' replied Desiree, who had long ago guessed the business of the ambassador.

'Well, he will be your husband in three months,' answered the queen, ordering the prince's presents to be brought in. The princess was very pleased with them, and admired them greatly, but the queen noticed that all the while her eyes constantly strayed from the softest silks and most brilliant jewels to the portrait of the prince.

The ambassador, finding that there was no hope of his being allowed to see the princess, took his leave, and returned to his own court; but here a new difficulty appeared. The prince, though transported with joy at the thought that Desiree was indeed to be his bride, was bitterly disappointed that she had not been allowed to return with Becasigue, as he had foolishly expected; and never having been taught to deny himself anything or to control his feelings, he fell as ill as he had done before. He would eat nothing nor take pleasure in anything, but lay all day on a heap of cushions, gazing at the picture of the princess.

'If I have to wait three months before I can marry the princess I shall die!' was all this spoilt boy would say; and at length the king, in despair, resolved to send a fresh embassy to Desiree's father to implore him to permit the marriage to be celebrated at once. 'I would have presented my prayer in person, he added in his letter, 'but my great age and infirmities do not suffer me to travel; however my envoy has orders to agree to any arrangement that you may propose.'

On his arrival at the palace Becasigue pleaded his young master's cause as fervently as the king his father could have done, and entreated that the princess might be consulted in the matter. The queen hastened to the marble tower, and told her daughter of the sad state of the prince. Desiree sank down fainting at the news, but soon came to herself again, and set about inventing a plan which would enable her to go to the prince without risking the doom pronounced over her by the wicked fairy.

'I see!' she exclaimed joyfully at last. 'Let a carriage be built through which no light can come, and let it be brought into my room. I will then get into it, and we can travel swiftly during the night and arrive before dawn at the palace of the prince. Once there, I can remain in some underground chamber, where no light can come.'

'Ah, how clever you are,' cried the queen, clasping her in her arms. And she hurried away to tell the king.

'What a wife our prince will have!' said Becasigue bowing low; 'but I must hasten back with the tidings, and to prepare the underground chamber for the princess.' And so he took his leave.

In a few days the carriage commanded by the princess was ready. It was of green velvet, scattered over with large golden thistles, and lined inside with silver brocade embroidered with pink roses. It had no windows, of course; but the fairy Tulip, whose counsel had been asked, had managed to light it up with a soft glow that came no one knew whither.

It was carried straight up into the great hall of the tower, and the princess stepped into it, followed by her faithful maid of honour, Eglantine, and by her lady in waiting Cerisette, who also had fallen in love with the prince's portrait and was bitterly jealous of her mistress. The fourth place in the carriage was filled by Cerisette's mother, who had been sent by the queen to look after the three young people.

Now the Fairy of the Fountain was the godmother of the princess Nera, to whom the prince had been betrothed before the picture of Desiree had made him faithless. She was very angry at the slight put upon her godchild, and from that moment kept careful watch on the princess. In this journey she saw her chance, and it was she who, invisible, sat by Cerisette, and put bad thoughts into the minds of both her and her mother.

The way to the city where the prince lived ran for the most part through a thick forest, and every night when there was no moon, and not a single star could be seen through the trees, the guards who travelled with the princess opened the carriage to give it an airing. This went on for several days, till only twelve hours journey lay between them and the palace. The Cerisette persuaded her mother to cut a great hole in the side of the carriage with a sharp knife which she herself had brought for the purpose. In the forest the darkness was so intense that no one perceived what she had done, but when they left the last trees behind them, and emerged into the open country, the sun was up, and for the first time since her babyhood, Desiree found herself in the light of day.

She looked up in surprise at the dazzling brilliance that streamed through the hole; then gave a sigh which seemed to come from her heart. The carriage door swung back, as if by magic, and a white doe sprang out, and in a moment was lost to sight in the forest. But, quick as she was, Eglantine, her maid of honour, had time to see where she went, and jumped from the carriage in pursuit of her, followed at a distance by the guards.

Cerisette and her mother looked at each other in surprise and joy. They could hardly believe in their good fortune, for everything had happened exactly as they wished. The first thing to be done was to conceal the hole which had been cut, and when this was managed (with the help of the angry fairy, though they did not know it), Cerisette hastened to take off her own clothes, and put on those of the princess, placing the crown of diamonds on her head. She found this heavier than she expected; but then, she had never been accustomed to wear crowns, which makes all the difference.

At the gates of the city the carriage was stopped by a guard of honour sent by the king as an escort to his son's bride. Though Cerisette and her mother could of course see nothing of what was going on outside, they heard plainly the shouts of welcome from the crowds along the streets.

The carriage stopped at length in the vast hall which Becasigue had prepared for the reception of the princess. The grand chamberlain and the lord high steward were awaiting her, and when the false bride stepped into the brilliantly lighted room, they bowed low, and said they had orders to inform his highness the moment she arrived. The prince, whom the strict etiquette of the court had prevented from being present in the underground hall, was burning with impatience in his own apartments.

'So she had come!' cried he, throwing down the bow he had been pretending to mend. 'Well, was I not right? Is she not a miracle of beauty and grace? And has she her equal in the whole world?' The ministers looked at each other, and made no reply; till at length the chamberlain, who was the bolder of the two, observed:

'My lord, as to her beauty, you can judge of that for yourself. No doubt it is as great as you say; but at present it seems to have suffered, as is natural, from the fatigues of the journey.'

This was certainly not what the prince had expected to hear. Could the portrait have flattered her? He had known of such things before, and a cold shiver ran through him; but with an effort he kept silent from further questioning, and only said:

'Has the king been told that the princess is in the palace?'

'Yes, highness; and he has probably already joined her.'

'Then I will go too,' said the prince.

Weak as he was from his long illness, the prince descended the staircase, supported by the ministers, and entered the room just in time to hear his father's loud cry of astonishment and disgust at the sight of Cerisette.

'There was been treachery at work,' he exclaimed, while the prince leant, dumb with horror, against the doorpost. But the lady in waiting, who had been prepared for something of the sort, advanced, holding in her hand the letters which the king and queen had entrusted to her.

'This is the princess Desiree,' said she, pretending to have heard nothing, 'and I have the honour to present to you these letters from my liege lord and lady, together with the casket containing the princess' jewels.'

The king did not move or answer her; so the prince, leaning on the arm of Becasigue, approached a little closer to the false princess, hoping against hope that his eyes had deceived him. But the longer he looked the more he agreed with his father that there was treason somewhere, for in no single respect did the portrait resemble the woman before him. Cerisette was so tall that the dress of the princess did not reach her ankles, and so thin that her bones showed through the stuff. Besides that her nose was hooked, and her teeth black and ugly.

In his turn, the prince stood rooted to the spot. At last he spoke, and his words were addressed to his father, and not to the bride who had come so far to marry him.

'We have been deceived,' he said, 'and it will cost me my life.' And he leaned so heavily on the envoy that Becasigue feared he was going to faint, and hastily laid him on the floor. For some minutes no one could attend to anybody but the prince; but as soon as he revived the lady in waiting made herself heard.

'Oh, my lovely princess, why did we ever leave home?' cried she. 'But the king your father will avenge the insults that have been heaped on you when we tell him how you have been treated.'

'I will tell him myself,' replied the king in wrath; 'he promised me a wonder of beauty, he has sent me a skeleton! I am not surprised that he has kept her for fifteen years hidden away from the eyes of the world. Take them both away,' he continued, turning to his guards, 'and lodge them in the state prison. There is something more I have to learn of this matter.'

His orders were obeyed, and the prince, loudly bewailing his sad fate, was led back to bed, where for many days he lay in a high fever. At length he slowly began to gain strength, but his sorrow was still so great that he could not bear the sight of a strange face, and shuddered at the notion of taking his proper part in the court ceremonies. Unknown to the king, or to anybody but Becasigue, he planned that, as soon as he was able, he would make his escape and pass the rest of his life alone in some solitary place. It was some weeks before he had regained his health sufficiently to carry out his design; but finally, one beautiful starlight night, the two friends stole away, and when the king woke next morning he found a letter lying by his bed, saying that his son had gone, he knew not whither. He wept bitter tears at the news, for he loved the prince dearly; but he felt that perhaps the young man had done wisely, and he trusted to time and Becasigue's influence to bring the wanderer home.

And while these things were happening, what had become of the white doe? Though when she sprang from the carriage she was aware that some unkind fate had changed her into an animal, yet, till she saw herself in a stream, she had no idea what it was.

'Is it really, I, Desiree?' she said to herself, weeping. 'What wicked fairy can have treated me so; and shall I never, never take my own shape again? My only comfort that, in this great forest, full of lions and serpents, my life will be a short one.'

Now the fairy Tulip was as much grieved at the sad fate of the princess as Desiree's own mother could have been if she had known of it. Still, she could not help feeling that if the king and queen had listened to her advice the girl would by this time be safely in the walls of her new home. However, she loved Desiree too much to let her suffer more than could be helped, and it was she who guided Eglantine to the place where the white doe was standing, cropping the grass which was her dinner.

At the sound of footsteps the pretty creature lifted her head, and when she saw her faithful companion approaching she bounded towards her, and rubbed her head on Eglantine's shoulder. The maid of honour was surprised; but she was fond of animals, and stroked the white doe tenderly, speaking gently to her all the while. Suddenly the beautiful creature lifted her head, and looked up into Eglantine's face, with tears streaming from her eyes. A thought flashed through her mind, and quick as lightning the girl flung herself on her knees, and lifting the animal's feet kissed them one by one. 'My princess! O my dear princess!' cried she; and again the white doe rubbed her head against her, for thought the spiteful fairy had taken away her power of speech, she had not deprived her of her reason!

All day long the two remained together, and when Eglantine grew hungry she was led by the white doe to a part of the forest where pears and peaches grew in abundance; but, as night came on, the maid of honour was filled with the terrors of wild beasts which had beset the princess during her first night in the forest.

'Is there no hut or cave we could go into?' asked she. But the doe only shook her head; and the two sat down and wept with fright.

The fairy Tulip, who, in spite of her anger, was very soft-hearted, was touched at their distress, and flew quickly to their help.

'I cannot take away the spell altogether,' she said, 'for the Fairy of the Fountain is stronger than I; but I can shorten the time of your punishment, and am able to make it less hard, for as soon as darkness fall you shall resume your own shape.'

To think that by-and-by she would cease to be a white doe--indeed, that she would at once cease to be one during the night--was for the present joy enough for Desiree, and she skipped about on the grass in the prettiest manner.

'Go straight down the path in front of you,' continued the fairy, smiling as she watched her; 'go straight down the path and you will soon reach a little hut where you will find shelter.' And with these words she vanished, leaving her hearers happier than they ever thought they could be again.

An old woman was standing at the door of the hut when Eglantine drew near, with the white doe trotting by her side.

'Good evening!' she said; 'could you give me a night's lodging for myself and my doe?'

'Certainly I can,' replied the old woman. And she led them into a room with two little white beds, so clean and comfortable that it made you sleepy even to look at them.

The door had hardly closed behind the old woman when the sun sank below the horizon, and Desiree became a girl again.

'Oh, Eglantine! what should I have done if you had not followed me,' she cried. And she flung herself into her friend's arms in a transport of delight.

Early in the morning Eglantine was awakened by the sound of someone scratching at the door, and on opening her eyes she saw the white doe struggling to get out. The little creature looked up and into her face, and nodded her head as the maid of honour unfastened the latch, but bounded away into the woods, and was lost to sight in a moment.

Meanwhile, the prince and Becasigue were wandering through the wood, till at last the prince grew so tired, that he lay down under a tree, and told Becasigue that he had better go in search of food, and of some place where they could sleep. Becasigue had not gone very far, when a turn of the path brought him face to face with the old woman who was feeding her doves before her cottage.

'Could you give me some milk and fruit?' asked he. 'I am very hungry myself, and, besides, I have left a friend behind me who is still weak from illness.'

'Certainly I can,' answered the old woman. 'But come and sit down in my kitchen while I catch the goat and milk it.'

Becasigue was glad enough to do as he was bid, and in a few minutes the old woman returned with a basket brimming over with oranges and grapes.

'If your friend has been ill he should not pass the night in the forest,' said she. 'I have room in my hut--tiny enough, it is true; but better than nothing, and to that you are both heartily welcome.'

Becasigue thanked her warmly, and as by this time it was almost sunset, he set out to fetch the prince. It was while he was absent that Eglantine and the white doe entered the hut, and having, of course, no idea that in the very next room was the man whose childish impatience had been the cause of all their troubles.

In spite of his fatigue, the prince slept badly, and directly it was light he rose, and bidding Becasigue remain where he was, as he wished to be alone, he strolled out into the forest. He walked on slowly, just as his fancy led him, till, suddenly, he came to a wide open space, and in the middle was the white doe quietly eating her breakfast. She bounded off at the sight of a man, but not before the prince, who had fastened on his bow without thinking, had let fly several arrows, which the fairy Tulip took care should do her no harm. But, quickly as she ran, she soon felt her strength failing her, for fifteen years of life in a tower had not taught her how to exercise her limbs.

Luckily, the prince was too weak to follow her far, and a turn of a path brought her close to the hut, where Eglantine was awaiting her. Panting for breath, she entered their room, and flung herself down on the floor.

When it was dark again, and she was once more the princess Desiree, she told Eglantine what had befallen her.

'I feared the Fairy of the Fountain, and the cruel beasts,' said she; 'but somehow I never thought of the dangers that I ran from men. I do not know now what saved me.'

'You must stay quietly here till the time of your punishment is over,' answered Eglantine. But when the morning dawned, and the girl turned into a doe, the longing for the forest came over her, and she sprang away as before.

As soon as the prince was awake he hastened to the place where, only the day before, he had found the white doe feeding; but of course she had taken care to go in the opposite direction. Much disappointed, he tried first one green path and then another, and at last, wearied with walking, he threw himself down and went fast asleep.

Just at this moment the white doe sprang out of a thicket near by, and started back trembling when she beheld her enemy lying there. Yet, instead of turning to fly, something bade her go and look at him unseen. As she gazed a thrill ran through her, for she felt that, worn and wasted though he was by illness, it was the face of her destined husband. Gently stooping over him she kissed his forehead, and at her touch he awoke.

For a minute they looked at each other, and to his amazement he recognized the white doe which had escaped him the previous day. But in an instant the animal was aroused to a sense of her danger, and she fled with all her strength into the thickest part of the forest. Quick as lightning the prince was on her track, but this time it was with no wish to kill or even wound the beautiful creature.

'Pretty doe! pretty doe! stop! I won't hurt you,' cried he, but his words were carried away by the wind.

At length the doe could run no more, and when the prince reached her, she was lying stretched out on the grass, waiting for her death blow. But instead the prince knelt at her side, and stroked her, and bade her fear nothing, as he would take care of her. So he fetched a little water from the stream in his horn hunting cup, then, cutting some branches from the trees, he twisted them into a litter which he covered with moss, and laid the white doe gently on it.

For a long time they remained thus, but when Desiree saw by the way that the light struck the trees, that he sun must be near its setting, she was filled with alarm lest the darkness should fall, and the prince should behold her in her human shape.

'No, he must not see me for the first time here,' she thought, and instantly began to plan how to get rid of him. Then she opened her mouth and let her tongue hang out, as if she were dying of thirst, and the prince, as she expected, hastened to the stream to get her some more water.

When he returned, the white doe was gone.

That night Desiree confessed to Eglantine that her pursuer was no other than the prince, and that far from flattering him, the portrait had never done him justice.

'Is it not hard to meet him in this shape,' wept she, 'when we both love each other so much?' But Eglantine comforted her, and reminded her that in a short time all would be well.

The prince was very angry at the flight of the white doe, for whom he had taken so much trouble, and returning to the cottage he poured out his adventures and his wrath to Becasigue, who could not help smiling.

'She shall not escape me again,' cried the prince. 'If I hunt her every day for a year, I will have her at last.' And in this frame of mind he went to bed.

When the white doe entered the forest next morning, she had not made up her mind whether she would go and meet the prince, or whether she would shun him, and hide in thickets of which he knew nothing. She decided that the last plan was the best; and so it would have been if the prince had not taken the very same direction in search of her.

Quite by accident he caught sight of her white skin shining through the bushes, and at the same instant she heard a twig snap under his feet. In a moment she was up and away, but the prince, not knowing how else to capture her, aimed an arrow at her leg, which brought her to the ground.

The young man felt like a murderer as he ran hastily up to where the white doe lay, and did his best to soothe the pain she felt, which, in reality, was the last part of the punishment sent by the Fairy of the Fountain. First he brought her some water, and then he fetched some healing herbs, and having crushed them in his hand, laid them on the wound.

'Ah! what a wretch I was to have hurt you,' cried he, resting her head upon his knees; 'and now you will hate me and fly from me for ever!'

For some time the doe lay quietly where she was, but, as before, she remembered that the hour of her transformation was near. She struggled to her feet, but the prince would not hear of her walking, and thinking the old woman might be able to dress her wound better than he could, he took her in his arms to carry her back to the hut. But, small as she was, she made herself so heavy that, after staggering a few steps under her weight, he laid her down, and tied her fast to a tree with some of the ribbons of his hat. This done he went away to get help.

Meanwhile Eglantine had grown very uneasy at the long absence of her mistress, and had come out to look for her. Just as the prince passed out of sight the fluttering ribbons dance before her eyes, and she descried her beautiful princess bound to a tree. With all her might she worked at the knots, but not a single one could she undo, though all appeared so easy. She was still busy with them when a voice behind her said:

'Pardon me, fair lady, but it is MY doe you are trying to steal!'

'Excuse me, good knight' answered Eglantine, hardly glancing at him, 'but it is MY doe that is tied up here! And if you wish for a proof of it, you can see if she knows me or not. Touch my heart, my little one,' she continued, dropping on her knees. And the doe lifted up its fore-foot and laid it on her side. 'Now put your arms round my neck, and sigh.' And again the doe did as she was bid.

'You are right,' said the prince; 'but it is with sorrow I give her up to you, for though I have wounded her yet I love her deeply.'

To this Eglantine answered nothing; but carefully raising up the doe, she led her slowly to the hut.

Now both the prince and Becasigue were quite unaware that the old woman had any guests besides themselves, and, following afar, were much surprised to behold Eglantine and her charge enter the cottage. They lost no time in questioning the old woman, who replied that she knew nothing about the lady and her white doe, who slept next the chamber occupied by the prince and his friend, but that they were very quiet, and paid her well. Then she went back to her kitchen.

'Do you know,' said Becasigue, when they were alone, 'I am certain that the lady we saw is the maid of honour to the Princess Desiree, whom I met at the palace. And, as her room is next to this, it will be easy to make a small hole through which I can satisfy myself whether I am right or not.'

So, taking a knife out of his pocket, he began to saw away the woodwork. The girls heard the grating noise, but fancying it was a mouse, paid no attention, and Becasigue was left in peace to pursue his work. At length the hole was large enough for him to peep through, and the sight was one to strike him dumb with amazement. He had guessed truly: the tall lady was Eglantine herself; but the other--where had he seen her? Ah! now he knew--it was the lady of the portrait!

Desiree, in a flowing dress of green silk, was lying stretched out upon cushions, and as Eglantine bent over her to bathe the wounded leg, she began to talk:

'Oh! let me die,' cried she, 'rather than go on leading this life. You cannot tell the misery of being a beast all the day, and unable to speak to the man I love, to whose impatience I owe my cruel fate. Yet, even so, I cannot bring myself to hate him.'

These words, low though they were spoken, reached Becasigue, who could hardly believe his ears. He stood silent for a moment; then, crossing to the window out of which the prince was gazing, he took his arm and led him across the room. A single glance was sufficient to show the prince that it was indeed Desiree; and how another had come to the palace bearing her name, at that instant he neither knew nor cared. Stealing on tip-toe from the room, he knocked at the next door, which was opened by Eglantine, who thought it was the old woman bearing their supper.

She started back at the sight of the prince, whom this time she also recognised. But he thrust her aside, and flung himself at the feet of Desiree, to whom he poured out all his heart!

Dawn found them still conversing; and the sun was high in the heavens before the princess perceived that she retained her human form. Ah! how happy she was when she knew that the days of her punishment were over; and with a glad voice she told the prince the tale of her enchantment.

So the story ended well after all; and the fairy Tulip, who turned out to be the old woman of the hut, made the young couple such a wedding feast as had never been seen since the world began. And everybody was delighted, except Cerisette and her mother, who were put in a boat and carried to a small island, where they had to work hard for their living.

[Contes des Fees, par Madame d'Aulnoy.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

The Girl-Fish

Once upon a time there lived, on the bank of a stream, a man and a woman who had a daughter. As she was an only child, and very pretty besides, they never could make up their minds to punish her for her faults or to teach her nice manners; and as for work-- she laughed in her mother's face if she asked her to help cook the dinner or to wash the plates. All the girl would do was to spend her days in dancing and playing with her friends; and for any use she was to her parents they might as well have no daughter at all.

However, one morning her mother looked so tired that even the selfish girl could not help seeing it, and asked if there was anything she was able to do, so that her mother might rest a little.

The good woman looked so surprised and grateful for this offer that the girl felt rather ashamed, and at that moment would have scrubbed down the house if she had been requested; but her mother only begged her to take the fishing-net out to the bank of the river and mend some holes in it, as her father intended to go fishing that night.

The girl took the net and worked so hard that soon there was not a hole to be found. She felt quite pleased with herself, though she had had plenty to amuse her, as everybody who passed by had stopped and had a chat with her. But by this time the sun was high overhead, and she was just folding her net to carry it home again, when she heard a splash behind her, and looking round she saw a big fish jump into the air. Seizing the net with both hands, she flung it into the water where the circles were spreading one behind the other, and, more by luck than skill, drew out the fish.

'Well, you are a beauty!' she cried to herself; but the fish looked up to her and said:

'You had better not kill me, for, if you do, I will turn you into a fish yourself!'

The girl laughed contemptuously, and ran straight in to her mother.

'Look what I have caught,' she said gaily; 'but it is almost a pity to eat it, for it can talk, and it declares that, if I kill it, it will turn me into a fish too.'

'Oh, put it back, put it back!' implored the mother. 'Perhaps it is skilled in magic. And I should die, and so would your father, if anything should happen to you.'

'Oh, nonsense, mother; what power could a creature like that have over me? Besides, I am hungry, and if I don't have my dinner soon, I shall be cross.' And off she went to gather some flowers to stick in her hair.

About an hour later the blowing of a horn told her that dinner was ready.

'Didn't I say that fish would be delicious?' she cried; and plunging her spoon into the dish the girl helped herself to a large piece. But the instant it touched her mouth a cold shiver ran through her. Her head seemed to flatten, and her eyes to look oddly round the corners; her legs and her arms were stuck to her sides, and she gasped wildly for breath. With a mighty bound she sprang through the window and fell into the river, where she soon felt better, and was able to swim to the sea, which was close by.

No sooner had she arrived there than the sight of her sad face attracted the notice of some of the other fishes, and they pressed round her, begging her to tell them her story.

'I am not a fish at all,' said the new-comer, swallowing a great deal of salt water as she spoke; for you cannot learn how to be a proper fish all in a moment. 'I am not a fish at all, but a girl; at least I was a girl a few minutes ago, only--' And she ducked her head under the waves so that they should not see her crying.

'Only you did not believe that the fish you caught had power to carry out its threat,' said an old tunny. 'Well, never mind, that has happened to all of us, and it really is not a bad life. Cheer up and come with us and see our queen, who lives in a palace that is much more beautiful than any your queens can boast of.'

The new fish felt a little afraid of taking such a journey; but as she was still more afraid of being left alone, she waved her tail in token of consent, and off they all set, hundreds of them together. The people on the rocks and in the ships that saw them pass said to each other:

'Look what a splendid shoal!' and had no idea that they were hastening to the queen's palace; but, then, dwellers on land have so little notion of what goes on in the bottom of the sea! Certainly the little new fish had none. She had watched jelly-fish and nautilus swimming a little way below the surface, and beautiful coloured sea-weeds floating about; but that was all. Now, when she plunged deeper her eyes fell upon strange things.

Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, inestimable stones, unvalued jewels-- all scattered in the bottom of the sea! Dead men's bones were there also, and long white creatures who had never seen the light, for they mostly dwelt in the clefts of rocks where the sun's rays could not come. At first our little fish felt as if she were blind also, but by-and-by she began to make out one object after another in the green dimness, and by the time she had swum for a few hours all became clear.

'Here we are at last,' cried a big fish, going down into a deep valley, for the sea has its mountains and valleys just as much as the land. 'That is the palace of the queen of the fishes, and I think you must confess that the emperor himself has nothing so fine.'

'It is beautiful indeed,' gasped the little fish, who was very tired with trying to swim as fast as the rest, and beautiful beyond words the palace was. The walls were made of pale pink coral, worn smooth by the waters, and round the windows were rows of pearls; the great doors were standing open, and the whole troop floated into the chamber of audience, where the queen, who was half a woman after all, was seated on a throne made of a green and blue shell.

'Who are you, and where do you come from?' said she to the little fish, whom the others had pushed in front. And in a low, trembling voice, the visitor told her story.

'I was once a girl too,' answered the queen, when the fish had ended; 'and my father was the king of a great country. A husband was found for me, and on my wedding-day my mother placed her crown on my head and told me that as long as I wore it I should likewise be queen. For many months I was as happy as a girl could be, especially when I had a little son to play with. But, one morning, when I was walking in my gardens, there came a giant and snatched the crown from my head. Holding me fast, he told me that he intended to give the crown to his daughter, and to enchant my husband the prince, so that he should not know the difference between us. Since then she has filled my place and been queen in my stead. As for me, I was so miserable that I threw myself into the sea, and my ladies, who loved me, declared that they would die too; but, instead of dying, some wizard, who pitied my fate, turned us all into fishes, though he allowed me to keep the face and body of a woman. And fished we must remain till someone brings me back my crown again!'

'I will bring it back if you tell me what to do!' cried the little fish, who would have promised anything that was likely to carry her up to earth again. And the queen answered:

'Yes, I will tell you what to do.'

She sat silent for a moment, and then went on:

'There is no danger if you will only follow my counsel; and first you must return to earth, and go up to the top of a high mountain, where the giant has built his castle. You will find him sitting on the steps weeping for his daughter, who has just died while the prince was away hunting. At the last she sent her father my crown by a faithful servant. But I warn you to be careful, for if he sees you he may kill you. Therefore I will give you the power to change yourself into any creature that may help you best. You have only to strike your forehead, and call out its name.'

This time the journey to land seemed much shorter than before, and when once the fish reached the shore she struck her forehead sharply with her tail, and cried:

'Deer, come to me!'

In a moment the small, slimy body disappeared, and in its place stood a beautiful beast with branching horns and slender legs, quivering with longing to be gone. Throwing back her head and snuffing the air, she broke into a run, leaping easily over the rivers and walls that stood in her way.

It happened that the king's son had been hunting since daybreak, but had killed nothing, and when the deer crossed his path as he was resting under a tree he determined to have her. He flung himself on his horse, which went like the wind, and as the prince had often hunted the forest before, and knew all the short cuts, he at last came up with the panting beast.

'By your favour let me go, and do not kill me,' said the deer, turning to the prince with tears in her eyes, 'for I have far to run and much to do.' And as the prince, struck dumb with surprise, only looked at her, the deer cleared the next wall and was soon out of sight.

'That can't really be a deer,' thought the prince to himself, reining in his horse and not attempting to follow her. 'No deer ever had eyes like that. It must be an enchanted maiden, and I will marry her and no other.' So, turning his horse's head, he rode slowly back to his palace.

The deer reached the giant's castle quite out of breath, and her heart sank as she gazed at the tall, smooth walls which surrounded it. Then she plucked up courage and cried:

'Ant, come to me!' And in a moment the branching horns and beautiful shape had vanished, and a tiny brown ant, invisible to all who did not look closely, was climbing up the walls.

It was wonderful how fast she went, that little creature! The wall must have appeared miles high in comparison with her own body; yet, in less time than would have seemed possible, she was over the top and down in the courtyard on the other side. Here she paused to consider what had best be done next, and looking about her she saw that one of the walls had a tall tree growing by it, and in the corner was a window very nearly on a level with the highest branches of the tree.

'Monkey, come to me!' cried the ant; and before you could turn round a monkey was swinging herself from the topmost branches into the room where the giant lay snoring.

'Perhaps he will be so frightened at the sight of me that he may die of fear, and I shall never get the crown,' thought the monkey. 'I had better become something else.' And she called softly: 'Parrot, come to me!'

Then a pink and grey parrot hopped up to the giant, who by this time was stretching himself and giving yawns which shook the castle. The parrot waited a little, until he was really awake, and then she said boldly that she had been sent to take away the crown, which was not his any longer, now his daughter the queen was dead.

On hearing these words the giant leapt out of bed with an angry roar, and sprang at the parrot in order to wring her neck with his great hands. But the bird was too quick for him, and, flying behind his back, begged the giant to have patience, as her death would be of no use to him.

'That is true,' answered the giant; 'but I am not so foolish as to give you that crown for nothing. Let me think what I will have in exchange!' And he scratched his huge head for several minutes, for giants' minds always move slowly.

'Ah, yes, that will do!' exclaimed the giant at last, his face brightening. 'You shall have the crown if you will bring me a collar of blue stones from the Arch of St. Martin, in the Great City.'

Now when the parrot had been a girl she had often heard of this wonderful arch and the precious stones and marbles that had been let into it. It sounded as if it would be a very hard thing to get them away from the building of which they formed a part, but all had gone well with her so far, and at any rate she could but try. So she bowed to the giant, and made her way back to the window where the giant could not see her. Then she called quickly:

'Eagle, come to me!'

Before she had even reached the tree she felt herself borne up on strong wings ready to carry her to the clouds if she wished to go there, and seeming a mere speck in the sky, she was swept along till she beheld the Arch of St. Martin far below, with the rays of the sun shining on it. Then she swooped down, and, hiding herself behind a buttress so that she could not be detected from below, she set herself to dig out the nearest blue stones with her beak. It was even harder work than she had expected; but at last it was done, and hope arose in her heart. She next drew out a piece of string that she had found hanging from a tree, and sitting down to rest strung the stones together. When the necklace was finished she hung it round her neck, and called: 'Parrot, come to me!' And a little later the pink and grey parrot stood before the giant.

'Here is the necklace you asked for,' said the parrot. And the eyes of the giant glistened as he took the heap of blue stones in his hand. But for all that he was not minded to give up the crown.

'They are hardly as blue as I expected,' he grumbled, though the parrot knew as well as he did that he was not speaking the truth; 'so you must bring me something else in exchange for the crown you covet so much. If you fail it will cost you not only the crown but you life also.'

'What is it you want now?' asked the parrot; and the giant answered:

'If I give you my crown I must have another still more beautiful; and this time you shall bring me a crown of stars.'

The parrot turned away, and as soon as she was outside she murmured:

'Toad, come to me!' And sure enough a toad she was, and off she set in search of the starry crown.

She had not gone far before she came to a clear pool, in which the stars were reflected so brightly that they looked quite real to touch and handle. Stooping down she filled a bag she was carrying with the shining water and, returning to the castle, wove a crown out of the reflected stars. Then she cried as before:

'Parrot, come to me!' And in the shape of a parrot she entered the presence of the giant.

'Here is the crown you asked for,' she said; and this time the giant could not help crying out with admiration. He knew he was beaten, and still holding the chaplet of stars, he turned to the girl.

'Your power is greater than mine: take the crown; you have won it fairly!'

The parrot did not need to be told twice. Seizing the crown, she sprang on to the window, crying: 'Monkey, come to me!' And to a monkey, the climb down the tree into the courtyard did not take half a minute. When she had reached the ground she said again: 'Ant, come to me!' And a little ant at once began to crawl over the high wall. How glad the ant was to be out of the giant's castle, holding fast the crown which had shrunk into almost nothing, as she herself had done, but grew quite big again when the ant exclaimed:

'Deer, come to me!'

Surely no deer ever ran so swiftly as that one! On and on she went, bounding over rivers and crashing through tangles till she reached the sea. Here she cried for the last time:

'Fish, come to me!' And, plunging in, she swam along the bottom as far as the palace, where the queen and all the fishes gathered together awaiting her.

The hours since she had left had gone very slowly--as they always do to people that are waiting--and many of them had quite given up hope.

'I am tired of staying here,' grumbled a beautiful little creature, whose colours changed with every movement of her body, 'I want to see what is going on in the upper world. It must be months since that fish went away.'

'It was a very difficult task, and the giant must certainly have killed her or she would have been back long ago,' remarked another.

'The young flies will be coming out now,' murmured a third, 'and they will all be eaten up by the river fish! It is really too bad!' When, suddenly, a voice was heard from behind: 'Look! look! what is that bright thing that is moving so swiftly towards us?' And the queen started up, and stood on her tail, so excited was she.

A silence fell on all the crowd, and even the grumblers held their peace and gazed like the rest. On and on came the fish, holding the crown tightly in her mouth, and the others moved back to let her pass. On she went right up to the queen, who bent and, taking the crown, placed it on her own head. Then a wonderful thing happened. Her tail dropped away or, rather, it divided and grew into two legs and a pair of the prettiest feet in the world, while her maidens, who were grouped around her, shed their scales and became girls again. They all turned and looked at each other first, and next at the little fish who had regained her own shape and was more beautiful than any of them.

'It is you who have given us back our life; you, you!' they cried; and fell to weeping from very joy.

So they all went back to earth and the queen's palace, and quite forgot the one that lay under the sea. But they had been so long away that they found many changes. The prince, the queen's husband, had died some years since, and in his place was her son, who had grown up and was king! Even in his joy at seeing his mother again an air of sadness clung to him, and at last the queen could bear it no longer, and begged him to walk with her in the garden. Seated together in a bower of jessamine--where she had passed long hours as a bride--she took her son's hand and entreated him to tell her the cause of his sorrow. 'For,' said she, 'if I can give you happiness you shall have it.'

'It is no use,' answered the prince; 'nobody can help me. I must bear it alone.'

'But at least let me share your grief,' urged the queen.

'No one can do that,' said he. 'I have fallen in love with what I can never marry, and I must get on as best I can.'

'It may not be as impossible as you think,' answered the queen. 'At any rate, tell me.'

There was silence between them for a moment, then, turning away his head, the prince answered gently:

'I have fallen in love with a beautiful deer!'

'Ah, if that is all,' exclaimed the queen joyfully. And she told him in broken words that, as he had guessed, it was no deer but an enchanted maiden who had won back the crown and brought her home to her own people.

'She is here, in my palace,' added the queen. 'I will take you to her.'

But when the prince stood before the girl, who was so much more beautiful than anything he had ever dreamed of, he lost all his courage, and stood with bent head before her.

Then the maiden drew near, and her eyes, as she looked at him, were the eyes of the deer that day in the forest. She whispered softly:

'By your favour let me go, and do not kill me.'

And the prince remembered her words, and his heart was filled with happiness. And the queen, his mother, watched them and smiled.

[From Cuentos Populars Catalans, por lo Dr. D. Francisco de S. Maspons y Labros.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

The Owl and the Eagle

Once upon a time, in a savage country where the snow lies deep for many months in the year, there lived an owl and an eagle. Though they were so different in many ways they became great friends, and at length set up house together, one passing the day in hunting and the other the night. In this manner they did not see very much of each other--and perhaps agreed all the better for that; but at any rate they were perfectly happy, and only wanted one thing, or, rather, two things, and that was a wife for each.

'I really am too tired when I come home in the evening to clean up the house,' said the eagle.

'And I am much too sleepy at dawn after a long night's hunting to begin to sweep and dust,' answered the owl. And they both made up their minds that wives they must have.

They flew about in their spare moments to the young ladies of their acquaintance, but the girls all declared they preferred one husband to two. The poor birds began to despair, when, one evening, after they had been for a wonder hunting together, they found two sisters fast asleep on their two beds. The eagle looked at the owl and the owl looked at the eagle.

'They will make capital wives if they will only stay with us,' said they. And they flew off to give themselves a wash, and to make themselves smart before the girls awoke.

For many hours the sisters slept on, for they had come a long way, from a town where there was scarcely anything to eat, and felt weak and tired. But by-and-by they opened their eyes and saw the two birds watching them.

'I hope you are rested?' asked the owl politely.

'Oh, yes, thank you,' answered the girls. 'Only we are so very hungry. Do you think we could have something to eat?'

'Certainly!' replied the eagle. And he flew away to a farmhouse a mile or two off, and brought back a nest of eggs in his strong beak; while the owl, catching up a tin pot, went to a cottage where lived an old woman and her cow, and entering the shed by the window dipped the pot into the pail of new milk that stood there.

The girls were so much delighted with the kindness and cleverness of their hosts that, when the birds inquired if they would marry them and stay there for ever, they accepted without so much as giving it a second thought. So the eagle took the younger sister to wife, and the owl the elder, and never was a home more peaceful than theirs!

All went well for several months, and then the eagle's wife had a son, while, on the same day, the owl's wife gave birth to a frog, which she placed directly on the banks of a stream near by, as he did not seem to like the house. The children both grew quickly, and were never tired of playing together, or wanted any other companions.

One night in the spring, when the ice had melted, and the snow was gone, the sisters sat spinning in the house, awaiting their husbands' return. But long though they watched, neither the owl nor the eagle ever came; neither that day nor the next, nor the next, nor the next. At last the wives gave up all hope of their return; but, being sensible women, they did not sit down and cry, but called their children, and set out, determined to seek the whole world over till the missing husbands were found.

Now the women had no idea in which direction the lost birds had gone, but they knew that some distance off was a thick forest, where good hunting was to be found. It seemed a likely place to find them, or, at any rate, they might hear something of them, and they walked quickly on, cheered by the thought that they were doing something. Suddenly the younger sister, who was a little in front, gave a cry of surprise.

'Oh! look at that lake!' she said, 'we shall never get across it.'

'Yes we shall,' answered the elder; 'I know what to do.' And taking a long piece of string from her pocket, fastened it into the frog's mouth, like a bit.

'You must swim across the lake,' she said, stooping to put him in, 'and we will walk across on the line behind you.' And so they did, till they got to about the middle of the lake, when the frog boy stopped.

'I don't like it, and I won't go any further,' cried he sulkily. And his mother had to promise him all sorts of nice things before he would go on again.

When at last they reached the other side, the owl's wife untied the line from the frog's mouth and told him he might rest and play by the lake till they got back from the forest. Then she and her sister and the boy walked on, with the great forest looming before them. But they had by this time come far and were very tired, and felt glad enough to see some smoke curling up from a little hut in front of them.

'Let us go in and ask for some water,' said the eagle's wife; and in they went.

The inside of the hut was so dark that at first they could see nothing at all; but presently they heard a feeble croak from one corner. But sisters turned to look, and there, tied by wings and feet, and their eyes sunken, were the husbands that they sought. Quick as lightning the wives cut the deer-thongs which bound them; but the poor birds were too weak from pain and starvation to do more than utter soft sounds of joy. Hardly, however, were they set free, than a voice of thunder made the two sisters jump, while the little boy clung tightly round his mother's neck.

'What are you doing in my house?' cried she. And the wives answered boldly that now they had found their husbands they meant to save them from such a wicked witch.

'Well, I will give you your chance,' answered the ogress, with a hideous grin; 'we will see if you can slide down this mountain. If you can reach the bottom of the cavern, you shall have your husbands back again.' And as she spoke she pushed them before her out of the door to the edge of a precipice, which went straight down several hundreds of feet. Unseen by the witch, the frog's mother fastened one end of the magic line about her, and whispered to the little boy to hold fast the other. She had scarcely done so when the witch turned round.

'You don't seem to like your bargain,' said she; but the girl answered:

'Oh, yes, I am quite ready. I was only waiting for you!' And sitting down she began her slide. On, on, she went, down to such a depth that even the witch's eyes could not follow her; but she took for granted that the woman was dead, and told the sister to take her place. At that instant, however, the head of the elder appeared above the rock, brought upwards by the magic line. The witch gave a howl of disgust, and hid her face in her hands; thus giving the younger sister time to fasten the cord to her waist before the ogress looked up.

'You can't expect such luck twice,' she said; and the girl sat down and slid over the edge. But in a few minutes she too was back again, and the witch saw that she had failed, and feared lest her power was going. Trembling with rage though she was, she dared not show it, and only laughed hideously.

'I sha'n't let my prisoners go as easily as all that!' she said. 'Make my hair grow as thick and as black as yours, or else your husbands shall never see daylight again.'

'That is quite simple,' replied the elder sister; 'only you must do as we did--and perhaps you won't like the treatment.'

'If you can bear it, of course I can,' answered the witch. And so the girls told her they had first smeared their heads with pitch and then laid hot stones upon them.

'It is very painful,' said they, 'but there is no other way that we know of. And in order to make sure that all will go right, one of us will hold you down while the other pours on the pitch.'

And so they did; and the elder sister let down her hair till it hung over the witch's eyes, so that she might believe it was her own hair growing. Then the other brought a huge stone, and, in short, there was an end of the witch. The sisters were savages who had never seen a missionary.

So when the sisters saw that she was dead they went to the hut, and nursed their husbands till they grew strong. Then they picked up the frog, and all went to make another home on the other side of the great lake.

[From the Journal of the Anthropological Institute.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

The Frog and the Lion Fairy

Once upon a time there lived a king who was always at war with his neighbours, which was very strange, as he was a good and kind man, quite content with his own country, and not wanting to seize land belonging to other people. Perhaps he may have tried too much to please everybody, and that often ends in pleasing nobody; but, at any rate, he found himself, at the end of a hard struggle, defeated in battle, and obliged to fall back behind the walls of his capital city. Once there, he began to make preparations for a long siege, and the first thing he did was to plan how best to send his wife to a place of security.

The queen, who loved her husband dearly, would gladly have remained with him to share his dangers, but he would not allow it. So they parted, with many tears, and the queen set out with a strong guard to a fortified castle on the outskirts of a great forest, some two hundred miles distant. She cried nearly all the way, and when she arrived she cried still more, for everything in the castle was dusty and old, and outside there was only a gravelled courtyard, and the king had forbidden her to go beyond the walls without at least two soldiers to take care of her.

Now the queen had only been married a few months, and in her own home she had been used to walk and ride all over the hills without any attendants at all; so she felt very dull at her being shut up in this way. However, she bore it for a long while because it was the king's wish, but when time passed and there were no signs of the war drifting in the direction of the castle, she grew bolder, and sometimes strayed outside the walls, in the direction of the forest.

Then came a dreadful period, when news from the king ceased entirely.

'He must surely be ill or dead,' thought the poor girl, who even now was only sixteen. 'I can bear it no longer, and if I do not get a letter from him soon I shall leave this horrible place and go back to see what is the matter. Oh! I do wish I had never come away!'

So, without telling anyone what she intended to do, she ordered a little low carriage to be built, something like a sledge, only it was on two wheels--just big enough to hold one person.

'I am tired of being always in the castle,' she said to her attendants; 'and I mean to hunt a little. Quite close by, of course,' she added, seeing the anxious look on their faces. 'And there is no reason that you should not hunt too.'

All the faces brightened at that, for, to tell the truth, they were nearly as dull as their mistress; so the queen had her way, and two beautiful horses were brought from the stable to draw the little chariot. At first the queen took care to keep near the rest of the hunt, but gradually she stayed away longer and longer, and at last, one morning, she took advantage of the appearance of a wild boar, after which her whole court instantly galloped, to turn into a path in the opposite direction.

Unluckily, it did not happen to lead towards the king's palace, where she intended to go, but she was so afraid her flight would be noticed that she whipped up her horses till they ran away.

When she understood what was happening the poor young queen was terribly frightened, and, dropping the reins, clung to the side of the chariot. The horses, thus left without any control, dashed blindly against a tree, and the queen was flung out on the ground, where she lay for some minutes unconscious.

A rustling sound near her at length caused her to open her eyes; before her stood a huge woman, almost a giantess, without any clothes save a lion's skin, which was thrown over her shoulders, while a dried snake's skin was plaited into her hair. In one hand she held a club on which she leaned, and in the other a quiver full of arrows.

At the sight of this strange figure the queen thought she must be dead, and gazing on an inhabitant of another world. So she murmured softly to herself:

'I am not surprised that people are so loth to die when they know that they will see such horrible creatures.' But, low as she spoke, the giantess caught the words, and began to laugh.

'Oh, don't be afraid; you are still alive, and perhaps, after all, you may be sorry for it. I am the Lion Fairy, and you are going to spend the rest of your days with me in my palace, which is quite near this. So come along.' But the queen shrank back in horror.

'Oh, Madam Lion, take me back, I pray you, to my castle; and fix what ransom you like, for my husband will pay it, whatever it is. But the giantess shook her head.

'I am rich enough already,' she answered, 'but I am often dull, and I think you may amuse me a little.' And, so saying, she changed her shape into that of a lion, and throwing the queen across her back, she went down the ten thousand steps that led to her palace. The lion had reached the centre of the earth before she stopped in front of a house, lighted with lamps, and built on the edge of a lake of quicksilver. In this lake various huge monsters might be seen playing or fighting--the queen did not know which-- and around flew rooks and ravens, uttering dismal croaks. In the distance was a mountain down whose sides waters slowly coursed--these were the tears of unhappy lovers--and nearer the gate were trees without either fruit of flowers, while nettles and brambles covered the ground. If the castle had been gloomy, what did the queen feel about this?

For some days the queen was so much shaken by all she had gone through that she lay with her eyes closed, unable either to move or speak. When she got better, the Lion Fairy told her that if she liked she could build herself a cabin, as she would have to spend her life in that place. At these words the queen burst into tears, and implored her gaoler to put her to death rather than condemn her to such a life; but the Lion Fairy only laughed, and counselled her to try to make herself pleasant, as many worse things might befall her.

'Is there no way in which I can touch your heart?' asked the poor girl in despair.

'Well, if you really wish to please me you will make me a pasty out of the stings of bees, and be sure it is good.'

'But I don't see any bees,' answered the queen, looking round.

'Oh, no, there aren't any,' replied her tormentor; 'but you will have to find them all the same.' And, so saying, she went away.

'After all, what does it matter?' thought the queen to herself, 'I have only one life, and I can but lose it.' And not caring what she did, she left the palace and seating herself under a yew tree, poured out all her grief.

'Oh, my dear husband,' wept she, 'what will you think when you come to the castle to fetch me and find me gone? Rather a thousand times that you should fancy me dead than imagine that I had forgotten you! Ah, how fortunate that the broken chariot should be lying in the wood, for then you may grieve for me as one devoured by wild beasts. And if another should take my place in your heart--Well, at least I shall never know it.'

She might have continued for long in this fashion had not the voice of a crow directly overhead attracted her attention. Looking up to see what was the matter she beheld, in the dim light, a crow holding a fat frog in his claws, which he evidently intended for his supper. The queen rose hastily from the seat, and striking the bird sharply on the claws with the fan which hung from her side, she forced him to drop the frog, which fell to the round more dead than alive. The crow, furious at his disappointment, flew angrily away.

As soon as the frog had recovered her senses she hopped up to the queen, who was still sitting under the yew. Standing on her hind legs, and bowing low before her, she said gently:

'Beautiful lady, by what mischance do you come here? You are the only creature that I have seen do a kind deed since a fatal curiosity lured me to this place.'

'What sort of a frog can you be that knows the language of mortals?' asked the queen in her turn. 'But if you do, tell me, I pray, if I alone am a captive, for hitherto I have beheld no one but the monsters of the lake.'

'Once upon a time they were men and women like yourself,' answered the frog, 'but having power in their hands, they used it for their own pleasure. Therefore fate has sent them here for a while to bear the punishment of their misdoings.'

'But you, friend frog, you are not one of these wicked people, I am sure?' asked the queen.

'I am half a fairy,' replied the frog; 'but, although I have certain magic gifts, I am not able to do all I wish. And if the Lion Fairy were to know of my presence in her kingdom she would hasten to kill me.'

'But if you are a fairy, how was it that you were so nearly slain by the crow?' said the queen, wrinkling her forehead.

'Because the secret of my power lies in my little cap that is made of rose leaves; but I had laid it aside for the moment, when that horrible crow pounced upon me. Once it is on my head I fear nothing. But let me repeat; had it not been for you I could not have escaped death, and if I can do anything to help you, or soften your hard fate, you have only to tell me.'

'Alas,' sighed the queen, 'I have been commanded by the Lion Fairy to make her a pasty out of the stings of bees, and, as far as I can discover, there are none here; as how should there be, seeing there are no flowers for them to feed on? And, even if there were, how could I catch them?'

'Leave it to me,' said the frog, 'I will manage it for you.' And, uttering a strange noise, she struck the ground thrice with her foot. In an instant six thousand frogs appeared before her, one of them bearing a little cap.

'Cover yourselves with honey, and hop round by the beehives,' commanded the frog, putting on the cap which her friend was holding in her mouth. And turning to the queen, he added:

'The Lion Fairy keeps a store of bees in a secret place near to the bottom of the ten thousand steps leading into the upper world. Not that she wants them for herself, but they are sometimes useful to her in punishing her victims. However, this time we will get the better of her.'

Just as she had finished speaking the six thousand frogs returned, looking so strange with bees sticking to every part of them that, sad as she felt, the poor queen could not help laughing. The bees were all so stupefied with what they had eaten that it was possible to draw their stings without hunting them. So, with the help of her friend, the queen soon made ready her pasty and carried it to the Lion Fairy.

'Not enough pepper,' said the giantess, gulping down large morsels, in order the hide the surprise she felt. 'Well, you have escaped this time, and I am glad to find I have got a companion a little more intelligent than the others I have tried. Now, you had better go and build yourself a house.'

So the queen wandered away, and picking up a small axe which lay near the door she began with the help of her friend the frog to cut down some cypress trees for the purpose. And not content with that the six thousand froggy servants were told to help also, and it was not long before they had built the prettiest little cabin in the world, and made a bed in one corner of dried ferns which they fetched from the top of the ten thousand steps. It looked soft and comfortable, and the queen was very glad to lie down upon it, so tired was she with all that had happened since the morning. Scarcely, however, had she fallen asleep when the lake monsters began to make the most horrible noises just outside, while a small dragon crept in and terrified her so that she ran away, which was just what the dragon wanted!

The poor queen crouched under a rock for the rest of the night, and the next morning, when she woke from her troubled dreams, she was cheered at seeing the frog watching by her.

'I hear we shall have to build you another palace,' said she. 'Well, this time we won't go so near the lake.' And she smiled with her funny wide mouth, till the queen took heart, and they went together to find wood for the new cabin.

The tiny palace was soon ready, and a fresh bed made of wild thyme, which smelt delicious. Neither the queen nor the frog said anything about it, but somehow, as always happens, the story came to the ears of the Lion Fairy, and she sent a raven to fetch the culprit.

'What gods or men are protecting you?' she asked, with a frown. 'This earth, dried up by a constant rain of sulphur and fire, produces nothing, yet I hear that YOUR bed is made of sweet smelling herbs. However, as you can get flowers for yourself, of course you can get them for me, and in an hour's time I must have in my room a nosegay of the rarest flowers. If not--! Now you can go.'

The poor queen returned to her house looking so sad that the frog, who was waiting for her, noticed it directly.

'What is the matter?' said she, smiling.

'Oh, how can you laugh!' replied the queen. 'This time I have to bring her in an hour a posy of the rarest flowers, and where am I to find them? If I fail I know she will kill me.'

'Well, I must see if I can't help you,' answered the frog. 'The only person I have made friends with here is a bat. She is a good creature, and always does what I tell her, so I will just lend her my cap, and if she puts it on, and flies into the world, she will bring back all we want. I would go myself, only she will be quicker.'

Then the queen dried her eyes, and waited patiently, and long before the hour had gone by the bat flew in with all the most beautiful and sweetest flowers that grew on the earth. The girl sprang up overjoyed at the sight, and hurried with them to the Lion Fairy, who was so astonished that for once she had nothing to say.

Now the smell and touch of the flowers had made the queen sick with longing for her home, and she told the frog that she would certainly die if she did not manage to escape somehow.

'Let me consult my cap,' said the frog; and taking it off she laid it in a box, and threw in after it a few sprigs of juniper, some capers, and two peas, which she carried under her right leg; she then shut down the lid of the box, and murmured some words which the queen did not catch.

In a few moments a voice was heard speaking from the box.

'Fate, who rules us all,' said the voice, 'forbids your leaving this place till the time shall come when certain things are fulfilled. But, instead, a gift shall be given you, which will comfort you in all your troubles.'

And the voice spoke truly, for, a few days after, when the frog peeped in at the door she found the most beautiful baby in the world lying by the side of the queen.

'So the cap has kept its word,' cried the frog with delight. 'How soft its cheeks are, and what tiny feet it has got! What shall we call it?'

This was a very important point, and needed much discussion. A thousand names were proposed and rejected for a thousand silly reasons. One was too long, and one was too short. One was too harsh, and another reminded the queen of somebody she did not like; but at length an idea flashed into the queen's head, and she called out:

'I know! We will call her Muffette.'

'That is the very thing,' shouted the frog, jumping high into the air; and so it was settled.

The princess Muffette was about six months old when the frog noticed that the queen had begun to grow sad again.

'Why do you have that look in your eyes?' she asked one day, when she had come in to play with the baby, who could now crawl.

The way they played their game was to let Muffette creep close to the frog, and then for the frog to bound high into the air and alight on the child's head, or back, or legs, when she always sent up a shout of pleasure. There is no play fellow like a frog; but then it must be a fairy frog, or else you might hurt it, and if you did something dreadful might happen to you. Well, as I have said, our frog was struck with the queen's sad face, and lost no time in asking her what was the reason.

'I don't see what you have to complain of now; Muffette is quite well and quite happy, and even the Lion Fairy is kind to her when she sees her. What is it?'

'Oh! if her father could only see her!' broke forth the queen, clasping her hands. 'Or if I could only tell him all that has happened since we parted. But they will have brought him tidings of the broken carriage, and he will have thought me dead, or devoured by wild beasts. And though he will mourn for me long--I know that well--yet in time they will persuade him to take a wife, and she will be young and fair, and he will forget me.'

And in all this the queen guessed truly, save that nine long years were to pass before he would consent to put another in her place.

The frog answered nothing at the time, but stopped her game and hopped away among the cypress trees. Here she sat and thought and thought, and the next morning she went back to the queen and said:

'I have come, madam, to make you an offer. Shall I go to the king instead of you, and tell him of your sufferings, and that he has the most charming baby in the world for his daughter? The way is long, and I travel slowly; but, sooner or later, I shall be sure to arrive. Only, are you not afraid to be left without my protection? Ponder the matter carefully; it is for you to decide.'

'Oh, it needs no pondering,' cried the queen joyfully, holding up her clasped hands, and making Muffette do likewise, in token of gratitude. But in order that he may know that you have come from me I will send him a letter.' And pricking her arm, she wrote a few words with her blood on the corner of her handkerchief. Then tearing it off, she gave it to the frog, and they bade each other farewell.

It took the frog a year and four days to mount the ten thousand steps that led to the upper world, but that was because she was still under the spell of a wicked fairy. By the time she reached the top, she was so tired that she had to remain for another year on the banks of a stream to rest, and also to arrange the procession with which she was to present herself before the king. For she knew far too well what was due to herself and her relations, to appear at Court as if she was a mere nobody. At length, after many consultations with her cap, the affair was settled, and at the end of the second year after her parting with the queen they all set out.

First walked her bodyguard of grasshoppers, followed by her maids of honour, who were those tiny green frogs you see in the fields, each one mounted on a snail, and seated on a velvet saddle. Next came the water-rats, dressed as pages, and lastly the frog herself, in a litter borne by eight toads, and made of tortoiseshell. Here she could lie at her ease, with her cap on her head, for it was quite large and roomy, and could easily have held two eggs when the frog was not in it.

The journey lasted seven years, and all this time the queen suffered tortures of hope, though Muffette did her best to comfort her. Indeed, she would most likely have died had not the Lion Fairy taken a fancy that the child and her mother should go hunting with her in the upper world, and, in spite of her sorrows, it was always a joy to the queen to see the sun again. As for little Muffette, by the time she was seven her arrows seldom missed their mark. So, after all, the years of waiting passed more quickly than the queen had dared to hope.

The frog was always careful to maintain her dignity, and nothing would have persuaded her to show her face in public places, or even along the high road, where there was a chance of meeting anyone. But sometimes, when the procession had to cross a little stream, or go over a piece of marshy ground, orders would be given for a halt; fine clothes were thrown off, bridles were flung aside, and grasshoppers, water-rats, even the frog herself, spent a delightful hour or two playing in the mud.

But at length the end was in sight, and the hardships were forgotten in the vision of the towers of the king's palace; and, one bright morning, the cavalcade entered the gates with all the pomp and circumstance of a royal embassy. And surely no ambassador had ever created such a sensation! Door and windows, even the roofs of houses, were filled with people, whose cheers reached the ears of the king. However, he had no time to attend to such matters just then, as, after nine years, he had at last consented to the entreaties of his courtiers, and was on the eve of celebrating his second marriage.

The frog's heart beat high when her litter drew up before the steps of the palace, and leaning forward she beckoned to her side one of the guards who were standing in his doorway.

'I wish to see his Majesty,' said he.

'His Majesty is engaged, and can see no one,' answered the soldier.

'His Majesty will see ME,' returned the frog, fixing her eye upon him; and somehow the man found himself leading the procession along the gallery into the Hall of Audience, where the king sat surrounded by his nobles arranging the dresses which everyone was to wear at his marriage ceremony.

All stared in surprise as the procession advanced, and still more when the frog gave one bound from the litter on to the floor, and with another landed on the arm of the chair of state.

'I am only just in time, sire,' began the frog; 'had I been a day later you would have broken your faith which you swore to the queen nine years ago.'

'Her remembrance will always be dear to me,' answered the king gently, though all present expected him to rebuke the frog severely for her impertinence. But know, Lady Frog, that a king can seldom do as he wishes, but must be bound by the desires of his subjects. For nine years I have resisted them; now I can do so no longer, and have made choice of the fair young maiden playing at ball yonder.'

'You cannot wed her, however fair she may be, for the queen your wife is still alive, and sends you this letter written in her own blood,' said the frog, holding out the square of handkerchief as she spoke. 'And, what is more, you have a daughter who is nearly nine years old, and more beautiful than all the other children in the world put together.'

The king turned pale when he heard these words, and his hand trembled so that he could hardly read what the queen had written. Then he kissed the handkerchief twice or thrice, and burst into tears, and it was some minutes before he could speak. When at length he found his voice he told his councillors that the writing was indeed that of the queen, and now that he had the joy of knowing she was alive he could, of course, proceed no further with his second marriage. This naturally displeased the ambassadors who had conducted the bride to court, and one of them inquired indignantly if he meant to put such an insult on the princess on the word of a mere frog.

'I am not a "mere frog," and I will give you proof of it,' retorted the angry little creature. And putting on her cap, she cried: Fairies that are my friends, come hither!' And in a moment a crowd of beautiful creatures, each one with a crown on her head, stood before her. Certainly none could have guessed that they were the snails, water-rats, and grasshoppers from which she had chosen her retinue.

At a sign from the frog the fairies danced a ballet, with which everyone was so delighted that they begged to have to repeated; but now it was not youths and maidens who were dancing, but flowers. Then these again melted into fountains, whose waters interlaced and, rushing down the sides of the hall, poured out in a cascade down the steps, and formed a river found the castle, with the most beautiful little boats upon it, all painted and gilded.

'Oh, let us go in them for a sail!' cried the princess, who had long ago left her game of ball for a sight of these marvels, and, as she was bent upon it, the ambassadors, who had been charged never to lose sight of her, were obliged to go also, though they never entered a boat if they could help it.

But the moment they and the princess had seated themselves on the soft cushions, river and boats vanished, and the princess and the ambassadors vanished too. Instead the snails and grasshoppers and water-rats stood round the frog in their natural shapes.

'Perhaps,' said she, 'your Majesty may now be convinced that I am a fairy and speak the truth. Therefore lose no time in setting in order the affairs of your kingdom and go in search of your wife. Here is a ring that will admit you into the presence of the queen, and will likewise allow you to address unharmed the Lion Fairy, though she is the most terrible creature that ever existed.'

By this time the king had forgotten all about the princess, whom he had only chosen to please his people, and was as eager to depart on his journey as the frog was for him to go. He made one of his ministers regent of the kingdom, and gave the frog everything her heart could desire; and with her ring on his finger he rode away to the outskirts of the forest. Here he dismounted, and bidding his horse go home, he pushed forward on foot.

Having nothing to guide him as to where he was likely to find the entrance of the under-world, the king wandered hither and thither for a long while, till, one day, while he was resting under a tree, a voice spoke to him.

'Why do you give yourself so much trouble for nought, when you might know what you want to know for the asking? Alone you will never discover the path that leads to your wife.'

Much startled, the king looked about him. He could see nothing, and somehow, when he thought about it, the voice seemed as if it were part of himself. Suddenly his eyes fell on the ring, and he understood.

'Fool that I was!' cried he; 'and how much precious time have I wasted? Dear ring, I beseech you, grant me a vision of my wife and my daughter!' And even as he spoke there flashed past him a huge lioness, followed by a lady and a beautiful young maid mounted on fairy horses.

Almost fainting with joy he gazed after them, and then sank back trembling on the ground.

'Oh, lead me to them, lead me to them!' he exclaimed. And the ring, bidding him take courage, conducted him safely to the dismal place where his wife had lived for ten years.

Now the Lion Fairy knew beforehand of his expected presence in her dominions, and she ordered a palace of crystal to be built in the middle of the lake of quicksilver; and in order to make it more difficult of approach she let it float whither it would. Immediately after their return from the chase, where the king had seen them, she conveyed the queen and Muffette into the palace, and put them under the guard of the monsters of the lake, who one and all had fallen in love with the princess. They were horribly jealous, and ready to eat each other up for her sake, so they readily accepted the charge. Some stationed themselves round the floating palace, some sat by the door, while the smallest and lightest perched themselves on the roof.

Of course the king was quite ignorant of these arrangements, and boldly entered the palace of the Lion Fairy, who was waiting for him, with her tail lashing furiously, for she still kept her lion's shape. With a roar that shook the walls she flung herself upon him; but he was on the watch, and a blow from his sword cut off the paw she had put forth to strike him dead. She fell back, and with his helmet still on and his shield up, he set his foot on her throat.

'Give me back the wife and the child you have stolen from me,' he said, 'or you shall not live another second!'

But the fairy answered:

'Look through the window at that lake and see if it is in my power to give them to you.' And the king looked, and through the crystal walls he beheld his wife and daughter floating on the quicksilver. At that sight the Lion Fairy and all her wickedness was forgotten. Flinging off his helmet, he shouted to them with all his might. The queen knew his voice, and she and Muffette ran to the window and held out their hands. Then the king swore a solemn oath that he would never leave the spot without taking them if it should cost him his life; and he meant it, though at the moment he did not know what he was undertaking.

Three years passed by, and the king was no nearer to obtaining his heart's desire. He had suffered every hardship that could be imagined--nettles had been his bed, wild fruits more bitter than gall his food, while his days had been spent in fighting the hideous monsters which kept him from the palace. He had not advanced one single step, nor gained one solitary advantage. Now he was almost in despair, and ready to defy everything and throw himself into the lake.

It was at this moment of his blackest misery that, one night, a dragon who had long watched him from the roof crept to his side.

'You thought that love would conquer all obstacles,' said he; 'well, you have found it hasn't! But if you will swear to me by your crown and sceptre that you will give me a dinner of the food that I never grow tired of, whenever I choose to ask for it, I will enable you to reach your wife and daughter.'

Ah, how glad the king was to hear that! What oath would he not have taken so as to clasp his wife and child in is arms? Joyfully he swore whatever the dragon asked of him; then he jumped on his back, and in another instant would have been carried by the strong wings into the castle if the nearest monsters had not happened to awake and hear the noise of talking and swum to the shore to give battle. The fight was long and hard, and when the king at last beat back his foes another struggle awaited him. At the entrance gigantic bats, owls, and crows set upon him from all sides; but the dragon had teeth and claws, while the queen broke off sharp bits of glass and stabbed and cut in her anxiety to help her husband. At length the horrible creatures flew away; a sound like thunder was heard, the palace and the monsters vanished, while, at the same moment--no one knew how-- the king found himself standing with his wife and daughter in the hall of his own home.

The dragon had disappeared with all the rest, and for some years no more was heard or thought of him. Muffette grew every day more beautiful, and when she was fourteen the kings and emperors of the neighbouring countries sent to ask her in marriage for themselves or their sons. For a long time the girl turned a deaf ear to all their prayers; but at length a young prince of rare gifts touched her heart, and though the king had left her free to choose what husband she would, he had secretly hoped that out of all the wooers this one might be his son-in-law. So they were betrothed that some day with great pomp, and then with many tears, the prince set out for his father's court, bearing with him a portrait of Muffette.

The days passed slowly to Muffette, in spite of her brave efforts to occupy herself and not to sadden other people by her complaints. One morning she was playing on her harp in the queen's chamber when the king burst into the room and clasped his daughter in his arms with an energy that almost frightened her.

'Oh, my child! my dear child! why were you ever born?' cried he, as soon as he could speak.

'Is the prince dead?' faltered Muffette, growing white and cold.

'No, no; but--oh, how can I tell you!' And he sank down on a pile of cushions while his wife and daughter knelt beside him.

At length he was able to tell his tale, and a terrible one it was! There had just arrived at court a huge giant, as ambassador from the dragon by whose help the king had rescued the queen and Muffette from the crystal palace. The dragon had been very busy for many years past, and had quite forgotten the princess till the news of her betrothal reached his ears. Then he remembered the bargain he had made with her father; and the more he heard of Muffette the more he felt sure she would make a delicious dish. So he had ordered the giant who was his servant to fetch her at once.

No words would paint the horror of both the queen and the princess as they listened to this dreadful doom. They rushed instantly to the hall, where the giant was awaiting them, and flinging themselves at his feet implored him to take the kingdom if he would, but to have pity on the princess. The giant looked at them kindly, for he was not at all hard-hearted, but said that he had no power to do anything, and that if the princess did not go with him quietly the dragon would come himself.

Several days went by, and the king and queen hardly ceased from entreating the aid of the giant, who by this time was getting weary of waiting.

'There is only one way of helping you,' he said at last, 'and that is to marry the princess to my nephew, who, besides being young and handsome, has been trained in magic, and will know how to keep her safe from the dragon.'

'Oh, thank you, thank you!' cried the parents, clasping his great hands to their breasts. 'You have indeed lifted a load from us. She shall have half the kingdom for her dowry.' But Muffette stood up and thrust them aside.

'I will not buy my life with faithlessness,' she said proudly; 'and I will go with you this moment to the dragon's abode.' And all her father's and mother's tears and prayers availed nothing to move her.

The next morning Muffette was put into a litter, and, guarded by the giant and followed by the king and queen and the weeping maids of honour, they started for the foot of the mountain where the dragon had his castle. The way, though rough and stony, seemed all too short, and when they reached the spot appointed by the dragon the giant ordered the men who bore the litter to stand still.

'It is time for you to bid farewell to your daughter,' said he; 'for I see the dragon coming to us.'

It was true; a cloud appeared to pass over the sun, for between them and it they could all discern dimly a huge body half a mile long approaching nearer and nearer. At first the king could not believe that this was the small beast who had seemed so friendly on the shore of the lake of quicksilver but then he knew very little of necromancy, and had never studied the art of expanding and contracting his body. But it was the dragon and nothing else, whose six wings were carrying him forward as fast as might be, considering his great weight and the length of his tail, which had fifty twists and a half.

He came quickly, yes; but the frog, mounted on a greyhound, and wearing her cap on her head, went quicker still. Entering a room where the prince was sitting gazing at the portrait of his betrothed, she cried to him:

'What are you doing lingering here, when the life of the princess is nearing its last moment? In the courtyard you will find a green horse with three heads and twelve feet, and by its side a sword eighteen yards long. Hasten, lest you should be too late!'

The fight lasted all day, and the prince's strength was well-nigh spent, when the dragon, thinking that the victory was won, opened his jaws to give a roar of triumph. The prince saw his chance, and before his foe could shut his mouth again had plunged his sword far down his adversary's throat. There was a desperate clutching of the claws to the earth, a slow flagging of the great wings, then the monster rolled over on his side and moved no more. Muffette was delivered.

After this they all went back to the palace. The marriage took place the following day, and Muffette and her husband lived happy for ever after.

[From Les Contes des Fees, par Madame d'Aulnoy.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

The Adventures of Covan the Brown-Haired

On the shores of the west, where the great hills stand with their feet in the sea, dwelt a goatherd and his wife, together with their three sons and one daughter. All day long the young men fished and hunted, while their sister took out the kids to pasture on the mountain, or stayed at home helping her mother and mending the nets.

For several years they all lived happily together, when one day, as the girl was out on the hill with the kids, the sun grew dark and an air cold as a thick white mist came creeping, creeping up from the sea. She rose with a shiver, and tried to call to her kids, but the voice died away in her throat, and strong arms seemed to hold her.

Loud were the wails in the hut by the sea when the hours passed on and the maiden came not. Many times the father and brothers jumped up, thinking they heard her steps, but in the thick darkness they could scarcely see their own hands, nor could they tell where the river lay, nor where the mountain. One by one the kids came home, and at every bleat someone hurried to open the door, but no sound broke the stillness. Through the night no one slept, and when morning broke and the mist rolled back, they sought the maiden by sea and by land, but never a trace of her could be found anywhere.

Thus a year and a day slipped by, and at the end of it Gorla of the Flocks and his wife seemed suddenly to have grown old. Their sons too were sadder than before, for they loved their sister well, and had never ceased to mourn for her. At length Ardan the eldest spoke and said:

'It is now a year and a day since our sister was taken from us, and we have waited in grief and patience for her to return. Surely some evil has befallen her, or she would have sent us a token to put our hearts at rest; and I have vowed to myself that my eyes shall not know sleep till, living or dead, I have found her.'

'If you have vowed, then must you keep your vow,' answered Gorla. 'But better had it been if you had first asked your father's leave before you made it. Yet, since it is so, your mother will bake you a cake for you to carry with you on your journey. Who can tell how long it may be?'

So the mother arose and baked not one cake but two, a big one and a little one.

'Choose, my son,' said she. 'Will you have the little cake with your mother's blessing, or the big one without it, in that you have set aside your father and taken on yourself to make a vow?'

'I will have the large cake,' answered the youth; 'for what good would my mother's blessing do for me if I was dying of hunger?' And taking the big cake he went his way.

Straight on he strode, letting neither hill nor river hinder him. Swiftly he walked-- swiftly as the wind that blew down the mountain. The eagles and the gulls looked on from their nests as he passed, leaving the deer behind him; but at length he stopped, for hunger had seized on him, and he could walk no more. Trembling with fatigue he sat himself on a rock and broke a piece off his cake.

'Spare me a morsel, Ardan son of Gorla,' asked a raven, fluttering down towards him.

'Seek food elsewhere, O bearer of ill-news,' answered Ardan son of Gorla; 'it is but little I have for myself.' And he stretched himself out for a few moments, then rose to his feet again. On and on went he till the little birds flew to their nests, and the brightness died out of the sky, and a darkness fell over the earth. On and on, and on, till at last he saw a beam of light streaming from a house and hastened towards it.

The door was opened and he entered, but paused when he beheld an old man lying on a bench by the fire, while seated opposite him was a maiden combing out the locks of her golden hair with a comb of silver.

'Welcome, fair youth,' said the old man, turning his head. 'Sit down and warm yourself, and tell me how fares the outer world. It is long since I have seen it.'

'All my news is that I am seeking service,' answered Ardan son of Gorla; 'I have come from far since sunrise, and glad was I to see the rays of your lamp stream into the darkness.'

'I need someone to herd my three dun cows, which are hornless,' said the old man. 'If, for the space of a year, you can bring them back to me each evening before the sun sets, I will make you payment that will satisfy your soul.'

But here the girl looked up and answered quickly:

'Ill will come of it if he listens to your offer.'

'Counsel unsought is worth nothing,' replied, rudely, Ardan son of Gorla. 'It would be little indeed that I am fit for if I cannot drive three cows out to pasture and keep them safe from the wolves that may come down from the mountains. Therefore, good father, I will take service with you at daybreak, and ask no payment till the new year dawns.'

Next morning the bell of the deer was not heard amongst the fern before the maiden with the hair of gold had milked the cows, and led them in front of the cottage where the old man and Ardan son of Gorla awaited them.

'Let them wander where they will,' he said to his servant, 'and never seek to turn them from their way, for well they know the fields of good pasture. But take heed to follow always behind them, and suffer nothing that you see, and nought that you hear, to draw you into leaving them. Now go, and may wisdom go with you.'

As he ceased speaking he touched one of the cows on her forehead, and she stepped along the path, with the two others one on each side. As he had been bidden, behind them came Ardan son of Gorla, rejoicing in his heart that work so easy had fallen to his lot. At the year's end, thought he, enough money would lie in his pocket to carry him into far countries where his sister might be, and, in the meanwhile, someone might come past who could give him tidings of her.

Thus he spoke to himself, when his eyes fell on a golden cock and a silver hen running swiftly along the grass in front of him. In a moment the words that the old man had uttered vanished from his mind and he gave chase. They were so near that he could almost seize their tails, yet each time he felt sure he could catch them his fingers closed on the empty air. At length he could run no more, and stopped to breathe, while the cock and hen went on as before. Then he remembered the cows, and, somewhat frightened, turned back to seek them. Luckily they had not strayed far, and were quietly feeding on the thick green grass.

Ardan son of Gorla was sitting under a tree, when he beheld a staff of gold and a staff of silver doubling themselves in strange ways on the meadow in front of him, and starting up he hastened towards them. He followed them till he was tired, but he could not catch them, though they seemed ever within his reach. When at last he gave up the quest his knees trembled beneath him for very weariness, and glad was he to see a tree growing close by lade with fruits of different sorts, of which he ate greedily.

The sun was by now low in the heavens, and the cows left off feeding, and turned their faces home again, followed by Ardan son of Gorla. At the door of their stable the maiden stood awaiting them, and saying nought to their herd, she sat down and began to milk. But it was not milk that flowed into her pail; instead it was filled with a thin stream of water, and as she rose up from the last cow the old man appeared outside.

'Faithless one, you have betrayed your trust!' he said to Ardan son of Gorla. 'Not even for one day could you keep true! Well, you shall have your reward at once, that others may take warning from you.' And waving his wand he touched with it the chest of the youth, who became a pillar of stone.

Now Gorla of the Flocks and his wife were full of grief that they had lost a son as well as a daughter, for no tidings had come to them of Ardan their eldest born. At length, when two years and two days had passed since the maiden had led her kids to feed on the mountain and had been seen no more, Ruais, second son of Gorla, rose up one morning, and said:

'Time is long without my sister and Ardan my brother. So I have vowed to seek them wherever they may be.'

And his father answered:

'Better it had been if you had first asked my consent and that of your mother; but as you have vowed so must you do.' Then he bade his wife make a cake, but instead she made two, and offered Ruais his choice, as she had done to Ardan. Like Ardan, Ruais chose the large, unblessed cake, and set forth on his way, doing always, though he knew it not, that which Ardan had done; so, needless is it to tell what befell him till he too stood, a pillar of stone, on the hill behind the cottage, so that all men might see the fate that awaited those who broke their faith.

Another year and a day passed by, when Covan the Brown-haired, youngest son of Gorla of the Flocks, one morning spake to his parents, saying:

'It is more than three years since my sister left us. My brothers have also gone, no one know whither, and of us four none remains but I. No, therefore, I long to seek them, and I pray you and my mother to place no hindrance in my way.'

And his father answered:

'Go, then, and take our blessing with you.'

So the wife of Gorla of the Flocks baked two cakes, one large and one small; and Covan took the small one, and started on his quest. In the wood he felt hungry, for he had walked far, and he sat down to eat. Suddenly a voice behind him cried:

'A bit for me! a bit for me!' And looking round he beheld the black raven of the wilderness.

'Yes, you shall have a bit,' said Covan the Brown-haired; and breaking off a piece he stretched it upwards to the raven, who ate it greedily. Then Covan arose and went forward, till he saw the light from the cottage streaming before him, and glad was he, for night was at hand.

'Maybe I shall find some work there,' he thought, 'and at least I shall gain money to help me in my search; for who knows how far my sister and my brothers may have wandered?'

The door stood open and he entered, and the old man gave him welcome, and the golden-haired maiden likewise. As happened before, he was offered by the old man to herd his cows; and, as she had done to his brothers, the maiden counselled him to leave such work alone. But, instead of answering rudely, like both Ardan and Ruais, he thanked her, with courtesy, though he had no mind to heed her; and he listened to the warnings and words of his new master.

Next day he set forth at dawn with the dun cows in front of him, and followed patiently wherever they might lead him. On the way he saw the gold cock and silver hen, which ran even closer to him than they had done to his brothers. Sorely tempted, he longed to give them chase; but, remembering in time that he had been bidden to look neither to the right nor to the left, with a mighty effort he turned his eyes away. Then the gold and silver staffs seemed to spring from the earth before him, but this time also he overcame; and though the fruit from the magic tree almost touched his mouth, he brushed it aside and went steadily on.

That day the cows wandered father than ever they had done before, and never stopped till they had reached a moor where the heather was burning. The fire was fierce, but the cows took no heed, and walked steadily through it, Covan the Brown-haired following them. Next they plunged into a foaming river, and Covan plunged in after them, though the water came high above his waist. On the other side of the river lay a wide plain, and here the cows lay down, while Covan looked about him. Near him was a house built of yellow stone, and from it came sweet songs, and Covan listened, and his heart grew light within him.

While he was thus waiting there ran up to him a youth, scarcely able to speak so swiftly had he sped; and he cried aloud:

'Hasten, hasten, Covan the Brown-haired, for your cows are in the corn, and you must drive them out!'

'Nay,' said Covan smiling, 'it had been easier for you to have driven them out than to come here to tell me.' And he went on listening to the music.

Very soon the same youth returned and cried with panting breath:

'Out upon you, Covan son of Gorla, that you stand there agape. For our dogs are chasing your cows, and you must drive them off!'

'Nay, then,' answered Covan as before, 'it had been easier for you to call off your dogs than to come here to tell me.' And he stayed where he was till the music ceased.

Then he turned to look for the cows, and found them all lying in the place where he had left them; but when they saw Covan they rose up and walked homewards, taking a different path to that they had trod in the morning. This time they passed over a plain so bare that a pin could not have lain there unnoticed, yet Covan beheld with surprise a foal and its mother feeding there, both as fat as if they had pastured on the richest grass. Further on they crossed another plain, where the grass was thick and green, but on it were feeding a foal and its mother, so lean that you could have counted their ribs. And further again the path led them by the shores of a lake whereon were floating two boats; one full of gay and happy youths, journeying to the land of the Sun, and another with grim shapes clothed in black, travelling to the land of Night.

'What can these things mean?' said Covan to himself, as he followed his cows.

Darkness now fell, the wind howled, and torrents of rain poured upon them. Covan knew not how far they might yet have to go, or indeed if they were on the right road. He could not even see his cows, and his heart sank lest, after all, he should have failed to bring them safely back. What was he to do?

He waited thus, for he could go neither forwards nor backwards, till he felt a great friendly paw laid on his shoulder.

'My cave is just here,' said the Dog of Maol-mor, of whom Covan son of Gorla had heard much. 'Spend the night here, and you shall be fed on the flesh of lamb, and shall lay aside three-thirds of thy weariness.'

And Covan entered, and supped, and slept, and in the morning rose up a new man.

'Farewell, Covan,' said the Dog of Maol-mor. 'May success go with you, for you took what I had to give and did not mock me. So, when danger is your companion, wish for me, and I will not fail you.'

At these words the Dog of Maol-mor disappeared into the forest, and Covan went to seek his cows, which were standing in the hollow where the darkness had come upon them.

At the sight of Covan the Brown-haired they walked onwards, Covan following ever behind them, and looking neither to the right nor to the left. All that day they walked, and when night fell they were in a barren plain, with only rocks for shelter.

'We must rest here as best we can,' spoke Covan to the cows. And they bowed their heads and lay down in the place where they stood. Then came the black raven of Corri-nan-creag, whose eyes never closed, and whose wings never tired; and he fluttered before the face of Covan and told him that he knew of a cranny in the rock where there was food in plenty, and soft moss for a bed.

'Go with me thither,' he said to Covan, 'and you shall lay aside three-thirds of your weariness, and depart in the morning refreshed,' and Covan listened thankfully to his words, and at dawn he rose up to seek his cows.

'Farewell!' cried the black raven. 'You trusted me, and took all I had to offer in return for the food you once gave me. So if in time to come you need a friend, wish for me, and I will not fail you.'

As before, the cows were standing in the spot where he had left them, ready to set out. All that day they walked, on and on, and on, Covan son of Gorla walking behind them, till night fell while they were on the banks of a river.

'We can go no further,' spake Covan to the cows. And they began to eat the grass by the side of the stream, while Covan listened to them and longed for some supper also, for they had travelled far, and his limbs were weak under him. Then there was a swish of water at his feet, and out peeped the head of the famous otter Doran-donn of the stream.

'Trust to me and I will find you warmth and shelter,' said Doran-donn; 'and for food fish in plenty.' And Covan went with him thankfully, and ate and rested, and laid aside three-thirds of his weariness. At sunrise he left his bed of dried sea-weed, which had floated up with the tide, and with a grateful heart bade farewell to Doran-donn.

'Because you trusted me and took what I had to offer, you have made me your friend, Covan,' said Doran-donn. 'And if you should be in danger, and need help from one who can swim a river or dive beneath a wave, call to me and I will come to you.' Then he plunged into the stream, and was seen no more.

The cows were standing ready in the place where Covan had left them, and they journeyed on all that day, till, when night fell, they reached the cottage. Joyful indeed was the old man as the cows went into their stables, and he beheld the rich milk that flowed into the pail of the golden-haired maiden with the silver comb.

'You have done well indeed,' he said to Covan son of Gorla. 'And now, what would you have as a reward?'

'I want nothing for myself,' answered Covan the Brown-haired; 'but I ask you to give me back my brothers and my sister who have been lost to us for three years past. You are wise and know the lore of fairies and of witches; tell me where I can find them, and what I must do to bring them to life again.'

The old man looked grave at the words of Covan.

'Yes, truly I know where they are,' answered he, 'and I say not that they may not be brought to life again. But the perils are great--too great for you to overcome.'

'Tell me what they are,' said Covan again, 'and I shall know better if I may overcome them.'

'Listen, then, and judge. In the mountain yonder there dwells a roe, white of foot, with horns that branch like the antlers of a deer. On the lake that leads to the land of the Sun floats a duck whose body is green and whose neck is of gold. In the pool of Corri-Bui swims a salmon with a skin that shines like silver, and whose gills are red--bring them all to me, and then you shall know where dwell your brothers and your sister!'

'To-morrow at cock-crow I will begone!' answered Covan.

The way to the mountain lay straight before him, and when he had climbed high he caught sight of the roe with the white feet and the spotted sides, on the peak in front.

Full of hope he set out in pursuit of her, but by the time he had reached that peak she had left it and was to be seen on another. And so it always happened, and Covan's courage had well-nigh failed him, when the thought of the Dog of Maol-mor darted into his mind.

'Oh, that he was here!' he cried. And looking up he saw him.

'Why did you summon me?' asked the Dog of Maol-mor. And when Covan had told him of his trouble, and how the roe always led him further and further, the Dog only answered:

'Fear nothing; I will soon catch her for you.' And in a short while he laid the roe unhurt at Covan's feet.

'What will you wish me to do with her?' said the Dog. And Covan answered:

'The old man bade me bring her, and the duck with the golden neck, and the salmon with the silver sides, to his cottage; if I shall catch them, I know not. But carry you the roe to the back of the cottage, and tether her so that she cannot escape.'

'It shall be done,' said the Dog of Maol-mor.

Then Covan sped to the lake which led to the land of the Sun, where the duck with the green body and the golden neck was swimming among the water-lilies.

'Surely I can catch him, good swimmer as I am,' to himself. But, if he could swim well, the duck could swim better, and at length his strength failed him, and he was forced to seek the land.

'Oh that the black raven were here to help me!' he thought to himself. And in a moment the black raven was perched on his shoulder.

'How can I help you?' asked the raven. And Covan answered:

'Catch me the green duck that floats on the water.' And the raven flew with his strong wings and picked him up in his strong beak, and in another moment the bird was laid at the feet of Covan.

This time it was easy for the young man to carry his prize, and after giving thanks to the raven for his aid, he went on to the river.

In the deep dark pool of which the old man had spoken the silver-sided salmon was lying under a rock.

'Surely I, good fisher as I am, can catch him,' said Covan son of Gorla. And cutting a slender pole from a bush, he fastened a line to the end of it. But cast with what skill he might, it availed nothing, for the salmon would not even look at the bait.

'I am beaten at last, unless the Doran-donn can deliver me,' he cried. And as he spoke there was a swish of the water, and the face of the Doran-donn looked up at him.

'O catch me, I pray you, that salmon under the rock!' said Covan son of Gorla. And the Doran-donn dived, and laying hold of the salmon by his tail, bore it back to the place where Covan was standing.

'The roe, and the duck, and the salmon are here,' said Covan to the old man, when he reached the cottage. And the old man smiled on him and bade him eat and drink, and after he hungered no more, he would speak with him.

And this was what the old man said: 'You began well, my son, so things have gone well with you. You set store by your mother's blessing, therefore you have been blest. You gave food to the raven when it hungered, you were true to the promise you had made to me, and did not suffer yourself to be turned aside by vain shows. You were skilled to perceive that the boy who tempted you to leave the temple was a teller of false tales, and took with a grateful heart what the poor had to offer you. Last of all, difficulties gave you courage, instead of lending you despair.

And now, as to your reward, you shall in truth take your sister home with you, and your brothers I will restore to life; but idle and unfaithful as they are their lot is to wander for ever. And so farewell, and may wisdom be with you.'

'First tell me your name?' asked Covan softly.

'I am the Spirit of Age,' said the old man.

[Taken from a Celtic Story. Translated by Doctor Macleod Clarke.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

The Princess Bella-Flor

Once upon a time there lived a man who had two sons. When they grew up the elder went to seek his fortune in a far country, and for many years no one heard anything about him. Meanwhile the younger son stayed at home with his father, who died at last in a good old age, leaving great riches behind him.

For some time the son who stayed at home spent his father's wealth freely, believing that he alone remained to enjoy it. But, one day, as he was coming down stairs, he was surprised to see a stranger enter the hall, looking about as if the house belonged to him.

'Have you forgotten me?' asked the man.

'I can't forget a person I have never known,' was the rude answer.

'I am your brother,' replied the stranger, 'and I have returned home without the money I hoped to have made. And, what is worse, they tell me in the village that my father is dead. I would have counted my lost gold as nothing if I could have seen him once more.'

'He died six months ago,' said the rich brother, 'and he left you, as your portion, the old wooden chest that stands in the loft. You had better go there and look for it; I have no more time to waste.' And he went his way.

So the wanderer turned his steps to the loft, which was at the top of the storehouse, and there he found the wooden chest, so old that it looked as if it were dropping to pieces.

'What use is this old thing to me?' he said to himself. 'Oh, well, it will serve to light a fire at which I can warm myself; so things might be worse after all.'

Placing the chest on his back, the man, whose name was Jose, set out for his inn, and, borrowing a hatchet, began to chop up the box. In doing so he discovered a secret drawer, and in it lay a paper. He opened the paper, not knowing what it might contain, and was astonished to find that it was the acknowledgment of a large debt that was owing to his father. Putting the precious writing in his pocket, he hastily inquired of the landlord where he could find the man whose name was written inside, and he ran out at once in search of him.

The debtor proved to be an old miser, who lived at the other end of the village. He had hoped for many months that the paper he had written had been lost or destroyed, and, indeed, when he saw it, was very unwilling to pay what he owed. However, the stranger threatened to drag him before the king, and when the miser saw that there was no help for it he counted out the coins one by one. The stranger picked them up and put them in his pocket, and went back to his inn feeling that he was now a rich man.

A few weeks after this he was walking through the streets of the nearest town, when he met a poor woman crying bitterly. He stopped and asked her what was the matter, and she answered between her sobs that her husband was dying, and, to make matters worse, a creditor whom he could not pay was anxious to have him taken to prison.

'Comfort yourself,' said the stranger kindly; 'they shall neither send your husband to prison nor sell your goods. I will not only pay his debts but, if he dies, the cost of his burial also. And now go home, and nurse him as well as you can.'

And so she did; but, in spite of her care, the husband died, and was buried by the stranger. But everything cost more than he expected, and when all was paid he found that only three gold pieces were left.

'What am I to do now?' said he to himself. 'I think I had better go to court, and enter into the service of the king.'

At first he was only a servant, who carried the king the water for his bath, and saw that his bed was made in a particular fashion. But he did his duties so well that his master soon took notice of him, and in a short time he rose to be a gentleman of the bedchamber.

Now, when this happened the younger brother had spent all the money he had inherited, and did not know how to make any for himself. He then bethought him of the king's favourite, and went whining to the palace to beg that his brother, whom he had so ill-used, would give him his protection, and find him a place. The elder, who was always ready to help everyone spoke to the king on his behalf, and the next day the young man took up is work at court.

Unfortunately, the new-comer was by nature spiteful and envious, and could not bear anyone to have better luck than himself. By dint of spying through keyholes and listening at doors, he learned that the king, old and ugly though he was, had fallen in love with the Princess Bella-Flor, who would have nothing to say to him, and had hidden herself in some mountain castle, no one knew where.

'That will do nicely,' thought the scoundrel, rubbing his hands. 'It will be quite easy to get the king to send my brother in search of her, and if he returns without finding her, his head will be the forfeit. Either way, he will be out of MY path.'

So he went at once to the Lord High Chamberlain and craved an audience of the king, to whom he declared he wished to tell some news of the highest importance. The king admitted him into the presence chamber without delay, and bade him state what he had to say, and to be quick about it.

'Oh, sire! the Princess Bella-Flor--' answered the man, and then stopped as if afraid.

'What of the Princess Bella-Flor?' asked the king impatiently.

'I have heard--it is whispered at court--that your majesty desires to know where she lies in hiding.'

'I would give half my kingdom to the man who will bring her to me,' cried the king, eagerly. 'Speak on, knave; has a bird of the air revealed to you the secret?'

'It is not I, but my brother, who knows,' replied the traitor; 'if your majesty would ask him--' But before the words were out of his mouth the king had struck a blow with his sceptre on a golden plate that hung on the wall.

'Order Jose to appear before me instantly,' he shouted to the servant who ran to obey his orders, so great was the noise his majesty had made; and when Jose entered the hall, wondering what in the world could be the matter, the king was nearly dumb from rage and excitement.

'Bring me the Princess Bella-Flor this moment,' stammered he, 'for if you return without her I will have you drowned!' And without another word he left the hall, leaving Jose staring with surprise and horror.

'How can I find the Princess Bella-Flor when I have never even seen her?' thought he. 'But it is no use staying here, for I shall only be put to death.' And he walked slowly to the stables to choose himself a horse.

There were rows upon rows of fine beasts with their names written in gold above their stalls, and Jose was looking uncertainly from one to the other, wondering which he should choose, when an old white horse turned its head and signed to him to approach.

'Take me,' it said in a gentle whisper, 'and all will go well.'

Jose still felt so bewildered with the mission that the king had given him that he forgot to be astonished at hearing a horse talk. Mechanically he laid his hand on the bridle and led the white horse out of the stable. He was about to mount on his back, when the animal spoke again:

'Pick up those three loaves of bread which you see there, and put them in your pocket.'

Jose did as he was told, and being in a great hurry to get away, asked no questions, but swung himself into the saddle.

They rode far without meeting any adventures, but at length they came to an ant-hill, and the horse stopped.

'Crumble those three loaves for the ants,' he said. But Jose hesitated.

'Why, we may want them ourselves!' answered he.

'Never mind that; give them to the ants all the same. Do not lose a chance of helping others.' And when the loaves lay in crumbs on the road, the horse galloped on.

By-and-by they entered a rocky pass between two mountains, and here they saw an eagle which had been caught in a hunter's net.

'Get down and cut the meshes of the net, and set the poor bird free,' said the horse.

'But it will take so long,' objected Jose, 'and we may miss the princess.'

'Never mind that; do not lose a chance of helping others,' answered the horse. And when the meshes were cut, and the eagle was free, the horse galloped on.

The had ridden many miles, and at last they came to a river, where they beheld a little fish lying gasping on the sand, and the horse said:

'Do you see that little fish? It will die if you do not put it back in the water.'

'But, really, we shall never find the Princess Bella-Flor if we waste our time like this!' cried Jose.

'We never waste time when we are helping others,' answered the horse. And soon the little fish was swimming happily away.

A little while after they reached a castle, which was built in the middle of a very thick wood, and right in front was the Princess Bella-Flor feeding her hens.

'Now listen,' said the horse. 'I am going to give all sorts of little hops and skips, which will amuse the Princess Bella-Flor. Then she will tell you that she would like to ride a little way, and you must help her to mount. When she is seated I shall begin to neigh and kick, and you must say that I have never carried a woman before, and that you had better get up behind so as to be able to manage me. Once on my back we will go like the wind to the king's palace.'

Jose did exactly as the horse told him, and everything fell out as the animal prophesied; so that it was not until they were galloping breathlessly towards the palace that the princess knew that she was taken captive. She said nothing, however, but quietly opened her apron which contained the bran for the chickens, and in a moment it lay scattered on the ground.

'Oh, I have let fall my bran!' cried she; 'please get down and pick it up for me.' But Jose only answered:

'We shall find plenty of bran where we are going.' And the horse galloped on.

They were now passing through a forest, and the princess took out her handkerchief and threw it upwards, so that it stuck in one of the topmost branches of a tree.

'Dear me; how stupid! I have let my handkerchief blow away,' said she. 'Will you climb up and get it for me?' But Jose answered:

'We shall find plenty of handkerchiefs where we are going.' And the horse galloped on.

After the wood they reached a river, and the princess slipped a ring off her finger and let it roll into the water.

'How careless of me,' gasped she, beginning to sob. 'I have lost my favourite ring; DO stop for a moment and look if you can see it.' But Jose answered:

'You will find plenty of rings where you are going.' And the horse galloped on.

At last they entered the palace gates, and the king's heart bounded with joy at beholding his beloved Princess Bella-Flor. But the princess brushed him aside as if he had been a fly, and locked herself into the nearest room, which she would not open for all his entreaties.

'Bring me the three things I lost on the way, and perhaps I may think about it,' was all she would say. And, in despair, the king was driven to take counsel of Jose.

'There is no remedy that I can see,' said his majesty, 'but that you, who know where they are, should go and bring them back. And if you return without them I will have you drowned.'

Poor Jose was much troubled at these words. He thought that he had done all that was required of him, and that his life was safe. However, he bowed low, and went out to consult his friend the horse.

'Do not vex yourself,' said the horse, when he had heard the story; 'jump up, and we will go and look for the things.' And Jose mounted at once.

They rode on till they came to the ant-hill, and then the horse asked:

'Would you like to have the bran?'

'What is the use of liking?' answered Jose.

'Well, call the ants, and tell them to fetch it for you; and, if some of it has been scattered by the wind, to bring in its stead the grains that were in the cakes you gave them.' Jose listened in surprise. He did not much believe in the horse's plan; but he could not think of anything better, so he called to the ants, and bade them collect the bran as fast as they could.

Then he saw under a tree and waited, while his horse cropped the green turf.

'Look there!' said the animal, suddenly raising its head; and Jose looked behind him and saw a little mountain of bran, which he put into a bag that was hung over his saddle.

'Good deeds bear fruit sooner or later,' observed the horse; 'but mount again, as we have far to go.'

When they arrived at the tree, they saw the handkerchief fluttering like a flag from the topmost branch, and Jose's spirits sank again.

'How am I to get that handkerchief?' cried he; 'why I should need Jacob's ladder!' But the horse answered:

'Do not be frightened; call to the eagle you set free from the net, he will bring it to you.'

So Jose called to the eagle, and the eagle flew to the top of the tree and brought back the handkerchief in its beak. Jose thanked him, and vaulting on his horse they rode on to the river.

A great deal of rain had fallen in the night, and the river, instead of being clear as it was before, was dark and troubled.

'How am I to fetch the ring from the bottom of this river when I do not know exactly where it was dropped, and cannot even see it?' asked Jose. But the horse answered: 'Do not be frightened; call the little fish whose life you saved, and she will bring it to you.'

So he called to the fish, and the fish dived to the bottom and slipped behind big stones, and moved little ones with its tail till it found the ring, and brought it to Jose in its mouth.

Well pleased with all he had done, Jose returned to the palace; but when the king took the precious objects to Bella-Flor, she declared that she would never open her door till the bandit who had carried her off had been fried in oil.

'I am very sorry,' said the king to Jose, 'I really would rather not; but you see I have no choice.'

While the oil was being heated in the great caldron, Jose went to the stables to inquire of his friend the horse if there was no way for him to escape.

'Do not be frightened,' said the horse. 'Get on my back, and I will gallop till my whole body is wet with perspiration, then rub it all over your skin, and no matter how hot the oil may be you will never feel it.'

Jose did not ask any more questions, but did as the horse bade him; and men wondered at his cheerful face as they lowered him into the caldron of boiling oil. He was left there till Bella-Flor cried that he must be cooked enough. Then out came a youth so young and handsome, that everyone fell in love with him, and Bella-Flor most of all.

As for the old king, he saw that he had lost the game; and in despair he flung himself into the caldron, and was fried instead of Jose. Then Jose was proclaimed king, on condition that he married Bella-Flor which he promised to do the next day. But first he went to the stables and sought out the horse, and said to him: 'It is to you that I owe my life and my crown. Why have you done all this for me?'

And the horse answered: 'I am the soul of that unhappy man for whom you spent all your fortune. And when I saw you in danger of death I begged that I might help you, as you had helped me. For, as I told you, Good deeds bear their own fruit!'

[From Cuentos, Oraciones, y Adivinas, por Fernan Caballero.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

The Bird of Truth

Once upon a time there lived a poor fisher who built a hut on the banks of a stream which, shunning the glare of the sun and the noise of the towns, flowed quietly past trees and under bushes, listening to the songs of the birds overhead.

One day, when the fisherman had gone out as usual to cast his nets, he saw borne towards him on the current a cradle of crystal. Slipping his net quickly beneath it he drew it out and lifted the silk coverlet. Inside, lying on a soft bed of cotton, were two babies, a boy and a girl, who opened their eyes and smiled at him. The man was filled with pity at the sight, and throwing down his lines he took the cradle and the babies home to his wife.

The good woman flung up her hands in despair when she beheld the contents of the cradle.

'Are not eight children enough,' she cried, 'without bringing us two more? How do you think we can feed them?'

'You would not have had me leave them to die of hunger,' answered he, 'or be swallowed up by the waves of the sea? What is enough for eight is also enough for ten.'

The wife said no more; and in truth her heart yearned over the little creatures. Somehow or other food was never lacking in the hut, and the children grew up and were so good and gentle that, in time, their foster-parents loved them as well or better than their own, who were quarrelsome and envious. It did not take the orphans long to notice that the boys did not like them, and were always playing tricks on them, so they used to go away by themselves and spend whole hours by the banks of the river. Here they would take out the bits of bread they had saved from their breakfasts and crumble them for the birds. In return, the birds taught them many things: how to get up early in the morning, how to sing, and how to talk their language, which very few people know.

But though the little orphans did their best to avoid quarrelling with their foster-brothers, it was very difficult always to keep the peace. Matters got worse and worse till, one morning, the eldest boy said to the twins:

'It is all very well for you to pretend that you have such good manners, and are so much better than we, but we have at least a father and mother, while you have only got the river, like the toads and the frogs.'

The poor children did not answer the insult; but it made them very unhappy. And they told each other in whispers that they could not stay there any longer, but must go into the world and seek their fortunes.

So next day they arose as early as the birds and stole downstairs without anybody hearing them. One window was open, and they crept softly out and ran to the side of the river. Then, feeling as if they had found a friend, they walked along its banks, hoping that by-and-by they should meet some one to take care of them.

The whole of that day they went steadily on without seeing a living creature, till, in the evening, weary and footsore, they saw before them a small hut. This raised their spirits for a moment; but the door was shut, and the hut seemed empty, and so great was their disappointment that they almost cried. However, the boy fought down his tears, and said cheerfully:

'Well, at any rate here is a bench where we can sit down, and when we are rested we will think what is best to do next.'

Then they sat down, and for some time they were too tired even to notice anything; but by-and-by they saw that under the tiles of the roof a number of swallows were sitting, chattering merrily to each other. Of course the swallows had no idea that the children understood their language, or they would not have talked so freely; but, as it was, they said whatever came into their heads.

'Good evening, my fine city madam,' remarked a swallow, whose manners were rather rough and countryfied to another who looked particularly distinguished. 'Happy, indeed, are the eyes that behold you! Only think of your having returned to your long-forgotten country friends, after you have lived for years in a palace!'

'I have inherited this nest from my parents,' replied the other, 'and as they left it to me I certainly shall make it my home. But,' she added politely, 'I hope that you and all your family are well?'

'Very well indeed, I am glad to say. But my poor daughter had, a short time ago, such bad inflammation in her eyes that she would have gone blind had I not been able to find the magic herb, which cured her at once.'

'And how is the nightingale singing? Does the lark soar as high as ever? And does the linnet dress herself as smartly?' But here the country swallow drew herself up.

'I never talk gossip,' she said severely. 'Our people, who were once so innocent and well-behaved, have been corrupted by the bad examples of men. It is a thousand pities.'

'What! innocence and good behaviour are not to be met with among birds, nor in the country! My dear friend, what are you saying?'

'The truth and nothing more. Imagine, when we returned here, we met some linnets who, just as the spring and the flowers and the long days had come, were setting out for the north and the cold? Out of pure compassion we tried to persuade them to give up this folly; but they only replied with the utmost insolence.'

'How shocking!' exclaimed the city swallow.

'Yes, it was. And worse than that, the crested lark, that was formerly so timid and shy, is now no better than a thief, and steals maize and corn whenever she can find them.'

'I am astonished at what you say.'

'You will be more astonished when I tell you that on my arrival here for the summer I found my nest occupied by a shameless sparrow! "This is my nest," I said. "Yours?" he answered, with a rude laugh. "Yes, mine; my ancestors were born here, and my sons will be born here also." And at that my husband set upon him and threw him out of the nest. I am sure nothing of this sort ever happens in a town.'

'Not exactly, perhaps. But I have seen a great deal--if you only knew!'

'Oh! do tell us! do tell us!' cried they all. And when they had settled themselves comfortably, the city swallow began:

'You must know, then that our king fell in love with the youngest daughter of a tailor, who was as good and gentle as she was beautiful. His nobles hoped that he would have chosen a queen from one of their daughters, and tried to prevent the marriage; but the king would not listen to them, and it took place. Not many months later a war broke out, and the king rode away at the head of his army, while the queen remained behind, very unhappy at the separation. When peace was made, and the king returned, he was told that his wife had had two babies in his absence, but that both were dead; that she herself had gone out of her mind and was obliged to be shut up in a tower in the mountains, where, in time, the fresh air might cure her.'

'And was this not true?' asked the swallows eagerly.

'Of course not,' answered the city lady, with some contempt for their stupidity. 'The children were alive at that very moment in the gardener's cottage; but at night the chamberlain came down and put them in a cradle of crystal, which he carried to the river.

'For a whole day they floated safely, for though the stream was deep it was very still, and the children took no harm. In the morning--so I am told by my friend the kingfisher--they were rescued by a fisherman who lived near the river bank.'

The children had been lying on the bench, listening lazily to the chatter up to this point; but when they heard the story of the crystal cradle which their foster-mother had always been fond of telling them, they sat upright and looked at each other.

'Oh, how glad I am I learnt the birds' language!' said the eyes of one to the eyes of the other.

Meanwhile the swallows had spoken again.

'That was indeed good fortune!' cried they.

'And when the children are grown up they can return to their father and set their mother free.'

'It will not be so easy as you think,' answered the city swallow, shaking her head; 'for they will have to prove that they are the king's children, and also that their mother never went mad at all. In fact, it is so difficult that there is only one way of proving it to the king.'

'And what is that?' cried all the swallows at once. 'And how do you know it?'

'I know it,' answered the city swallow, 'because, one day, when I was passing through the palace garden, I met a cuckoo, who, as I need not tell you, always pretends to be able to see into the future. We began to talk about certain things which were happening in the palace, and of the events of past years. "Ah," said he, "the only person who can expose the wickedness of the ministers and show the king how wrong he has been, is the Bird of Truth, who can speak the language of men."

'"And where can this bird be found?" I asked.

'"It is shut up in a castle guarded by a fierce giant, who only sleeps one quarter of an hour out of the whole twenty-four," replied the cuckoo.

'And where is this castle?' inquired the country swallow, who, like all the rest, and the children most of all, had been listening with deep attention.

'That is just what I don't know,' answered her friend. 'All I can tell you is that not far from here is a tower, where dwells an old witch, and it is she who knows the way, and she will only teach it to the person who promises to bring her the water from the fountain of many colours, which she uses for her enchantments. But never will she betray the place where the Bird of Truth is hidden, for she hates him, and would kill him if she could; knowing well, however, that this bird cannot die, as he is immortal, she keeps him closely shut up, and guarded night and day by the Birds of Bad Faith, who seek to gag him so that his voice should not be heard.'

'And is there no one else who can tell the poor boy where to find the bird, if he should ever manage to reach the tower?' asked the country swallow.

'No one,' replied the city swallow, 'except an owl, who lives a hermit's life in that desert, and he knows only one word of man's speech, and that is "cross." So that even if the prince did succeed in getting there, he could never understand what the owl said. But, look, the sun is sinking to his nest in the depths of the sea, and I must go to mine. Good-night, friends, good-night!'

Then the swallow flew away, and the children, who had forgotten both hunger and weariness in the joy of this strange news, rose up and followed in the direction of her flight. After two hours' walking, they arrived at a large city, which they felt sure must be the capital of their father's kingdom. Seeing a good-natured looking woman standing at the door of a house, they asked her if she would give them a night's lodging, and she was so pleased with their pretty faces and nice manners that she welcomed them warmly.

It was scarcely light the next morning before the girl was sweeping out the rooms, and the boy watering the garden, so that by the time the good woman came downstairs there was nothing left for her to do. This so delighted her that she begged the children to stay with her altogether, and the boy answered that he would leave his sisters with her gladly, but that he himself had serious business on hand and must not linger in pursuit of it. So he bade them farewell and set out.

For three days he wandered by the most out-of-the-way paths, but no signs of a tower were to be seen anywhere. On the fourth morning it was just the same, and, filled with despair, he flung himself on the ground under a tree and hid his face in his hands. In a little while he heard a rustling over his head, and looking up, he saw a turtle dove watching him with her bright eyes.

'Oh dove!' cried the boy, addressing the bird in her own language, 'Oh dove! tell me, I pray you, where is the castle of Come-and-never-go?'

'Poor child,' answered the dove, 'who has sent you on such a useless quest?'

'My good or evil fortune,' replied the boy, 'I know not which.'

'To get there,' said the dove, 'you must follow the wind, which to-day is blowing towards the castle.'

The boy thanked her, and followed the wind, fearing all the time that it might change its direction and lead him astray. But the wind seemed to feel pity for him and blew steadily on.

With each step the country became more and more dreary, but at nightfall the child could see behind the dark and bare rocks something darker still. This was the tower in which dwelt the witch; and seizing the knocker he gave three loud knocks, which were echoed in the hollows of the rocks around.

The door opened slowly, and there appeared on the threshold an old woman holding up a candle to her face, which was so hideous that the boy involuntarily stepped backwards, almost as frightened by the troop of lizards, beetles and such creatures that surrounded her, as by the woman herself.

'Who are you who dare to knock at my door and wake me?' cried she. 'Be quick and tell me what you want, or it will be the worse for you.'

'Madam,' answered the child, 'I believe that you alone know the way to the castle of Come-and-never-go, and I pray you to show it to me.'

'Very good,' replied the witch, with something that she meant for a smile, 'but to-day it is late. To-morrow you shall go. Now enter, and you shall sleep with my lizards.'

'I cannot stay,' said he. 'I must go back at once, so as to reach the road from which I started before day dawns.'

'If I tell you, will you promise me that you will bring me this jar full of the many-coloured water from the spring in the court-yard of the castle?' asked she. 'If you fail to keep your word I will change you into a lizard for ever.'

'I promise,' answered the boy.

Then the old woman called to a very thin dog, and said to him:

'Conduct this pig of a child to the castle of Come-and-never-go, and take care that you warn my friend of his arrival.' And the dog arose and shook itself, and set out.

At the end of two hours they stopped in front of a large castle, big and black and gloomy, whose doors stood wide open, although neither sound nor light gave sign of any presence within. The dog, however, seemed to know what to expect, and, after a wild howl, went on; but the boy, who was uncertain whether this was the quarter of an hour when the giant was asleep, hesitated to follow him, and paused for a moment under a wild olive that grew near by, the only tree which he had beheld since he had parted from the dove. 'Oh, heaven, help me!' cried he.

'Cross! cross!' answered a voice.

The boy leapt for joy as he recognised the note of the owl of which the swallow had spoken, and he said softly in the bird's language:

'Oh, wise owl, I pray you to protect and guide me, for I have come in search of the Bird of Truth. And first I must fill this far with the many-coloured water in the courtyard of the castle.'

'Do not do that,' answered the owl, 'but fill the jar from the spring which bubbles close by the fountain with the many-coloured water. Afterwards, go into the aviary opposite the great door, but be careful not to touch any of the bright-plumaged birds contained in it, which will cry to you, each one, that he is the Bird of Truth. Choose only a small white bird that is hidden in a corner, which the others try incessantly to kill, not knowing that it cannot die. And, be quick!--for at this very moment the giant has fallen asleep, and you have only a quarter of an hour to do everything.'

The boy ran as fast as he could and entered the courtyard, where he saw the two spring close together. He passed by the many-coloured water without casting a glance at it, and filled the jar from the fountain whose water was clear and pure. He next hastened to the aviary, and was almost deafened by the clamour that rose as he shut the door behind him. Voices of peacocks, voices of ravens, voices of magpies, each claiming to be the Bird of Truth. With steadfast face the boy walked by them all, to the corner, where, hemmed in by a hand of fierce crows, was the small white bird he sought. Putting her safely in his breast, he passed out, followed by the screams of the birds of Bad Faith which he left behind him.

Once outside, he ran without stopping to the witch's tower, and handed to the old woman the jar she had given him.

'Become a parrot!' cried she, flinging the water over him. But instead of losing his shape, as so many had done before, he only grew ten times handsomer; for the water was enchanted for good and not ill. Then the creeping multitude around the witch hastened to roll themselves in the water, and stood up, human beings again.

When the witch saw what was happening, she took a broomstick and flew away.

Who can guess the delight of the sister at the sight of her brother, bearing the Bird of Truth? But although the boy had accomplished much, something very difficult yet remained, and that was how to carry the Bird of Truth to the king without her being seized by the wicked courtiers, who would be ruined by the discovery of their plot.

Soon--no one knew how--the news spread abroad that the Bird of Truth was hovering round the palace, and the courtiers made all sorts of preparations to hinder her reaching the king.

They got ready weapons that were sharpened, and weapons that were poisoned; they sent for eagles and falcons to hunt her down, and constructed cages and boxes in which to shut her up if they were not able to kill her. They declared that her white plumage was really put on to hide her black feathers--in fact there was nothing they did not do in order to prevent the king from seeing the bird or from paying attention to her words if he did.

As often happens in these cases, the courtiers brought about that which they feared. They talked so much about the Bird of Truth that at last the king heard of it, and expressed a wish to see her. The more difficulties that were put in his way the stronger grew his desire, and in the end the king published a proclamation that whoever found the Bird of Truth should bring her to him without delay.

As soon as he saw this proclamation the boy called his sister, and they hastened to the palace. The bird was buttoned inside his tunic, but, as might have been expected, the courtiers barred the way, and told the child that he could not enter. It was in vain that the boy declared that he was only obeying the king's commands; the courtiers only replied that his majesty was not yet out of bed, and it was forbidden to wake him.

They were still talking, when, suddenly, the bird settled the question by flying upwards through an open window into the king's own room. Alighting on the pillow, close to the king's head, she bowed respectfully, and said:

'My lord, I am the Bird of Truth whom you wished to see, and I have been obliged to approach you in the manner because the boy who brought me is kept out of the palace by your courtiers.'

'They shall pay for their insolence,' said the king. And he instantly ordered one of his attendants to conduct the boy at once to his apartments; and in a moment more the prince entered, holding his sister by the hand.

'Who are you?' asked the king; 'and what has the Bird of Truth to do with you?'

'If it please your majesty, the Bird of Truth will explain that herself,' answered the boy.

And the bird did explain; and the king heard for the first time of the wicked plot that had been successful for so many years. He took his children in his arms, with tears in his eyes, and hurried off with them to the tower in the mountains where the queen was shut up. The poor woman was as white as marble, for she had been living almost in darkness; but when she saw her husband and children, the colour came back to her face, and she was as beautiful as ever.

They all returned in state to the city, where great rejoicings were held. The wicked courtiers had their heads cut off, and all their property was taken away. As for the good old couple, they were given riches and honour, and were loved and cherished to the end of their lives.

[From Cuentos, Oraciones y Adivinas, por Fernan Caballero.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

The Mink and the Wolf

In a big forest in the north of America lived a quantity of wild animals of all sorts. They were always very polite when they met; but, in spite of that, they kept a close watch one upon the other, as each was afraid of being killed and eaten by somebody else. But their manners were so good that no one would ever had guessed that.

One day a smart young wolf went out to hunt, promising his grandfather and grandmother that he would be sure to be back before bedtime. He trotted along quite happily through the forest till he came to a favourite place of his, just where the river runs into the sea. There, just as he had hoped, he saw the chief mink fishing in a canoe.

'I want to fish too,' cried the wolf. But the mink said nothing and pretended not to hear.

'I wish you would take me into your boat!' shouted the wolf, louder than before, and he continued to beseech the mink so long that at last he grew tired of it, and paddled to the shore close enough for the wolf to jump in.

'Sit down quietly at that end or we shall be upset,' said the mink; 'and if you care about sea-urchins' eggs, you will find plenty in that basket. But be sure you eat only the white ones, for the red ones would kill you.'

So the wolf, who was always hungry, began to eat the eggs greedily; and when he had finished he told the mink he thought he would have a nap.

'Well, then, stretch yourself out, and rest your head on that piece of wood,' said the mink. And the wolf did as he was bid, and was soon fast asleep. Then the mink crept up to him and stabbed him to the heart with his knife, and he died without moving. After that he landed on the beach, skinned the wolf, and taking the skin to his cottage, he hung it up before the fire to dry.

Not many days later the wolf's grandmother, who, with the help of her relations, had been searching for him everywhere, entered the cottage to buy some sea-urchins' eggs, and saw the skin, which she at once guessed to be that of her grandson.

'I knew he was dead--I knew it! I knew it!' she cried, weeping bitterly, till the mink told her rudely that if she wanted to make so much noise she had better do it outside as he liked to be quiet. So, half-blinded by her tears, the old woman went home the way she had come, and running in at the door, she flung herself down in front of the fire.

'What are you crying for?' asked the old wolf and some friends who had been spending the afternoon with him.

'I shall never see my grandson any more!' answered she. 'Mink has killed him, oh! oh!' And putting her head down, she began to weep as loudly as ever.

'There! there!' said her husband, laying his paw on her shoulder. 'Be comforted; if he IS dead, we will avenge him.' And calling to the others they proceeded to talk over the best plan. It took them a long time to make up their minds, as one wolf proposed one thing and one another; but at last it was agreed that the old wolf should give a great feast in his house, and that the mink should be invited to the party. And in order that no time should be lost it was further agreed that each wolf should bear the invitations to the guests that lived nearest to him.

Now the wolves thought they were very cunning, but the mink was more cunning still; and though he sent a message by a white hare, that was going that way, saying he should be delighted to be present, he determined that he would take his precautions. So he went to a mouse who had often done him a good turn, and greeted her with his best bow.

'I have a favour to ask of you, friend mouse,' said he, 'and if you will grant it I will carry you on my back every night for a week to the patch of maize right up the hill.'

'The favour is mine,' answered the mouse. 'Tell me what it is that I can have the honour of doing for you.'

'Oh, something quite easy,' replied the mink. 'I only want you--between to-day and the next full moon--to gnaw through the bows and paddles of the wolf people, so that directly they use them they will break. But of course you must manage it so that they notice nothing.'

'Of course,' answered the mouse, 'nothing is easier; but as the full moon is to-morrow night, and there is not much time, I had better begin at once.' Then the mink thanked her, and went his way; but before he had gone far he came back again.

'Perhaps, while you are about the wolf's house seeing after the bows, it would do no harm if you were to make that knot-hole in the wall a little bigger,' said he. 'Not large enough to draw attention, of course; but it might come in handy.' And with another nod he left her.

The next evening the mink washed and brushed himself carefully and set out for the feast. He smiled to himself as he looked at the dusty track, and perceived that though the marks of wolves' feet were many, not a single guest was to be seen anywhere. He knew very well what that meant; but he had taken his precautions and was not afraid.

The house door stood open, but through a crack the mink could see the wolves crowding in the corner behind it. However, he entered boldly, and as soon as he was fairly inside the door was shut with a bang, and the whole herd sprang at him, with their red tongues hanging out of their mouths. Quick as they were they were too late, for the mink was already through the knot-hole and racing for his canoe.

The knot-hole was too small for the wolves, and there were so many of them in the hut that it was some time before they could get the door open. Then they seized the bows and arrows which were hanging on the walls and, once outside, aimed at the flying mink; but as they pulled the bows broke in their paws, so they threw them away, and bounded to the shore, with all their speed, to the place where their canoes were drawn up on the beach.

Now, although the mink could not run as fast as the wolves, he had a good start, and was already afloat when the swiftest among them threw themselves into the nearest canoe. They pushed off, but as they dipped the paddles into the water, they snapped as the bows had done, and were quite useless.

'I know where there are some new ones,' cried a young fellow, leaping on shore and rushing to a little cave at the back of the beach. And the mink's heart smote him when he heard, for he had not known of this secret store.

After a long chase the wolves managed to surround their prey, and the mink, seeing it was no good resisting any more, gave himself up. Some of the elder wolves brought out some cedar bands, which they always carried wound round their bodies, but the mink laughed scornfully at the sight of them.

'Why I could snap those in a moment,' said he; 'if you want to make sure that I cannot escape, better take a line of kelp and bind me with that.'

'You are right,' answered the grandfather; 'your wisdom is greater than ours.' And he bade his servants gather enough kelp from the rocks to make a line, as they had brought none with them.

'While the line is being made you might as well let me have one last dance,' remarked the mink. And the wolves replied: 'Very good, you may have your dance; perhaps it may amuse us as well as you.' So they brought two canoes and placed them one beside the other. The mink stood up on his hind legs and began to dance, first in one canoe and then in the other; and so graceful was he, that the wolves forgot they were going to put him to death, and howled with pleasure.

'Pull the canoes a little apart; they are too close for this new dance,' he said, pausing for a moment. And the wolves separated them while he gave a series of little springs, sometime pirouetting while he stood with one foot on the prow of both. 'Now nearer, now further apart,' he would cry as the dance went on. 'No! further still.' And springing into the air, amidst howls of applause, he came down head-foremost, and dived to the bottom. And through the wolves, whose howls had now changed into those of rage, sought him everywhere, they never found him, for he hid behind a rock till they were out of sight, and then made his home in another forest.

[From the Journal of the Anthropological Institute.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

Adventures of an Indian Brave

A long, long way off, right away in the west of America, there once lived an old man who had one son. The country round was covered with forests, in which dwelt all kinds of wild beasts, and the young man and his companions used to spend whole days in hunting them, and he was the finest hunter of all the tribe.

One morning, when winter was coming on, the youth and his companions set off as usual to bring back some of the mountain goats and deer to be salted down, as he was afraid of a snow-storm; and if the wind blew and the snow drifted the forest might be impassable for some weeks. The old man and the wife, however, would not go out, but remained in the wigwam making bows and arrows.

It soon grew so cold in the forest that at last one of the men declared they could walk no more, unless they could manage to warm themselves.

'That is easily done,' said the leader, giving a kick to a large tree. Flames broke out in the trunk, and before it had burnt up they were as hot as if it had been summer. Then they started off to the place where the goats and deer were to be found in the greatest numbers, and soon had killed as many as they wanted. But the leader killed most, as he was the best shot.

'Now we must cut up the game and divide it,' said he; and so they did, each one taking his own share; and, walking one behind the other, set out for the village. But when they reached a great river the young man did not want the trouble of carrying his pack any further, and left it on the bank.

'I am going home another way,' he told his companions. And taking another road he reached the village long before they did.

'Have you returned with empty hands?' asked the old man, as his son opened the door.

'Have I ever done that, that you put me such a question?' asked the youth. 'No; I have slain enough to feast us for many moons, but it was heavy, and I left the pack on the bank of the great river. Give me the arrows, I will finish making them, and you can go to the river and bring home the pack!'

So the old man rose and went, and strapped the meat on his shoulder; but as he was crossing the ford the strap broke and the pack fell into the river. He stooped to catch it, but it swirled past him. He clutched again; but in doing so he over-balanced himself and was hurried into some rapids, where he was knocked against some rocks, and he sank and was drowned, and his body was carried down the stream into smoother water when it rose to the surface again. But by this time it had lost all likeness to a man, and was changed into a piece of wood.

The wood floated on, and the river got bigger and bigger and entered a new country. There it was borne by the current close to the shore, and a woman who was down there washing her clothes caught it as it passed, and drew it out, saying to herself: 'What a nice smooth plank! I will use it as a table to put my food upon.' And gathering up her clothes she took the plank with her into her hut.

When her supper time came she stretched the board across two strings which hung from the roof, and set upon it the pot containing a stew that smelt very good. The woman had been working hard all day and was very hungry, so she took her biggest spoon and plunged it into the pot. But what was her astonishment and disgust when both pot and food vanished instantly before her!

'Oh, you horrid plank, you have brought me ill-luck!' she cried. And taking it up she flung it away from her.

The woman had been surprised before at the disappearance of her food, but she was more astonished still when, instead of the plank, she beheld a baby. However, she was fond of children and had none of her own, so she made up her mind that she would keep it and take care of it. The baby grew and throve as no baby in that country had ever done, and in four days he was a man, and as tall and strong as any brave of the tribe.

'You have treated me well,' he said, 'and meat shall never fail to your house. But now I must go, for I have much work to do.'

Then he set out for his home.

It took him many days to get there, and when he saw his son sitting in his place his anger was kindled, and his heart was stirred to take vengeance upon him. So he went out quickly into the forest and shed tears, and each tear became a bird. 'Stay there till I want you,' said he; and he returned to the hut.

'I saw some pretty new birds, high up in a tree yonder,' he remarked. And the son answered: 'Show me the way and I will get them for dinner.'

The two went out together, and after walking for about half an hour they old man stopped. 'That is the tree,' he said. And the son began to climb it.

Now a strange thing happened. The higher the young man climbed the higher the birds seemed to be, and when he looked down the earth below appeared no bigger than a star. Sill he tried to go back, but he could not, and though he could not see the birds any longer he felt as if something were dragging him up and up.

He thought that he had been climbing that tree for days, and perhaps he had, for suddenly a beautiful country, yellow with fields of maize, stretched before him, and he gladly left the top of the tree and entered it. He walked through the maize without knowing where he was going, when he heard a sound of knocking, and saw two old blind women crushing their food between two stones. He crept up to them on tiptoe, and when one old woman passed her dinner to the other he held out his hand and took it and ate if for himself.

'How slow you are kneading that cake,' cried the other old woman at last.

'Why, I have given you your dinner, and what more do you want?' replied the second.

'You didn't; at least I never got it,' said the other.

'I certainly thought you took it from me; but here is some more.' And again the young man stretched out his hand; and the two old women fell to quarrelling afresh. But when it happened for the third time the old women suspected some trick, and one of them exclaimed:

'I am sure there is a man here; tell me, are you not my grandson?'

'Yes,' answered the young man, who wished to please her, 'and in return for your good dinner I will see if I cannot restore your sight; for I was taught in the art of healing by the best medicine man in the tribe.' And with that he left them, and wandered about till he found the herb which he wanted. Then he hastened back to the old women, and begging them to boil him some water, he threw the herb in. As soon as the pot began to sing he took off the lid, and sprinkled the eyes of the women, and sight came back to them once more.

There was no night in that country, so, instead of going to bed very early, as he would have done in his own hut, the young man took another walk. A splashing noise near by drew him down to a valley through which ran a large river, and up a waterfall some salmon were leaping. How their silver sides glistened in the light, and how he longed to catch some of the great fellows! But how could he do it? He had beheld no one except the old women, and it was not very likely that they would be able to help him. So with a sigh he turned away and went back to them, but, as he walked, a thought struck him. He pulled out one of his hairs which hung nearly to his waist, and it instantly became a strong line, nearly a mile in length.

'Weave me a net that I may catch some salmon,' said he. And they wove him the net he asked for, and for many weeks he watched by the river, only going back to the old women when he wanted a fish cooked.

At last, one day, when he was eating his dinner, the old woman who always spoke first, said to him:

'We have been very glad to see you, grandson, but now it is time that you went home.' And pushing aside a rock, he saw a deep hole, so deep that he could not see to the bottom. Then they dragged a basket out of the house, and tied a rope to it. 'Get in, and wrap this blanket round your head,' said they; 'and, whatever happens, don't uncover it till you get to the bottom.' Then they bade him farewell, and he curled himself up in the basket.

Down, down, down he went; would he ever stop going? But when the basket did stop, the young man forgot what he had been told, and put his head out to see what was the matter. In an instant the basket moved, but, to his horror, instead of going down, he felt himself being drawn upwards, and shortly after he beheld the faces of the old women.

'You will never see your wife and son if you will not do as you are bid,' said they. 'Now get in, and do not stir till you hear a crow calling.'

This time the young man was wiser, and though the basket often stopped, and strange creatures seemed to rest on him and to pluck at his blanket, he held it tight till he heard the crow calling. Then he flung off the blanket and sprang out, while the basket vanished in the sky.

He walked on quickly down the track that led to the hut, when, before him, he saw his wife with his little son on her back.

'Oh! there is father at last,' cried the boy; but the mother bade him cease from idle talking.

'But, mother, it is true; father is coming!' repeated the child. And, to satisfy him, the woman turned round and perceived her husband.

Oh, how glad they all were to be together again! And when the wind whistled through the forest, and the snow stood in great banks round the door, the father used to take the little boy on his knee and tell him how he caught salmon in the Land of the Sun.

[From the Journal of the Anthropological Institute.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

How the Stalos Were Tricked

'Mother, I have seen such a wonderful man,' said a little boy one day, as he entered a hut in Lapland, bearing in his arms the bundle of sticks he had been sent out to gather.

'Have you, my son; and what was he like?' asked the mother, as she took off the child's sheepskin coat and shook it on the doorstep.

'Well, I was tired of stooping for the sticks, and was leaning against a tree to rest, when I heard a noise of 'sh-'sh, among the dead leaves. I thought perhaps it was a wolf, so I stood very still. But soon there came past a tall man--oh! twice as tall as father--with a long red beard and a red tunic fastened with a silver girdle, from which hung a silver-handled knife. Behind him followed a great dog, which looked stronger than any wolf, or even a bear. But why are you so pale, mother?'

'It was the Stalo,' replied she, her voice trembling; 'Stalo the man-eater! You did well to hide, or you might never had come back. But, remember that, though he is so tall and strong, he is very stupid, and many a Lapp has escaped from his clutches by playing him some clever trick.'

Not long after the mother and son had held this talk, it began to be whispered in the forest that the children of an old man called Patto had vanished one by one, no one knew whither. The unhappy father searched the country for miles round without being able to find as much as a shoe or a handkerchief, to show him where they had passed, but at length a little boy came with news that he had seen the Stalo hiding behind a well, near which the children used to play. The boy had waited behind a clump of bushes to see what would happen, and by-and-by he noticed that the Stalo had laid a cunning trap in the path to the well, and that anybody who fell over it would roll into the water and drown there.

And, as he watched, Patto's youngest daughter ran gaily down the path, till her foot caught in the strings that were stretched across the steepest place. She slipped and fell, and in another instant had rolled into the water within reach of the Stalo.

As soon as Patto heard this tale his heart was filled with rage, and he vowed to have his revenge. So he straightway took an old fur coat from the hook where it hung, and putting it on went out into the forest. When he reached the path that led to the well he looked hastily round to be sure that no one was watching him, then laid himself down as if he had been caught in the snare and had rolled into the well, though he took care to keep his head out of the water.

Very soon he heard a 'sh-'sh of the leaves, and there was the Stalo pushing his way through the undergrowth to see what chance he had of a dinner. At the first glimpse of Patto's head in the well he laughed loudly, crying:

'Ha! ha! This time it is the old ass! I wonder how he will taste?' And drawing Patto out of the well, he flung him across his shoulders and carried him home. Then he tied a cord round him and hung him over the fire to roast, while he finished a box that he was making before the door of the hut, which he meant to hold Patto's flesh when it was cooked. In a very short time the box was so nearly done that it only wanted a little more chipping out with an axe; but this part of the work was easier accomplished indoors, and he called to one of his sons who were lounging inside to bring him the tool.

The young man looked everywhere, but he could not find the axe, for the very good reason that Patto had managed to pick it up and hide it in his clothes.

'Stupid fellow! what is the use of you?' grumbled his father angrily; and he bade first one and then another of his sons to fetch him the tool, but they had no better success than their brother.

'I must come myself, I suppose!' said Stalo, putting aside the box. But, meanwhile, Patto had slipped from the hook and concealed himself behind the door, so that, as Stalo stepped in, his prisoner raised the axe, and with one blow the ogre's head was rolling on the ground. His sons were so frightened at the sight that they all ran away.

And in this manner Patto avenged his dead children.

But though Stalo was dead, his three sons were still living, and not very far off either. They had gone to their mother, who was tending some reindeer on the pastures, and told her that by some magic, they knew not what, their father's head had rolled from his body, and they had been so afraid that something dreadful would happen to them that they had come to take refuge with her. The ogress said nothing. Long ago she had found out how stupid her sons were, so she just sent them out to milk the reindeer, while she returned to the other house to bury her husband's body.

Now, three days' journey from the hut on the pastures two brothers Sodno dwelt in a small cottage with their sister Lyma, who tended a large herd of reindeer while they were out hunting. Of late it had been whispered from one to another that the three young Stalos were to be seen on the pastures, but the Sodno brothers did not disturb themselves, the danger seemed too far away.

Unluckily, however, one day, when Lyma was left by herself in the hut, the three Stalos came down and carried her and the reindeer off to their own cottage. The country was very lonely, and perhaps no one would have known in which direction she had gone had not the girl managed to tie a ball of thread to the handle of a door at the back of the cottage and let it trail behind her. Of course the ball was not long enough to go all the way, but it lay on the edge of a snowy track which led straight to the Stalos' house.

When the brothers returned from their hunting they found both the hut and the sheds empty. Loudly they cried: 'Lyma! Lyma!' But no voice answered them; and they fell to searching all about, lest perchance their sister might have dropped some clue to guide them. At length their eyes dropped on the thread which lay on the snow, and they set out to follow it.

On and on they went, and when at length the thread stopped the brothers knew that another day's journey would bring them to the Stalos' dwelling. Of course they did not dare to approach it openly, for the Stalos had the strength of giants, and besides, there were three of them; so the two Sodnos climbed into a big bushy tree which overhung a well.

'Perhaps our sister may be sent to draw water here,' they said to each other.

But it was not till the moon had risen that the sister came, and as she let down her bucket into the well, the leaves seemed to whisper 'Lyma! Lyma!'

The girl started and looked up, but could see nothing, and in a moment the voice came again.

'Be careful--take no notice, fill your buckets, but listen carefully all the while, and we will tell you what to do so that you may escape yourself and set free the reindeer also.'

So Lyman bent over the well lower than before, and seemed busier than ever.

'You know,' said her brother, 'that when a Stalo finds that anything has been dropped into his food he will not eat a morsel, but throws it to his dogs. Now, after the pot has been hanging some time over the fire, and the broth is nearly cooked, just rake up the log of wood so that some of the ashes fly into the pot. The Stalo will soon notice this, and will call you to give all the food to the dogs; but, instead, you must bring it straight to us, as it is three days since we have eaten or drunk. That is all you need do for the present.'

Then Lyma took up her buckets and carried them into the house, and did as her brothers had told her. They were so hungry that they ate the food up greedily without speaking, but when there was nothing left in the pot, the eldest one said:

'Listen carefully to what I have to tell you. After the eldest Stalo has cooked and eaten a fresh supper, he will go to bed and sleep so soundly that not even a witch could wake him. You can hear him snoring a mile off, and then you must go into his room and pull off the iron mantle that covers him, and put it on the fire till it is almost red hot. When that is done, come to us and we will give you further directions.'

'I will obey you in everything, dear brothers,' answered Lyman; and so she did.

It had happened that on this very evening the Stalos had driven in some of the reindeer from the pasture, and had tied them up to the wall of the house so that they might be handy to kill for next day's dinner. The two Sodnos had seen what they were doing, and where the beasts were secured; so, at midnight, when all was still, they crept down from their tree and seized the reindeer by the horns which were locked together. The animals were frightened, and began to neigh and kick, as if they were fighting together, and the noise became so great that even the eldest Stalo was awakened by it, and that was a thing which had never occurred before. Raising himself in his bed, he called to his youngest brother to go out and separate the reindeer or they would certainly kill themselves.

The young Stalo did as he was bid, and left the house; but no sooner was he out of the door than he was stabbed to the heart by one of the Sodnos, and fell without a groan. Then they went back to worry the reindeer, and the noise became as great as ever, and a second time the Stalo awoke.

'The boy does not seem to be able to part the beasts,' he cried to his second brother; 'go and help him, or I shall never get to sleep.' So the brother went, and in an instant was struck dead as he left the house by the sword of the eldest Sodno. The Stalo waited in bed a little longer for things to get quiet, but as the clatter of the reindeer's horns was as bad as ever, he rose angrily from his bed muttering to himself:

'It is extraordinary that they cannot unlock themselves; but as no one else seems able to help them I suppose I must go and do it.'

Rubbing his eyes, he stood up on the floor and stretched his great arms and gave a yawn which shook the walls. The Sodnos heard it below, and posted themselves, one at the big door and one at the little door at the back, for they did not know what their enemy would come out at.

The Stalo put out his hand to take his iron mantle from the bed, where it always lay, but the mantle was no there. He wondered where it could be, and who could have moved it, and after searching through all the rooms, he found it hanging over the kitchen fire. But the first touch burnt him so badly that he let it alone, and went with nothing, except a stick in his hand, through the back door.

The young Sodno was standing ready for him, and as the Stalo passed the threshold struck him such a blow on the head that he rolled over with a crash and never stirred again. The two Sodnos did not trouble about him, but quickly stripped the younger Stalos of their clothes, in which they dressed themselves. Then they sat still till the dawn should break and they could find out from the Stalos' mother where the treasure was hidden.

With the first rays of the sun the young Sodno went upstairs and entered the old woman's room. She was already up and dressed, and sitting by the window knitting, and the young man crept in softly and crouched down on the floor, laying his head on her lap. For a while he kept silence, then he whispered gently:

'Tell me, dear mother, where did my eldest brother conceal his riches?'

'What a strange question! Surely you must know,' answered she.

'No, I have forgotten; my memory is so bad.'

'He dug a hole under the doorstep and placed it there,' said she. And there was another pause.

By-and-by the Sodno asked again:

'And where may my second brother's money be?'

'Don't you know that either?' cried the mother in surprise.

'Oh, yes; I did once. But since I fell upon my head I can remember nothing.'

'It is behind the oven,' answered she. And again was silence.

'Mother, dear mother,' said the young man at last, 'I am almost afraid to ask you; but I really have grown so stupid of late. Where did I hide my own money?'

But at this question the old woman flew into a passion, and vowed that if she could find a rod she would bring his memory back to him. Luckily, no rod was within her reach, and the Sodno managed, after a little, to coax her back into good humour, and at length she told him that the youngest Stalo had buried his treasure under the very place where she was sitting.

'Dear mother,' said Lyman, who had come in unseen, and was kneeling in front of the fire. 'Dear mother, do you know who it is you have been talking with?'

The old woman started, but answered quietly:

'It is a Sodno, I suppose?'

'You have guessed right,' replied Lyma.

The mother of the Stalos looked round for her iron cane, which she always used to kill her victims, but it was not there, for Lyma had put it in the fire.

'Where is my iron cane?' asked the old woman.

'There!' answered Lyma, pointing to the flames.

The old woman sprang forwards and seized it, but her clothes caught fire, and in a few minutes she was burned to ashes.

So the Sodno brothers found the treasure, and they carried it, and their sister and the reindeer, to their own home, and were the richest men in all Lapland.

[From Lapplandische Marchen, J. C. Poestion.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

Andras Baive

Once upon a time there lived in Lapland a man who was so very strong and swift of foot that nobody in his native town of Vadso could come near him if they were running races in the summer evenings. The people of Vadso were very proud of their champion, and thought that there was no one like him in the world, till, by-and-by, it came to their ears that there dwelt among the mountains a Lapp, Andras Baive by name, who was said by his friends to be even stronger and swifter than the bailiff. Of course not a creature in Vadso believed that, and declared that if it made the mountaineers happier to talk such nonsense, why, let them!

The winter was long and cold, and the thoughts of the villagers were much busier with wolves than with Andras Baive, when suddenly, on a frosty day, he made his appearance in the little town of Vadso. The bailiff was delighted at this chance of trying his strength, and at once went out to seek Andras and to coax him into giving proof of his vigour. As he walked along his eyes fell upon a big eight-oared boat that lay upon the shore, and his face shone with pleasure. 'That is the very thing,' laughed he, 'I will make him jump over that boat.' Andras was quite ready to accept the challenge, and they soon settled the terms of the wager. He who could jump over the boat without so much as touching it with his heel was to be the winner, and would get a large sum of money as the prize. So, followed by many of the villagers, the two men walked down to the sea.

An old fisherman was chosen to stand near the boat to watch fair play, and to hold the stakes, and Andras, as the stranger was told to jump first. Going back to the flag which had been stuck into the sand to mark the starting place, he ran forward, with his head well thrown back, and cleared the boat with a mighty bound. The lookers-on cheered him, and indeed he well deserve it; but they waited anxiously all the same to see what the bailiff would do. On he came, taller than Andras by several inches, but heavier of build. He too sprang high and well, but as he came down his heel just grazed the edge of the boat. Dead silence reigned amidst the townsfolk, but Andras only laughed and said carelessly:

'Just a little too short, bailiff; next time you must do better than that.'

The bailiff turned red with anger at his rival's scornful words, and answered quickly: 'Next time you will have something harder to do.' And turning his back on his friends, he went sulkily home. Andras, putting the money he had earned in his pocket, went home also.

The following spring Andras happened to be driving his reindeer along a great fiord to the west of Vadso. A boy who had met him hastened to tell the bailiff that his enemy was only a few miles off; and the bailiff, disguising himself as a Stalo, or ogre, called his son and his dog and rowed away across the fiord to the place where the boy had met Andras.

Now the mountaineer was lazily walking along the sands, thinking of the new hut that he was building with the money that he had won on the day of his lucky jump. He wandered on, his eyes fixed on the sands, so that he did not see the bailiff drive his boat behind a rock, while he changed himself into a heap of wreckage which floated in on the waves. A stumble over a stone recalled Andras to himself, and looking up he beheld the mass of wreckage. 'Dear me! I may find some use for that,' he said; and hastened down to the sea, waiting till he could lay hold of some stray rope which might float towards him. Suddenly--he could not have told why--a nameless fear seized upon him, and he fled away from the shore as if for his life. As he ran he heard the sound of a pipe, such as only ogres of the Stalo kind were wont to use; and there flashed into his mind what the bailiff had said when they jumped the boat: 'Next time you will have something harder to do.' So it was no wreckage after all that he had seen, but the bailiff himself.

It happened that in the long summer nights up in the mountain, where the sun never set, and it was very difficult to get to sleep, Andras had spent many hours in the study of magic, and this stood him in good stead now. The instant he heard the Stalo music he wished himself to become the feet of a reindeer, and in this guise he galloped like the wind for several miles. Then he stopped to take breath and find out what his enemy was doing. Nothing he could see, but to his ears the notes of a pipe floated over the plain, and ever, as he listened, it drew nearer.

A cold shiver shook Andras, and this time he wished himself the feet of a reindeer calf. For when a reindeer calf has reached the age at which he begins first to lose his hair he is so swift that neither beast nor bird can come near him. A reindeer calf is the swiftest of all things living. Yes; but not so swift as a Stalo, as Andras found out when he stopped to rest, and heard the pipe playing!

For a moment his heart sank, and he gave himself up for dead, till he remembered that, not far off, were two little lakes joined together by a short though very broad river. In the middle of the river lay a stone that was always covered by water, except in dry seasons, and as the winter rains had been very heavy, he felt quite sure that not even the top of it could be seen. The next minute, if anyone had been looking that way, he would have beheld a small reindeer calf speeding northwards, and by-and-by giving a great spring, which landed him in the midst of the stream. But, instead of sinking to the bottom, he paused a second to steady himself, then gave a second spring which landed him on the further shore. He next ran on to a little hill where he saw down and began to neigh loudly, so that the Stalo might know exactly where he was.

'Ah! There you are,' cried the Stalo, appearing on the opposite bank; 'for a moment I really thought I had lost you.'

'No such luck,' answered Andras, shaking his head sorrowfully. By this time he had taken his own shape again.

'Well, but I don't see how I am to get to you1' said the Stalo, looking up and down.

'Jump over, as I did,' answered Andras; 'it is quite easy.'

'But I could not jump this river; and I don't know how you did,' replied the Stalo.

'I should be ashamed to say such things,' exclaimed Andras. 'Do you mean to tell me that a jump, which the weakest Lapp boy would make nothing of, is beyond your strength?'

The Stalo grew red and angry when he heard these words, just as Andras meant him to do. He bounded into the air and fell straight into the river. Not that that would have mattered, for he was a good swimmer; but Andras drew out the bow and arrows which every Lapp carries, and took aim at him. His aim was good, but the Stalo sprang so high into the air that the arrow flew between his feet. A second shot, directed at his forehead, fared no better, for this time the Stalo jumped so high to the other side that the arrow passed between his finger and thumb. Then Andras aimed his third arrow a little over the Stalo's head, and when he sprang up, just an instant too soon, it hit him between the ribs.

Mortally wounded as he was, the Stalo was not yet dead, and managed to swim to the shore. Stretching himself on the sand, he said slowly to Andras:

'Promise that you will give me an honourable burial, and when my body is laid in the grave go in my boat across the fiord, and take whatever you find in my house which belongs to me. My dog you must kill, but spare my son, Andras.'

Then he died; and Andras sailed in his boat away across the fiord and found the dog and boy. The dog, a fierce, wicked-looking creature, he slew with one blow from his fist, for it is well known that if a Stalo's dog licks the blood that flows from his dead master's wounds the Stalo comes to life again. That is why no REAL Stalo is ever seen without his dog; but the bailiff, being only half a Stalo, had forgotten him, when he went to the little lakes in search of Andras. Next, Andras put all the gold and jewels which he found in the boat into his pockets, and bidding the boy get in, pushed it off from the shore, leaving the little craft to drift as it would, while he himself ran home. With the treasure he possessed he was able to buy a great herd of reindeer; and he soon married a rich wife, whose parents would not have him as a son-in-law when he was poor, and the two lived happy for ever after.

[From Lapplandische Mahrchen, J. C. Poestion.]

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

The White Slipper

Once upon a time there lived a king who had a daughter just fifteen years old. And what a daughter!

Even the mothers who had daughters of their own could not help allowing that the princess was much more beautiful and graceful than any of them; and, as for the fathers, if one of them ever beheld her by accident he could talk of nothing else for a whole day afterwards.

Of course the king, whose name was Balancin, was the complete slave of his little girl from the moment he lifted her from the arms of her dead mother; indeed, he did not seem to know that there was anyone else in the world to love.

Now Diamantina, for that was her name, did not reach her fifteenth birthday without proposals for marriage from every country under heaven; but be the suitor who he might, the king always said him nay.

Behind the palace a large garden stretched away to the foot of some hills, and more than one river flowed through. Hither the princess would come each evening towards sunset, attended by her ladies, and gather herself the flowers that were to adorn her rooms. She also brought with her a pair of scissors to cut off the dead blooms, and a basket to put them in, so that when the sun rose next morning he might see nothing unsightly. When she had finished this task she would take a walk through the town, so that the poor people might have a chance of speaking with her, and telling her of their troubles; and then she would seek out her father, and together they would consult over the best means of giving help to those who needed it.

But what has all this to do with the White Slipper? my readers will ask.

Have patience, and you will see.

Next to his daughter, Balancin loved hunting, and it was his custom to spend several mornings every week chasing the boars which abounded in the mountains a few miles from the city. One day, rushing downhill as fast as he could go, he put his foot into a hole and fell, rolling into a rocky pit of brambles. The king's wounds were not very severe, but his face and hands were cut and torn, while his feet were in a worse plight still, for, instead of proper hunting boots, he only wore sandals, to enable him to run more swiftly.

In a few days the king was as well as ever, and the signs of the scratches were almost gone; but one foot still remained very sore, where a thorn had pierced deeply and had festered. The best doctors in the kingdom treated it with all their skill; they bathed, and poulticed, and bandaged, but it was in vain. The foot only grew worse and worse, and became daily more swollen and painful.

After everyone had tried his own particular cure, and found it fail, there came news of a wonderful doctor in some distant land who had healed the most astonishing diseases. On inquiring, it was found that he never left the walls of his own city, and expected his patients to come to see him; but, by dint of offering a large sum of money, the king persuaded the famous physician to undertake the journey to his own court.

On his arrival the doctor was led at once into the king's presence, and made a careful examination of his foot.

'Alas! your majesty,' he said, when he had finished, 'the wound is beyond the power of man to heal; but though I cannot cure it, I can at least deaden the pain, and enable you to walk without so much suffering.'

'Oh, if you can only do that,' cried the king, 'I shall be grateful to you for life! Give your own orders; they shall be obeyed.'

'Then let your majesty bid the royal shoemaker make you a shoe of goat-skin very loose and comfortable, while I prepare a varnish to paint over it of which I alone have the secret!' So saying, the doctor bowed himself out, leaving the king more cheerful and hopeful than he had been for long.

The days passed very slowly with him during the making of the shoe and the preparation of the varnish, but on the eighth morning the physician appeared, bringing with him the shoe in a case. He drew it out to slip on the king's foot, and over the goat-skin he had rubbed a polish so white that the snow itself was not more dazzling.

'While you wear this shoe you will not feel the slightest pain,' said the doctor. 'For the balsam with which I have rubbed it inside and out has, besides its healing balm, the quality of strengthening the material it touches, so that, even were your majesty to live a thousand years, you would find the slipper just as fresh at the end of that time as it is now.'

The king was so eager to put it on that he hardly gave the physician time to finish. He snatched it from the case and thrust his foot into it, nearly weeping for joy when he found he could walk and run as easily as any beggar boy.

'What can I give you?' he cried, holding out both hands to the man who had worked this wonder. 'Stay with me, and I will heap on you riches greater than ever you dreamed of.' But the doctor said he would accept nothing more than had been agreed on, and must return at once to his own country, where many sick people were awaiting him. So king Balancin had to content himself with ordering the physician to be treated with royal honours, and desiring that an escort should attend him on his journey home.

For two years everything went smoothly at court, and to king Balancin and his daughter the sun no sooner rose than it seemed time for it to set. Now, the king's birthday fell in the month of June, and as the weather happened to be unusually fine, he told the princess to celebrate it in any way that pleased her. Diamantina was very fond of being on the river, and she was delighted at this chance of delighting her tastes. She would have a merry-making such as never had been seen before, and in the evening, when they were tired of sailing and rowing, there should be music and dancing, plays and fireworks. At the very end, before the people went home, every poor person should be given a loaf of bread and every girl who was to be married within the year a new dress.

The great day appeared to Diamantina to be long in coming, but, like other days, it came at last. Before the sun was fairly up in the heavens the princess, too full of excitement to stay in the palace, was walking about the streets so covered with precious stones that you had to shade your eyes before you could look at her. By-and-by a trumpet sounded, and she hurried home, only to appear again in a few moments walking by the side of her father down to the river. Here a splendid barge was waiting for them, and from it they watched all sorts of races and feats of swimming and diving. When these were over the barge proceeded up the river to the field where the dancing and concerts were to take place, and after the prizes had been given away to the winners, and the loaves and the dresses had been distributed by the princess, they bade farewell to their guests, and turned to step into the barge which was to carry them back to the palace.

Then a dreadful thing happened. As the king stepped on board the boat one of the sandals of the white slipper, which had got loose, caught in a nail that was sticking out, and caused the king to stumble. The pain was great, and unconsciously he turned and shook his foot, so that the sandals gave way, and in a moment the precious shoe was in the river.

It had all occurred so quickly that nobody had noticed the loss of the slipper, not even the princess, whom the king's cries speedily brought to his side.

'What is the matter, dear father?' asked she. But the king could not tell her; and only managed to gasp out: 'My shoe! my shoe!' While the sailors stood round staring, thinking that his majesty had suddenly gone mad.

Seeing her father's eyes fixed on the stream, Diamantina looked hastily in that direction. There, dancing on the current, was the point of something white, which became more and more distant the longer they watched it. The king could bear the sight no more, and, besides, now that the healing ointment in the shoe had been removed the pain in his foot was as bad as ever; he gave a sudden cry, staggered, and fell over the bulwarks into the water.

In an instant the river was covered with bobbing heads all swimming their fastest towards the king, who had been carried far down by the swift current. At length one swimmer, stronger than the rest, seized hold of his tunic, and drew him to the bank, where a thousand eager hands were ready to haul him out. He was carried, unconscious, to the side of his daughter, who had fainted with terror on seeing her father disappear below the surface, and together they were place in a coach and driven to the palace, where the best doctors in the city were awaiting their arrival.

In a few hours the princess was as well as ever; but the pain, the wetting, and the shock of the accident, all told severely on the king, and for three days he lay in a high fever. Meanwhile, his daughter, herself nearly mad with grief, gave orders that the white slipper should be sought for far and wide; and so it was, but even the cleverest divers could find no trace of it at the bottom of the river.

When it became clear that the slipper must have been carried out to sea by the current, Diamantina turned her thoughts elsewhere, and sent messengers in search of the doctor who had brought relief to her father, begging him to make another slipper as fast as possible, to supply the place of the one which was lost. But the messengers returned with the sad news that the doctor had died some weeks before, and, what was worse, his secret had died with him.

In his weakness this intelligence had such an effect on the king that the physicians feared he would become as ill as before. He could hardly be persuaded to touch food, and all night long he lay moaning, partly with pain, and partly over his own folly in not having begged the doctor to make him several dozens of white slippers, so that in case of accidents he might always have one to put on. However, by-and-by he saw that it was no use weeping and wailing, and commanded that they should search for his lost treasure more diligently than ever.

What a sight the river banks presented in those days! It seemed as if all the people in the country were gathered on them. But this second search was no more fortunate than the first, and at last the king issued a proclamation that whoever found the missing slipper should be made heir to the crown, and should marry the princess.

Now many daughters would have rebelled at being disposed of in the manner; and it must be admitted that Diamantina's heart sank when she heard what the king had done. Still, she loved her father so much that she desired his comfort more than anything else in the world, so she said nothing, and only bowed her head.

Of course the result of the proclamation was that the river banks became more crowded than before; for all the princess's suitors from distant lands flocked to the spot, each hoping that he might be the lucky finder. Many times a shining stone at the bottom of the stream was taken for the slipper itself, and every evening saw a band of dripping downcast men returning homewards. But one youth always lingered longer than the rest, and night would still see him engaged in the search, though his clothes stuck to his skin and his teeth chattered.

One day, when the king was lying on his bed racked with pain, he heard the noise of a scuffle going on in his antechamber, and rang a golden bell that stood by his side to summon one of his servants.

'Sire,' answered the attendant, when the king inquired what was the matter, 'the noise you heard was caused by a young man from the town, who has had the impudence to come here to ask if he may measure your majesty's foot, so as to make you another slipper in place of the lost one.'

'And what have you done to the youth?' said the king.

'The servants pushed him out of the palace, and, added a few blows to teach him not to be insolent,' replied the man.

'Then they did very ill,' answered the king, with a frown. 'He came here from kindness, and there was no reason to maltreat him.'

'Oh, my lord, he had the audacity to wish to touch your majesty's sacred person--he, a good-for-nothing boy, a mere shoemaker's apprentice, perhaps! And even if he could make shoes to perfection they would be no use without the soothing balsam.'

The king remained silent for a few moments, then he said:

'Never mind. Go and fetch the youth and bring him to me. I would gladly try any remedy that may relieve my pain.'

So, soon afterwards, the youth, who had not gone far from the palace, was caught and ushered into the king's presence.

He was tall and handsome and, though he professed to make shoes, his manners were good and modest, and he bowed low as he begged the king not only to allow him to take the measure of his foot, but also to suffer him to place a healing plaster over the wound.

Balancin was pleased with the young man's voice and appearance, and thought that he looked as if he knew what he was doing. So he stretched out his bad foot which the youth examined with great attention, and then gently laid on the plaster.

Very shortly the ointment began to soothe the sharp pain, and the king, whose confidence increased every moment, begged the young man to tell him his name.

'I have no parents; they died when I was six, sire,' replied the youth, modestly. 'Everyone in the town calls me Gilguerillo, [*1] because, when I was little, I went singing through the world in spite of my misfortunes. Luckily for me I was born to be happy.'

'And you really think you can cure me?' asked the king.

'Completely, my lord,' answered Gilguerillo.

'And how long do you think it will take?'

'It is not an easy task; but I will try to finish it in a fortnight,' replied the youth.

A fortnight seemed to the king a long time to make one slipper. But he only said:

'Do you need anything to help you?'

'Only a good horse, if your majesty will be kind enough to give me one,' answered Gilguerillo. And the reply was so unexpected that the courtiers could hardly restrain their smiles, while the king stared silently.

'You shall have the horse,' he said at last, 'and I shall expect you back in a fortnight. If you fulfil your promise you know your reward; if not, I will have you flogged for your impudence.'

Gilguerillo bowed, and turned to leave the palace, followed by the jeers and scoffs of everyone he met. But he paid no heed, for he had got what he wanted.

He waited in front of the gates till a magnificent horse was led up to him, and vaulting into the saddle with an ease which rather surprised the attendant, rode quickly out of the town amidst the jests of the assembled crowd, who had heard of his audacious proposal. And while he is on his way let us pause for a moment and tell who he is.

Both father and mother had died before the boy was six years old; and he had lived for many years with his uncle, whose life had been passed in the study of chemistry. He could leave no money to his nephew, as he had a son of his own; but he taught him all he knew, and at his dead Gilguerillo entered an office, where he worked for many hours daily. In his spare time, instead of playing with the other boys, he passed hours poring over books, and because he was timid and liked to be alone he was held by everyone to be a little mad. Therefore, when it became known that he had promised to cure the king's foot, and had ridden away--no one knew where--a roar of laughter and mockery rang through the town, and jeers and scoffing words were sent after him.

But if they had only known what were Gilguerillo's thoughts they would have thought him madder than ever.

The real truth was that, on the morning when the princess had walked through the streets before making holiday on the river Gilguerillo had seen her from his window, and had straightway fallen in love with her. Of course he felt quite hopeless. It was absurd to imagine that the apothecary's nephew could ever marry the king's daughter; so he did his best to forget her, and study harder than before, till the royal proclamation suddenly filled him with hope. When he was free he no longer spent the precious moments poring over books, but, like the rest, he might have been seen wandering along the banks of the river, or diving into the stream after something that lay glistening in the clear water, but which turned out to be a white pebble or a bit of glass.

And at the end he understood that it was not by the river that he would win the princess; and, turning to his books for comfort, he studied harder than ever.

There is an old proverb which says: 'Everything comes to him who knows how to wait.' It is not all men who know hot to wait, any more than it is all men who can learn by experience; but Gilguerillo was one of the few and instead of thinking his life wasted because he could not have the thing he wanted most, he tried to busy himself in other directions. So, one day, when he expected it least, his reward came to him.

He happened to be reading a book many hundreds of years old, which told of remedies for all kinds of diseases. Most of them, he knew, were merely invented by old women, who sought to prove themselves wiser than other people; but at length he came to something which caused him to sit up straight in his chair, and made his eyes brighten. This was the description of a balsam-- which would cure every kind of sore or wound--distilled from a plant only to be found in a country so distant that it would take a man on foot two months to go and come back again.

When I say that the book declared that the balsam could heal every sort of sore or wound, there were a few against which it was powerless, and it gave certain signs by which these might be known. This was the reason why Gilguerillo demanded to see the king's foot before he would undertake to cure it; and to obtain admittance he gave out that he was a shoemaker. However, the dreaded signs were absent, and his heart bounded at the thought that the princess was within his reach.

Perhaps she was; but a great deal had to be accomplished yet, and he had allowed himself a very short time in which to do it.

He spared his horse only so much as was needful, yet it took him six days to reach the spot where the plant grew. A thick wood lay in front of him, and, fastening the bridle tightly to a tree, he flung himself on his hands and knees and began to hunt for the treasure. Many time he fancied it was close to him, and many times it turned out to be something else; but, at last, when light was fading, and he had almost given up hope, he came upon a large bed of the plant, right under his feet! Trembling with joy, he picked every scrap he could see, and placed it in his wallet. Then, mounting his horse, he galloped quickly back towards the city.

It was night when he entered the gates, and the fifteen days allotted were not up till the next day. His eyes were heavy with sleep, and his body ached with the long strain, but, without pausing to rest, he kindled a fire on is hearth, and quickly filling a pot with water, threw in the herbs and left them to boil. After that he lay down and slept soundly.

The sun was shining when he awoke, and he jumped up and ran to the pot. The plant had disappeared and in its stead was a thick syrup, just as the book had said there would be. He lifted the syrup out with a spoon, and after spreading it in the sun till it was partly dry, poured it into a small flask of crystal. He next washed himself thoroughly, and dressed himself, in his best clothes, and putting the flask in his pocket, set out for the palace, and begged to see the king without delay.

Now Balancin, whose foot had been much less painful since Gilguerillo had wrapped it in the plaster, was counting the days to the young man's return; and when he was told Gilguerillo was there, ordered him to be admitted at once. As he entered, the king raised himself eagerly on his pillows, but his face fell when he saw no signs of a slipper.

'You have failed, then?' he said, throwing up his hands in despair.

'I hope not, your majesty; I think not,' answered the youth. And drawing the flask from his pocket, he poured two or three drops on the wound.

'Repeat this for three nights, and you will find yourself cured,' said he. And before the king had time to thank him he had bowed himself out.

Of course the news soon spread through the city, and men and women never tired of calling Gilguerillo an impostor, and prophesying that the end of the three days would see him in prison, if not on the scaffold. But Gilguerillo paid no heed to their hard words, and no more did the king, who took care that no hand but his own should put on the healing balsam.

On the fourth morning the king awoke and instantly stretched out his wounded foot that he might prove the truth or falsehood of Gilguerillo's remedy. The wound was certainly cured on that side, but how about the other? Yes, that was cured also; and not even a scar was left to show where it had been!

Was ever any king so happy as Balancin when he satisfied himself of this?

Lightly as a deer he jumped from his bed, and began to turn head over heels and to perform all sorts of antics, so as to make sure that his foot was in truth as well as it looked. And when he was quite tired he sent for his daughter, and bade the courtiers bring the lucky young man to his room.

'He is really young and handsome,' said the princess to herself, heaving a sigh of relief that it was not some dreadful old man who had healed her father; and while the king was announcing to his courtiers the wonderful cure that had been made, Diamantina was thinking that if Gilguerillo looked so well in his common dress, how much improved by the splendid garments of a king' son. However, she held her peace, and only watched with amusement when the courtiers, knowing there was no help for it, did homage and obeisance to the chemist's boy.

Then they brought to Gilguerillo a magnificent tunic of green velvet bordered with gold, and a cap with three white plumes stuck in it; and at the sight of him so arrayed, the princess fell in love with him in a moment. The wedding was fixed to take place in eight days, and at the ball afterwards nobody danced so long or so lightly as king Balancin.

[From Capullos de Rosa, por D. Enrique Ceballos Quintana.]

Footnotes

^1 Linnet.

The Orange Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

The Magic Book

There was once an old couple named Peder and Kirsten who had an only son called Hans. From the time he was a little boy he had been told that on his sixteenth birthday he must go out into the world and serve his apprenticeship. So, one fine summer morning, he started off to seek his fortune with nothing but the clothes he wore on his back.

For many hours he trudged on merrily, now and then stopping to drink from some clear spring or to pick some ripe fruit from a tree. The little wild creatures peeped at him from beneath the bushes, and he nodded and smiled, and wished them 'Good-morning.' After he had been walking for some time he met an old white-bearded man who was coming along the footpath. The boy would not step aside, and the man was determined not to do so either, so they ran against one another with a bump.

'It seems to me,' said the old fellow, 'that a boy should give way to an old man.'

'The path is for me as well as for you,' answered young Hans saucily, for he had never been taught politeness.

'Well, that's true enough,' answered the other mildly. 'And where are you going?'

'I am going into service,' said Hans.

'Then you can come and serve me,' replied the man.

Well, Hans could do that; but what would his wages be?

'Two pounds a year, and nothing to do but keep some rooms clean,' said the new-comer.

This seemed to Hans to be easy enough; so he agreed to enter the old man's service, and they set out together. On their way they crossed a deep valley and came to a mountain, where the man opened a trapdoor, and bidding Hans follow him, he crept in and began to go down a long flight of steps. When they got to the bottom Hans saw a large number of rooms lit by many lamps and full of beautiful things. While he was looking round the old man said to him:

'Now you know what you have to do. You must keep these rooms clean, and strew sand on the floor every day. Here is a table where you will always find food and drink, and there is your bed. You see there are a great many suits of clothes hanging on the wall, and you may wear any you please; but remember that you are never to open this locked door. If you do ill will befall you. Farewell, for I am going away again and cannot tell when I may return.

No sooner had the old man disappeared than Hans sat down to a good meal, and after that went to bed and slept until the morning. At first he could not remember what had happened to him, but by-and-by he jumped up and went into all the rooms, which he examined carefully.

'How foolish to bid me to put sand on the floors,' he thought, 'when there is nobody here by myself! I shall do nothing of the sort.' And so he shut the doors quickly, and only cleaned and set in order his own room. And after the first few days he felt that that was unnecessary too, because no one came there to see if the rooms where clean or not. At last he did no work at all, but just sat and wondered what was behind the locked door, till he determined to go and look for himself.

The key turned easily in the lock. Hans entered, half frightened at what he was doing, and the first thing he beheld was a heap of bones. That was not very cheerful; and he was just going out again when his eye fell on a shelf of books. Here was a good way of passing the time, he thought, for he was fond of reading, and he took one of the books from the shelf. It was all about magic, and told you how you could change yourself into anything in the world you liked. Could anything be more exciting or more useful? So he put it in his pocket, and ran quickly away out of the mountain by a little door which had been left open.

When he got home his parents asked him what he had been doing and where he had got the fine clothes he wore.

'Oh, I earned them myself,' answered he.

'You never earned them in this short time,' said his father. 'Be off with you; I won't keep you here. I will have no thieves in my house!'

'Well I only came to help you,' replied the boy sulkily. 'Now I'll be off, as you wish; but to-morrow morning when you rise you will see a great dog at the door. Do not drive it away, but take it to the castle and sell it to the duke, and they will give you ten dollars for it; only you must bring the strap you lead it with, back to the house.'

Sure enough the next day the dog was standing at the door waiting to be let in. The old man was rather afraid of getting into trouble, but his wife urged him to sell the dog as the boy had bidden him, so he took it up to the castle and sold it to the duke for ten dollars. But he did not forget to take off the strap with which he had led the animal, and to carry it home. When he got there old Kirsten met him at the door.

'Well, Peder, and have you sold the dog?' asked she.

'Yes, Kirsten; and I have brought back ten dollars, as the boy told us,' answered Peder.

'Ay! but that's fine!' said his wife. 'Now you see what one gets by doing as one is bid; if it had not been for me you would have driven the dog away again, and we should have lost the money. After all, I always know what is best.'

'Nonsense!' said her husband; 'women always think they know best. I should have sold the dog just the same whatever you had told me. Put the money away in a safe place, and don't talk so much.'

The next day Hans came again; but though everything had turned out as he had foretold, he found that his father was still not quite satisfied.

'Be off with you!' said he, 'you'll get us into trouble.'

'I haven't helped you enough yet,' replied the boy. 'To-morrow there will come a great fat cow, as big as the house. Take it to the king's palace and you'll get as much as a thousand dollars for it. Only you must unfasten the halter you lead it with and bring it back, and don't return by the high road, but through the forest.'

The next day, when the couple rose, they saw an enormous head looking in at their bedroom window, and behind it was a cow which was nearly as big as their hut. Kirsten was wild with joy to think of the money the cow would bring them.

'But how are you going to put the rope over her head?' asked she.

'Wait and you'll see, mother,' answered her husband. Then Peder took the ladder that led up to the hayloft and set it against the cow's neck, and he climbed up and slipped the rope over her head. When he had made sure that the noose was fast they started for the palace, and met the king himself walking in his grounds.

'I heard that the princess was going to be married,' said Peder, 'so I've brought your majesty a cow which is bigger than any cow that was ever seen. Will your majesty deign to buy it?'

The king had, in truth, never seen so large a beast, and he willingly paid the thousand dollars, which was the price demanded; but Peder remembered to take off the halter before he left. After he was gone the king sent for the butcher and told him to kill the animal for the wedding feast. The butcher got ready his pole-axe; but just as he was going to strike, the cow changed itself into a dove and flew away, and the butcher stood staring after it as if he were turned to stone. However, as the dove could not be found, he was obliged to tell the king what had happened, and the king in his turn despatched messengers to capture the old man and bring him back. But Peder was safe in the woods, and could not be found. When at last he felt the danger was over, and he might go home, Kirsten nearly fainted with joy at the sight of all the money he brought with him.

'Now that we are rich people we must build a bigger house,' cried she; and was vexed to find that Peder only shook his head and said: 'No; if they did that people would talk, and say they had got their wealth by ill-doing.'

A few mornings later Hans came again.

'Be off before you get us into trouble,' said his father. 'So far the money has come right enough, but I don't trust it.'

'Don't worry over that, father,' said Hans. 'To-morrow you will find a horse outside by the gate. Ride it to market and you will get a thousand dollars for it. Only don't forget to loosen the bridle when you sell it.'

Well, in the morning there was the horse; Kirsten had never seen so find an animal. 'Take care it doesn't hurt you, Peder,' said she.

'Nonsense, wife,' answered he crossly. 'When I was a lad I lived with horses, and could ride anything for twenty miles round.' But that was not quite the truth, for he had never mounted a horse in his life.

Still, the animal was quiet enough, so Peder got safely to market on its back. There he met a man who offered nine hundred and ninety-nine dollars for it, but Peder would take nothing less than a thousand. At last there came an old, grey-bearded man who looked at the horse and agreed to buy it; but the moment he touched it the horse began to kick and plunge. 'I must take the bridle off,' said Peder. 'It is not to be sold with the animal as is usually the case.'

'I'll give you a hundred dollars for the bridle,' said the old man, taking out his purse.

'No, I can't sell it,' replied Hans's father.

'Five hundred dollars!'

'No.'

'A thousand!'

At this splendid offer Peder's prudence gave way; it was a shame to let so much money go. So he agreed to accept it. But he could hardly hold the horse, it became so unmanageable. So he gave the animal in charge to the old man, and went home with his two thousand dollars.

Kirsten, of course, was delighted at this new piece of good fortune, and insisted that the new house should be built and land bought. This time Peder consented, and soon they had quite a fine farm.

Meanwhile the old man rode off on his new purchase, and when he came to a smithy he asked the smith to forge shoes for the horse. The smith proposed that they should first have a drink together, and the horse was tied up by the spring whilst they went indoors. The day was hot, and both men were thirsty, and, besides, they had much to say; and so the hours slipped by and found them still talking. Then the servant girl came out to fetch a pail of water, and, being a kind-hearted lass, she gave some to the horse to drink. What was her surprise when the animal said to her: 'Take off my bridle and you will save my life.'

'I dare not,' said she; 'your master will be so angry.'

'He cannot hurt you,' answered the horse, 'and you will save my life.'

At that she took off the bridle; but nearly fainted with astonishment when the horse turned into a dove and flew away just as the old man came out of the house. Directly he saw what had happened he changed himself into a hawk and flew after the dove. Over the woods and fields they went, and at length they reached a king's palace surrounded by beautiful gardens. The princess was walking with her attendants in the rose garden when the dove turned itself into a gold ring and fell at her feet.

'Why, here is a ring!' she cried, 'where could it have come from?' And picking it up she put it on her finger. As she did so the hill-man lost his power over Hans--for of course you understand that it was he who had been the dog, the cow, the horse and the dove.

'Well, that is really strange,' said the princess. 'It fits me as though it had been made for me!'

Just at that moment up came the king.

'Look at what I have found!' cried his daughter.

'Well, that is not worth much, my dear,' said he. 'Besides, you have rings enough, I should think.'

'Never mind, I like it,' replied the princess.

But as soon as she was alone, to her amazement, the ring suddenly left her finger and became a man. You can imagine how frightened she was, as, indeed, anybody would have been; but in an instant the man became a ring again, and then turned back to a man, and so it went on for some time until she began to get used to these sudden changes.

'I am sorry I frightened you,' said Hans, when he thought he could safely speak to the princess without making her scream. 'I took refuge with you because the old hill-man, whom I have offended, was trying to kill me, and here I am safe.'

'You had better stay here then,' said the princess. So Hans stayed, and he and she became good friends; though, of course, he only became a man when no one else was present.

This was all very well; but, one day, as they were talking together, the king happened to enter the room, and although Hans quickly changed himself into a ring again it was too late.

The king was terribly angry.

'So this is why you have refused to marry all the kings and princes who have sought your hand?' he cried.

And, without waiting for her to speak, he commanded that his daughter should be walled up in the summer-house and starved to death with her lover.

That evening the poor princess, still wearing her ring, was put into the summer-house with enough food to last for three days, and the door was bricked up. But at the end of a week or two the king thought it was time to give her a grand funeral, in spite of her bad behaviour, and he had the summer-house opened. He could hardly believe his eyes when he found that the princess was not there, nor Hans either. Instead, there lay at his feet a large hole, big enough for two people to pass through.

Now what had happened was this.

When the princess and Hans had given up hope, and cast themselves down on the ground to die, they fell down this hole, and right through the earth as well, and at last they tumbled into a castle built of pure gold at the other side of the world, and there they lived happily. But of this, of course, the king knew nothing.

'Will anyone go down and see where the passage leads to?' he asked, turning to his guards and courtiers. 'I will reward splendidly the man who is brave enough to explore it.'

For a long time nobody answered. The hole was dark and deep, and if it had a bottom no one could see it. At length a soldier, who was a careless sort of fellow, offered himself for the service, and cautiously lowered himself into the darkness. But in a moment he, too, fell down, down, down. Was he going to fall for ever, he wondered! Oh, how thankful he was in the end to reach the castle, and to meet the princess and Hans, looking quite well and not at all as if they had been starved. They began to talk, and the soldier told them that the king was very sorry for the way he had treated his daughter, and wished day and night that he could have her back again.

Then they all took ship and sailed home, and when they came to the princess's country, Hans disguised himself as the sovereign of a neighbouring kingdom, and went up to the palace alone. He was given a hearty welcome by the king, who prided himself on his hospitality, and a banquet was commanded in his honour. That evening, whilst they sat drinking their wine, Hans said to the king:

'I have heard the fame of your majesty's wisdom, and I have travelled from far to ask your counsel. A man in my country has buried his daughter alive because she loved a youth who was born a peasant. How shall I punish this unnatural father, for it is left to me to give judgment?'

The king, who was still truly grieved for his daughter's loss, answered quickly:

'Burn him alive, and strew his ashes all over the kingdom.'

Hans looked at him steadily for a moment, and then threw off his disguise.

'You are the man,' said he; 'and I am he who loved your daughter, and became a gold ring on her finger. She is safe, and waiting not far from here; but you have pronounced judgment on yourself.'

Then the king fell on his knees and begged for mercy; and as he had in other respects been a good father, they forgave him. The wedding of Hans and the princess was celebrated with great festivities which lasted a month. As for the hill-man he intended to be present; but whilst he was walking along a street which led to the palace a loose stone fell on his head and killed him. So Hans and the princess lived in peace and happiness all their days, and when the old king died they reigned instead of him.

[From AEventyr fra Zylland samlede og optegnede af Tang Kristensen. Translated from the Danish by Mrs. Skavgaard-Pedersen.]

 

    


===== BOOK: osgp.txt =====


    
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE

  

OF

  

THE GREAT PYRAMID

  

BY

  

C. STANILAND WAKE

  

AUTHOR OF "THE EVOLUTION OF MORALITY," &c., &c.

  

LONDON:

  

REEVES & TURNER, 196, STRAND, W.C.

  

[1882]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, July, 2007. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to January 1st, 1923. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact in all copies.

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: The GREAT PYRAMID of Gizeh, from the sand-hills above Mena House Hotel; showing the terminus of the carriage-drive which connects Cairo with the Pyramids.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Front End Papers: Passage System of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh

Click to enlarge
Back End Papers: Chamber System of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iv]

  

PREFACE

The subject treated of in the following pages has during the last few years attracted much attention, thanks to the influence of Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth's important work, "Life and Work at the Great Pyramid." It was to test, by the light of history, the conclusion accepted by that writer as to the inspired origin of the Great Pyramid that I entered upon a consideration of the subject. That such an origin was required by the facts, I did not suppose, but the conviction was forced on me that the structure had much more importance, viewed as a scientific and religious monument, than was generally conceded. I found nothing, however, to show that either its design or its construction necessitated Divine intervention. I was led to the conclusion, nevertheless, that the builders of the Great Pyramid intended to perpetuate certain scientific ideas, and, moreover, that they had a religious motive in its erection. There is little doubt, indeed, that it is a monument of Sabaism--the worship of the heavenly host, which had a wide extension in the ancient world, and with which "Serpent worship" was intimately connected. The importance of the Great Pyramid as a religico-scientific structure is still further increased if, as is not improbable, it was intended to mark the substitution of an astronomy based on the passage of the sun through the twelve signs of the Zodiac for the lunar astronomy which preceded it. My endeavour has been

[p. v]

to state fairly the historical conditions of the problem considered, and to point out the direction in which its solution must be sought. With the question as to the original source from which the wisdom of the Ancients, of which the Great Pyramid is so wonderful a monument, was derived, these pages are not concerned.

The Serpent, enclosed in a pyramid, given on the cover, is taken from a gem figured in Matter's "Histoire Critique du Gnosticism," planche II B, figure 2. It is there said to be the Solar Chnouphis or Agathodemon--Christos, with the seven sons of Sophia (Wisdom), the seven planetary genii.

The substance of this little work was read as a Paper before the Hull Literary Club on the 13th March, 1882.

Click to enlarge
The Sphinx, and the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vi]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

          
   CHAPTER I

        

     
      THE ASTRONOMICAL   THEORY

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      THE PYRAMIDS OF   GHIZEH

       <page 1>

     
      THEORY OF   INSPIRED ORIGIN OF GREAT PYRAMID

       <page 2>

     
      DATE OF   ERECTION

       <page 6>

     
      ASTRONOMICAL   EXPLANATION OF STRUCTURE

       <page 7>

     
      ASTROLOGICAL   THEORY OF ORIGIN

       <page 13>

     
      PRIMARY OBJECT   RELIGIOUS

       <page 18>

     
      
   CHAPTER II

        

     
      EARLY EGYPTIAN   CIVILIZATION

        

     
      SUPPOSED   INABILITY OF ANCIENT PEOPLES TO DESIGN THE GREAT PYRAMID

       <page 20>

     
      EARLIEST   EGYPTIAN PYRAMIDS

       <page 24>

     
      DIFFERENCES OF   INTERNAL CONSTRUCTION

       <page 25>

     
      EGYPTIAN   CIVILIZATION UNDER FOURTH DYNASTY

       <page 27>

     
      EGYPTIAN   CIVILIZATION AT FOUNDATION OF MONARCHY

       <page 32>

     
      CIVILIZATION OF   THE EARLIER EGYPTIANS

       <page 35>

     
      [p. vii]

        

     
      
   CHAPTER III

        

     
      THE TOMB THEORY

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      TESTIMONY OF   GREEK WRITERS

       <page 38>

     
      COMPARISON WITH   FACTS

       <page 42>

     
      THE TOMB OF   CHEOPS

       <page 45>

     
      USE OF PYRAMIDS   AS TOMBS

       <page 48>

     
      ABSENCE OF   RELICS EXPLAINED

       <page 50>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV

        

     
      THE RELIGIOUS THEORY

        

     
      THE GREAT   PYRAMID CONSIDERED AS A TEMPLE

       <page 54>

     
      THE SABAeANS AND   THE PYRAMIDS

       <page 56>

     
      SETH AND OSIRIS

       <page 59>

     
      SETH THE GOD OF   THE SEMITES AND THE HYKSOS

       <page 60>

     
      ASSOCIATION OF   SETH WITH THE GREAT PYRAMID

       <page 66>

     
      
   CHAPTER V

        

     
      SETH AND SERPENT   WORSHIP

        

     
      THE GOD OF   WISDOM

       <page 70>

     
      IDEAS CONNECTED   WITH THE SERPENT

       <page 72>

     
      SETH IDENTIFIED   WITH TYPHON

       <page 77>

     
      ASTRONOMICAL   ASSOCIATIONS OF THE SERPENT

       <page 81>

     
      THE GREAT   PYRAMID AND THE DELUGE

       <page 83>

     
      AGE OF THE   GREAT PYRAMID

       <page 85>

     
      THE PYRAMID AND   THE CONSTELLATIONS

       <page 87>

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      
   NOTE.

        

     
      ON THE COFFER   IN THE "KING'S CHAMBER"

       <page 92>

     
      
   APPENDIX I.

        

     
      DR. SPRENGER ON   THE CONNECTION OF SETH AND HERMES WITH THE PYRAMIDS OF GHIZEH

       <page 94>

     
      
   APPENDIX II.

        

     
      MASOUDI'S   ACCOUNT OF THE ERECTION, ETC., OF THE GREAT PYRAMID

       <page 98>

     
   
Click to enlarge
Human skulls unearthed during the excavations of the Temple of the Second Pyramid of Gizeh.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE

  

ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE

  

OF

  

THE GREAT PYRAMID

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE ASTRONOMICAL THEORY

THE GREEKS of the time of Alexander the Great were so impressed with the magnitude or splendour of certain edifices, that they spoke of them as the seven wonders of the world. Among these, the first place was given to the Pyramids of Egypt, and pre-eminently to those of Ghizeh, which are situate a few miles from Cairo, and in the neighbourhood of ancient Memphis. The Pyramids of Ghizeh form a group of nine, consisting of three large ones, known as the Pyramid of Cheops, or the Great Pyramid; that of Cephren; and that of Mycerinus, which is inferior in size to either of the others. The six other pyramids of the Ghizeh group are much smaller,

[p. 2]

and arc supposed to be the tombs of female relatives of the kings who constructed the larger ones. From the term "Great" applied to the largest pyramid, it might be thought that it far exceeds in size any of the others. As a fact, however, the Pyramid of Cephren is not very much smaller than that of Cheops, which was about 756 feet square at the base and 480 feet high, as against 707 feet 9 inches the extreme length of the sides, and 454 the height, of the Second Pyramid. Moreover, the construction of the two pyramids was, according to Col. Vyse, carried on upon the same principles. This is true more especially of the general design and external characters of the buildings, which in their internal features, however, differ considerably. The position of the chambers, and the inclination of the passages of the Great Pyramid are exceptional, and, judging from these peculiarities and from certain scientific facts supposed to be embodied in it, several modern writers have affirmed that the design for the Great Pyramid must have been derived from an inspired source. The originator of this theory was John Taylor who in 1859, published a book on the subject [**]

[p. 3]

and as in recent years it has attracted considerable attention, chiefly through its adoption by the author of "Life and Work at the Great Pyramid," Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth, the Astronomer Royal of Scotland, and as the scientific facts on which it is based are admittedly true, it is necessary to consider the theory.

In the first place, the Great Pyramid is said to embody in its form and proportions certain facts as to the size and shape of the earth. Thus, John Taylor says that the builders of the Great Pyramid "imagined the earth to be a sphere, and as they knew that the radius of a circle must bear a certain proportion to its circumference, they built a four-sided pyramid of such a height in proportion to its base that its perpendicular would be the radius of a sphere equal to the perimeter of the base." This shape is supposed to have reference to an important astronomical fact, seeing that "the vertical height of the Great Pyramid multiplied by 10 to the 9th power (109) tells the mean distance of the sun from the earth--that is, one thousand million times the pyramid's height, or 91,840,000 miles." [**] Moreover,

[p. 4]

the Great Pyramid is thought to supply a standard of linear measure, based on the length of the polar axis of the earth. Assuming this length to be 500,500,000 of our inches, the 500 millionth of that axis (omitting fractions) will be one inch. Of these inches, 25 or 25.025 of our inches would form a cubit or longer standard, the ten millionth part of the semi-axis of the globe in length, which is the measure of the sacred cubit of the ancient Hebrews. This cubit of 25 earth inches is contained in each side of the Great Pyramid as many times as there are days in the year, and the inch itself "is contained separately and independently in the entire perimeter of the Great Pyramid's base just one hundred times for each day of the year." The inch is also said to be the "representative of a year in the reckoning of the passage floor lines as charts of history, also in the diagonals of the pyramid's base taken as a measure of the precessional cycle."

The Great Pyramid is found, moreover, to furnish an important weight and capacity measure

[p. 5]

having relation to the mean density or specific gravity of the earth. These earth-measures are said to be reproduced in the Coffer preserved in the large or so-called King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid, the internal capacity of which vessel is just four times the measure of an English quarter of wheat. The Great Pyramid was thus, according to the holders of the inspiration theory, originally designed as a perfect and complete metrological monument. This conclusion is thought to be supported by the great astronomical knowledge possessed by the builders, who were aware, not only of the shape and rotatory motion of the earth, but also of its distance from the sun. They were able, further, to do what was found so difficult up to a comparatively recent date--to fix with precision the position of the four cardinal points, as is shewn by the fact that the pyramid stands due North, South, East, and West.

The Great Pyramid is thus seen to be an important astronomical monument, and it is no less remarkable in relation to certain chronological facts. It is supposed to perpetuate the great cycle founded on the precession of the equinoxes. This siderial year is equal to 25,868

[p. 6]

of our years, and the two diagonals of the pyramid's base taken together are said to measure just the same number of inches. It is thought, moreover, that by means of this cycle the date of the erection of the pyramid can be ascertained. Assuming that the long narrow downward passage leading from the entrance was directed towards the pole star of the pyramid builders, astronomers have shown that in the year 2,170 B.C. the passage pointed to Alpha Draconis, the then pole star, at its lower culmination, at the same time that the Pleiades, particularly Alcyone, the centre of the group, were on the same meridian above. This relative position of Alpha Draconis and Alcyone being an extraordinary one, as it could not occur again for a whole siderial year, it is thought to mark the date of the building of the Great Pyramid. [**] It should be mentioned, however, that the date named is not the only possible one. Mr. Richard A. Proctor the astronomer, after stating that the Pole-star was in the required position about 3,350 B.C., as well as in 2,170 B.C., says "either of

[p. 7]

these would correspond with the position of the descending passage in the Great Pyramid; but Egyptologists tell us there can absolutely be no doubt that the later epoch is far too late." He adds: If then we regard the slant passage as intended to bear on the Pole-star at its sub-polar passage, we get the date of the pyramid assigned as about 3,350 years B.C., with a probable limit of error of not more than 200 years either way, and perhaps of only fifty years." [**]

The testimony of Mr. Proctor is important as he has recently performed very valuable work in pointing out the true astronomical meaning of the passages and galleries which distinguish the internal structure of the Great Pyramid from that of other pyramids. We may now accept the view that the former has been erected with an astronomical purpose, although its measurements may not have all the significance sometimes assigned to them.

Mr. Proctor, while admitting the existence of many of the curious coincidences on which the theory of the inspired origin of the Great

[p. 8]

[paragraph continues] Pyramid is based, gives an entirely different explanation of them. He declares, indeed, "that they are mere coincidences, and that they would still remain if the pyramid had no existence." The fact that they exist, and are in themselves so singular, shows simply how little value there is in the argument from mere coincidence. [**] In support of this opinion, Mr. Proctor refers to "the  of relations, independent of the pyramid, which have turned up while Pyramidalists have been endeavouring to connect the pyramid with the solar system." "These coincidences," he says, "are altogether more curious than any coincidence between the Pyramid and astronomical numbers: the former are as close and remarkable as they are real; the latter, which are only imaginary, have only been established by the process which schoolboys call 'fudging,' and now new measures have left the work to be done all over again." [*+] The new measures here referred to show that the base of the pyramid is

[p. 9]

several feet shorter than had been supposed, and this will necessitate a change in the pyramid inch and in the length of the cubit on which the astronomical relations of the Great Pyramid were based.

Mr. Proctor's own explanation of the peculiar features which distinguish the internal construction of the Great Pyramid from that of the other pyramids is very ingenious, and probably conclusive: He says, we see "in all the Egyptian pyramids the evidence of an astronomical plan; and in the Great Pyramid we find evidence that such a plan was carried out with great skill, and with an attention to points of detail which shows that, for some reason or other, the edifice was required to be most carefully built in a special astronomical position." Moreover, to obtain such accuracy, it was made to serve, while being built, "the purpose of an astronomical observatory." To this end, "the builders of the Great Pyramid used the passages which they made within it to determine the proper position of each part of it, up to the so-called King's Chamber, at least, and probably higher." The slant descending passage was directed to the position of the Pole-star when it was due north and at

[p. 10]

its lowest, for the purpose of obtaining true orientation. As layer after layer of the building was placed, this passage was carried towards the north until it reached the northern face of the Pyramid. Here it was compelled to terminate and another mode of observing the Pole-star had to be used. This was effected by making a fresh passage "in such a direction as to contain the rays from the Pole-star after reflection at a. horizontal surface, such as that of still water." The reflecting surface required was obtained by plugging the descending passage and pouring in water so as to partially fill the angle thus formed, from which the rays would be reflected up the ascending passage. Mr. Proctor remarks that thus far the pyramid builders had "been working with manifest reference to the meridional plane, just as an astronomer of our own time would; and it looks very much, even from what we have already seen, as though they had considered this plane for the same reason that the modern astronomer considers it--viz., because this is the plane in which all the heavenly bodies culminate, or attain the middle and highest point of their passage from the eastern to the western horizon." Mr. Proctor adds that at the point where the

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] Grand Gallery commences all doubt ceases. "The astronomical nature of the builder's purpose becomes here as clear and certain as already the astronomical nature of their methods had been. For from here upwards the small ascending passage is changed to one of great height, so as to command a long vertical space of the heavens, precisely as a modern astronomer sets his transit circle to sweep the vertical meridian." This Grand Gallery shows that it was intended for astronomical observations by its double character, Its walls, taken as wholes, are aslant, but every part of the them is absolutely vertical, as would be required by an astronomer if his observations were to be of value. To facilitate these observations, long slant stone ramps or banks are placed at each side of the gallery the whole of its length, with holes in them at equal distances for the purpose of receiving movable seats. Regarded as a kind of architectural transit instrument, the Great Gallery would, says Mr. Proctor, "have to be carried to a certain height, and there open out on the level to which the pyramid had then attained, the sides and top being carried up until the southernmost end of the gallery was completed." At that end commences the so-called

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Antechamber, and the floor of this chamber and of the King's Chamber, then not walled in, would serve to station a time indicator and the watchers "appointed to mark the passage of time in some way, and to note also the instants when the observer or observers in the Great Gallery signalled the beginning or end of transit across the gallery's field of view." Mr. Proctor concludes an interesting chapter on this subject by saying, "if a telescopist of our time will try to plan out a method of determining the declinations and right ascensions of stars (say for the purpose of forming a trustworthy star chart or catalogue), without using a telescope, by using such an observing place as the Great Gallery, he will see how much might be done, so far as equatorial and zodiacal stars were concerned; and they are altogether the most important, even now, and were still more so in the days when the stars in their courses were supposed to rule the fates of men and nations." In a further article, Mr. Proctor gives a view of the Pyramid observatory, showing the object end of the great observing tube. In that article he says, "the astronomers who observed from the Great Pyramid doubtless made many more observations off the meridian

[p. 13]

than on it. . . . They no doubt often used astrolabes and similar instruments to determine the position of stars, planets, comets, etc., when off the meridian, with reference to stars whose places were already determined by the use of their great meridional instrument. But all those observations were regulated by, and derived their value from, the work done in the Great Ascending Gallery. The modern astronomer sees that this was the only way in which exact observations of the heavenly bodies all over the star-sphere could possibly have been made; and seeing the extreme care, the most marvellous pains, which the astronomers of the Great Pyramid took to secure good meridional work, the astronomer recognizes in them fellow workers."

Mr. Proctor very properly assumes, however, that the builder of the Great Pyramid had something more than a scientific purpose in its erection, something beyond even its use as a tomb. That purpose is to be gathered from the fact that "the astronomy of the time of Cheops was essentially astrology, and astrology a most important part of religion." The Great Pyramid was erected as a place from which the heavenly

[p. 14]

bodies could be observed, and their movements were observed and studied that Cheops might know what was to happen, and learn the times and seasons which were likely to be fortunate or unfortunate for him or his race. "As an astrological edifice," says Mr. Proctor, "a gigantic horoscope for him and for him only, we can understand its purport, much though we may marvel at the vast expenditure of care, labour, and treasure at which it was erected. Granted full faith in astrology (and we know there was such faith), it was worth while to build even such a structure as the Great Pyramid; just as, granted the ideas of Egyptians about burial, we can understand the erection of so mighty a mass, and all save its special astronomical character. Of no other theory, I venture to say, than that which combines these two strange but most marked characteristics of the Egyptian mind, can this be said."

Mr. Proctor gives a figure, taken from Raphael's "Astrology," representing the ordinary horoscope and its relations to "a horizontal, carefully-oriented square plane surface, such as the top of the pyramid was, with just such direction lines as would naturally be used on such a platform";

[p. 15]

and, apart from the reasons assigned by him for the differences in size [**] between the Pyramids of Cheops, and those of Cephren, his brother, and Mycerinus and Asychis, his son and grandson, Mr. Proctor has conclusively established the astrological purpose of the Great Pyramid. Elsewhere, he says, "remembering the mysterious influence which astrologers ascribed to special numbers, figures, positions, and so forth, the care with which the Great Pyramid was so proportioned as to indicate particular astronomical and mathematical relations is at once explained. The four sides of the square base were carefully placed with reference to the cardinal points, precisely like the four sides of the ordinary square scheme of nativity. The eastern side faced the Ascendant, the southern faced the Mid-heaven, the western faced the Descendant, and the northern faced the Imum Coeli. Again, we can understand that the architects would have made a circuit of the base correspond in length with the number of days in the year--a relation which, according to Prof. P. Smyth, is fulfilled in this manner, that the four sides contain one hundred times as many

[p. 16]

pyramid inches as there are days in the year. The pyramid inch again is itself mystically connected with astronomical relations, for its length is equal to the five hundred millionth part of the earth's diameter, to a degree of exactness corresponding well with what we might expect Chaldean astronomers to attain. . . . It is not [indeed] at all certain that the sacred cubit bore any reference to the earth's dimensions, but this seems tolerably well made out--that the sacred cubit was about 25 inches in length, and that the circuit of the pyramid's base contained a hundred inches for every day of the year. Relations such as these are precisely what we might expect to find in buildings having an astrological significance. Similarly, it would correspond well with the mysticism of astrology that the pyramid should be so proportioned as to make the height be the radius of a circle whose circumference would equal the circuit of the pyramid's base. Again, that long slant tunnel, leading downwards from the pyramid's northern face, would at once find a meaning in this astrological theory. The slant tunnel pointed to the pole-star of Cheops's time, when due north below the true pole of the heavens. This circumstance

[p. 17]

had no observational utility. It could afford no indication of time, because a pole-star moves very slowly, and the pole-star of Cheops's day must have been in view through that tunnel for more than an hour at a time. But, apart from the mystical significance which an astrologer would attribute to such a relation, it may be shown that this slant tunnel is precisely what the astrologer would require in order to get the horoscope correctly." [**] Mr. Proctor supports his view as to the astrological object of the pyramid by reference to the fact that in the account given by Ebn Abd Al Hokm of the contents of the Pyramids of Ghizeh, those assigned to the East or Great Pyramid "relate entirely to astrology and associated mysteries." [*+] The Arab writer, or rather the earlier historian, Masoudi, whose account he repeats, says, "in the eastern pyramid were inscribed the heavenly spheres, and figures representing the stars and planets in the forms in which they were worshipped. The king also deposited the instruments and the thuribula with which his forefathers had sacrificed to the stars,

[p. 18]

and their circles; together with the history and chronicles of time past, of that which is to come, and of every future event which would take place in Egypt." [**]

The connection of astrology with the Great Pyramid is thus confirmed by ancient testimony, but this does not support the notion that the chief object of its erection was astrological. An early Arab writer, Jafer Ben Mohammed Balkhi, who was himself an astrologer, says that the pyramids were built for refuge against an approaching destruction of every created being, by submersion or by fire, which was foreseen by wise men previous to the flood. [*+] The founder of the Great Pyramid had undoubtedly a more permanent object in its erection than its use as a horoscope for the benefit of himself and his family. Mr. Proctor speaks of the religious observances associated with astrological observations. These, being made by priests, were religious in character, and in all probability the priests who made them "professed a religion differing little from pure Sabaism, or the worship

[p. 19]

of the heavenly host," of which astrology vas the natural offspring. Religion has here  secondary character, however, and it is quite subsidiary to the astrological purpose with which the pyramid is supposed to have been erected. The reverse of this would be nearer the truth, and it will be hereafter shown that whatever may have been its temporary purpose, its primary object was religious.

Footnotes

^2:* "The Great Pyramid: Why was it built? and who built it?"

^3:* Mr. Proctor regards this fact as a mere coincidence, although he deems it probable that the smaller unit of measurement used [p. 4] by the Great Pyramid builders was intended to have a relation to the earth's diameter, as stated in the text.--"Myths and Marvels of Astronomy" (Ed. 188o), pp. 66, 73.

^6:* I have taken the opinions of the Pyramidalists from the 9th edition of an ingenious work by Dr. Seiss, of Philadelphia, entitled "A Miracle in Stone."

^7:* Knowledge Vol. i. pp. 242-400 This agrees very well with one of the dates given by Diodorus, but 2,170 B.C. is a preferable date on grounds which will be referred to infra.

^8:* They must, however, have been more than mere coincidences if the builders of the pyramid had the astronomical knowledge displayed in its perfect orientation and in its other admitted astronomical features. See infra.

^8:+ See Mr. Petrie's letter to The Academy, Dec. 17, 1881. Mr. Proctor's views are taken from Knowledge, Vol. i. unless otherwise stated.

^15:* The size of each Pyramid is usually supposed to denote the length of the reign of the Monarch by whom it was constructed.

^17:* "Myths and Marvels of Astronomy" (Ed. 1880), p. 101.

^17:+ Ditto, p. 103.

^18:* See Appendix II.

^18:+ Vyse, "Operations at the Pyramids of Gizeh," Vol. p. 319.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

CHAPTER II

  

EARLY EGYPTIAN CIVILIZATION

NOTWITHSTANDING the religious object of the erection of the Great Pyramid, there is no ground for supposing that its erection required the aid of Divine inspiration or guidance. Prof. Smyth affirms however, that the Great Pyramid measures are quite different from those used by the ancient Egyptians. They were the sacred measures of the Hebrews, but this people could not, according to Prof. Smyth, have been its builders, as they were dwellers in tents. Nor, on the same authority, were the Egyptians more competent. Their wisdom was not sufficient to enable them to design the Great Pyramid. The civilization of the Egyptians, moreover, had a sudden beginning, so that they could not have gradually acquired the necessary scientific knowledge for such a purpose. Prof. Smyth further asserts that there is no evidence of the existence of

[p. 21]

an earlier race who could have designed the Great Pyramid, and he affirms that it was erected by a people foreign to the land of Egypt, whom he calls Cushites or Chaldeans, under Divine guidance. [**]

It is evident that the real argument of those who hold the theory of divine inspiration in relation to the Great Pyramid is the supposed absence of any people who could by their own knowledge design the structure. Dr. Seiss, who finds a reference to the pyramid in the Book of Job, says as to this ancient book, "In it we find a familiarity with writing, engraving in stone, mining, metallurgy, building, shipping, natural history, astronomy, and science in general, showing an advanced, organised, and exalted state of society, answering exactly to what pertains above all to the sons of Joktan, whose descendants spread themselves from Upper Arabia to the South Seas, and from the Persian Gulf to the Pillars of Hercules, tracking their course as the first teachers of our modern world with the greatest monuments that antiquity contains." [*+]

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] According to Dr. Seiss, the Joktanites were the true Arabians, and they, and not the Cushites, were the highly cultured people who erected those great monuments. This writer, moreover, sees in Job the son of Joktan, and he suggests the identity of the Patriarch with the Philition, whose name is associated by Herodotus with the erection of the Great Pyramid. It will be thought that as the Joktanites had the scientific qualifications necessary for the erection of the Great Pyramid, there is no occasion to call in the aid of divine inspiration. Not so Dr. Seiss, who terms this great structure "a miracle in stone, a petrifaction of wisdom and truth revealed of God, preserved among his people from the foundation of the world, and thus memorialised by impulse and aid from Him." [**]

It is evident, however, that Dr. Seiss admits too much. If the Joktanites had the scientific knowledge ascribed to them, they could have built the Great Pyramid without divine guidance. How this knowledge was originally acquired is another question, and one which does not now concern us. Prof. Smyth, who ascribes the building of the pyramid to the influence of the

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Cushites, makes an equally fatal admission. He says, "The spirit, then, of the Egyptians at the building of the Great Pyramid was the same which marked them, both at the oppression of the children of Israel afterwards, and, in conjunction with other peoples, at the building of the Tower of Babel before. In so far as the Egyptians could accomplish it in their new work on the banks of the Nile, and as they flattered themselves, too, for ages that they had accomplished it even to the full,--the Great Pyramid was a resurgence in a new land, and with a community speaking a new language, of their thwarted ideas in another place; but through the humble agency of the shepherd Philition their labours were made really to tell against themselves." [**] The reference made in this passage to the Tower of Babel is important. This building appears to have struck the imagination of the ancient world by its magnitude as much as the Great Pyramid has since done, and we may well suppose that a people who could rear the one could erect the other without supernatural aid. Moreover, if, as Prof. Smyth supposes, the Egyptians sought to carry out in the later

[p. 24]

building the ideas which they with other peoples had attempted to embody in the Tower of Babel, there does not appear to be any object in calling in such aid either for the designing or the erection of the Great Pyramid.

It will be objected, however, that the Babylonian Tower could not have formed the model for the great Egyptian edifice, as they were of different construction; and that, as the Great Pyramid was not only the largest but the earliest of the pyramids, its design could not have been derived from the former through intermediate structures. This argument would doubtless have great force if it were founded on fact. In reality, however, the Pyramids of Ghizeh, although the largest, are not the earliest Egyptian monuments of this description. [**] The best modern authorities believe that the great Pyramid of Sakkarah was erected by one of the kings of the First Dynasty, whereas the Pyramids of Ghizeh belong to the Fourth Dynasty. If that was so, the fact is of great importance, since the design of the Sakkarah pyramid, as shown by its name of

[p. 25]

[paragraph continues] Pyramid of Degrees, evidently approaches that of the Tower of Babel. It might well have formed the original on which the design of the Great Pyramid of Ghizeh was modelled, notwithstanding that the internal features of the two buildings differ considerably. The peculiarity of the Great Pyramid is that its chambers and passages are chiefly formed in the structure itself, instead of being cut out of the rock on which the building is erected. Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson affirms, indeed, but not very correctly, that the passages of the Second Pyramid are very similar to those of the Great Pyramid; and Prof. Smyth remarks on the analogy between the Sepulchral Room of the one and the so-called King's Chamber of the other structure. This latter authority thinks the analogy not real, however, as the King's Chamber is "140 feet above the ground outside and in the midst of worked masonry,--or in a position whey e no pyramid was ever yet known to have any chamber or to bury a man; while the large chamber of the Second Pyramid is excavated in rock, and has its floor below the level of the ground outside,--or in a position suitable to burying." The shape and position of the sarcophagus

[p. 26]

in this burial chamber, as compared with the coffer of the Great Pyramid, are said to weaken still further the analogy, which Prof. Smyth considers to be finally disposed of by the fact, not to be overlooked, that "while the chamber of the Second Pyramid is directly led to by the leading of the entrance passage and its conspicuously lined walls, the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid is just as directly led away from by the entrance-passage there, which seems rather to have been a blind and shield to it, and a diversion to all who would come to seek for that remarkable chamber. . . . . . Hence the chamber in the Great Pyramid, which is truly the representative of the larger one in the Second Pyramid, can be no other than that usually despised, but nevertheless very large, subterranean chamber which is excavated in the rock at the bottom of the long entrance passage, and equally with the chambers excavated in other pyramids must have been intended to be easily discovered, and looked on as sepulchral, while the so-called King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid stands absolutely unique." [**] From this point of view, it might probably be said that the

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] Great Pyramid was, like other structures of the same kind, intended for a sepulchral monument, but that it had some other aim, denoted by the various chambers and passages which mark its peculiar internal construction. As a fact, however, the subterranean chamber of the Great Pyramid was never completely excavated, from which perhaps may have arisen the tradition that, owing to the opposition of the people, the body of Cheops, the royal builder, was not after all deposited in the tomb prepared for it.

It is only in comparatively modern times that any doubt has been thrown on the sepulchral aim of the Great Pyramid, and we will see what light antiquity throws on the subject. But first as to the period of its erection and the social and political condition which prevailed in Egypt at that epoch. The building of the Pyramids of Ghizeh is universally ascribed to the Fourth Dynasty, and that of the Great Pyramid in particular to Khoufou or Souphis, commonly known as Cheops, the first king of the dynasty. M. Lenormant, in the ninth edition of his important work on the "Ancient History of the East," states, that "the first reigns of the Fourth Dynasty marked the culminating point of the primitive

[p. 28]

history of Egypt. The splendour and the internal richness of the country would appear to have been immense under these princes, and are sufficiently attested by their prodigious constructions. The limits of the kingdom extended as far as the first cataract; the capital was always at Man-nofri, or Memphis, and the centre of the life of the empire was in its environs." [**] The Egyptian monarchy was founded by Mena or Menes, who built the royal city of Man-nofri, that is, the "good place," or "good port," and whose dynasty occupied the throne for 253 years. The kings of the Second Dynasty, which probably also belonged to the family of Menes, reigned during a period of 302 years, and it was succeeded by a native Memphite dynasty which endured for 214 years. The Egyptian monarchy had thus existed for more than 75o years before the commencement of the Fourth Dynasty, a period which was amply sufficient for the development of the scientific and artistic knowledge necessary for the construction of even the Great Pyramid itself. An English Egyptologist, Dr. S. Birch, has given a very interesting account of the attainments of Egyptian civilization at that epoch. He says,

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] "Architecture, as represented by the Pyramids, had become an advanced science, and reflected the geometric and theoretical knowledge of mathematics which their form and structure described for all future ages. The technical masonry was unrivalled, the finish admirable and unsurpassed by any later efforts of the Egyptian architect. The hardest materials, such as the granite of Syene, were hewn into the requisite form of the truest proportions, while the softer but more beautiful alabaster had been discovered and worked. In sculpture a canon of proportion had been discovered and laid down for the human figure, and granite, diorite, and other hard stones conquered and moulded into shape by the efforts of the chisel. The statue of Kephren is equal, if not superior, to the subsequent efforts of Egyptian sculpture, while in the features is clearly to be recognised a portrait of the monarch, showing that the power of producing excellent representations of the living form in all its details existed . . . In wood even greater excellence was attained, for in that material the sculptor developed all his power. The wooden statue of the Museum of Boulaq is an unrivalled work of ancient art . . . The bas-reliefs

[p. 30]

of the tombs are executed with a minute detail . . . The graphic system of writing was complete; the language perfectly represented by the hieroglyphs, which presented to the eye a lively picture on the painted wall of tomb or sepulchre; while the inscriptions show that the religion of the country was already reduced to a system, and the seasons marked by a regular calendar of festivals. The political organization had also attained a considerable degree of refinement. The court of Memphis swarmed with sacerdotal personages, prophets and prophetesses of the gods, and priests attached to the personal worship of the monarch. Scribes and secretaries were attached to the Pharaoh, superintendents were set over every branch of the public service. In private life the Egyptian lord led a charmed life--his estate was cultivated by slaves, his household full of domestics; the barber, the waiting-maid, the nurse, appear as necessary adjuncts to his household as the steward who presided over the distribution and the clerk who checked the expenses of his daily life. Each priest or noble had in his establishment all the trades necessary for his ease and comfort--the glass-blower, the gold-worker, the potter, the

[p. 31]

tailor, the baker, and the butler. His leisure or ennui was charmed by the acrobat and the dancer, the harpist and the singer; games of chance and skill were played either by him or in his presence. The chief occupation of the period, or at all events that most often represented in the tombs, was inspection of the farm." After particularizing the domesticated animals possessed by the noble of the Fourth Dynasty, the food he ate, and the dress he wore, Dr. Birch continues, "Simple, but elegant, furniture ministered to his requirements. Stools, chairs, footstools, couches, and headrests, or wooden pillows--the use of these rests is still retained in Africa,--appear in the furniture of his elegantly-built house . . . He enjoyed all the pleasures of existence, and delighted more in the arts of peace than war." [**]

This view of early Egyptian society agrees with the statements of other writers. M. Lenormant affirms that the representations on a tomb of one of the great officers under the Third Dynasty show us the Egyptian civilization as completely organized as it was at the date of the conquest by the Persians, or of that by the Macedonians, with a physiognomy perfectly individual

[p. 32]

and the marks of a long anterior existence. The inhabitants of the valley of the Nile had then not only the same species of domestic animals as those which they took with them in their migrations, but certain species of indigenous mammalia which we find only in a savage state, although the only beast of burden is the ass, neither the horse nor the camel being yet known. According to Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson, indeed, the Egyptians of the Fourth Dynasty had "the same settled habits as in later times. We see no primitive mode of life; no barbarous customs; not even the habit, so slowly abandoned by all peoples, of wearing arms when not in military service, nor any archaic art." [**]

But what was the condition of the Egyptian civilization 750 years earlier, at the commencement of the first Memphite Dynasty? Menes, the founder of the dynasty, is said to have diverted the ancient course of the Nile, and to have constructed a colossal dam to keep back the river, so as to form a site for his capital--a work which still continues to regulate the waters of that region. The city of Memphis with the

[p. 33]

neighbouring towns became, says M. Lenormant, quoting M. Maspero, "the home of Egyptian civilization. It was at Memphis that literature developed and flourished; at Memphis, in the palace of the kings, that the exact sciences were cultivated with the greatest care; at Memphis, finally, that the plastic arts produced their chefs d'oeuvre." The immediate successor of Menes began the construction of the palace at Memphis, and is reputed to have composed books on medicine. [**]

The name of the succeeding monarch is given as the constructor of one of the pyramids of Sakkarah. During the reign of the fifth monarch of the dynasty, several chapters of the Book of the Dead are said to have been found, and also a treatise of medicine, of which the text has been preserved to us in the medical papyrus at Berlin. Menes himself is referred to in official history as the perfect type of a monarch, a constructor, a legislator, and a conqueror. The priests, whose power he had broken, represented him as a corrupter of the simplicity of primitive manners, and the introducer of habits of luxury and effeminacy, among them being

[p. 34]

that of reclining on a bed or couch at meals. [**] To one of his successors, the second king of the Second Dynasty, is ascribed the erection of the Great Pyramid of Sakkarah, known as the Pyramid of Degrees, which must have long preceded the larger structure at Ghizeh. The form, and especially the underground arrangement of the former structure, are evidence of its great , as they reproduce many of the features of the. Egyptian tombs of the early Memphite period. These consist of a deep pit, leading to an underground chamber, and surmounted by a building which serves in great measure to conceal the entrance to the proper tomb. The Pyramid of Degrees is formed of a series of such buildings of decreasing size, placed one above the other, the ground beneath it being excavated in various places, so as to form numerous passages and chambers to be used for sepulchral purposes. The same general plan is found in the Second Pyramid of Ghizeh, but in the latter the deep pit is replaced by the long slanting passage.

The civilization which found its home at Memphis might thus well have originated the

[p. 35]

science necessary for the formation of the Great Pyramid. The erection of this building is, indeed, supposed by M. Lenormant to have been preceded several centuries by that of the Sphinx, the image of the reclining Sun-god, and also of the neighbouring temple, the structure of which is described as prodigious even by the side of the Pyramids. An inscription of the time of Khoufou, or Cheops, [**] speaks of this temple as having been accidentally discovered buried in the sand of the desert, and the Sphinx appears to have had need of repair during the reign of the same monarch. But we cannot suppose the civilization of the founders of Memphis to have been suddenly acquired. The overthrow of the priestly power, which Menes accomplished, requires the prior existence of a culture differing perhaps little, except in its milder and more peaceful character, from that which afterwards developed itself in the Memphite region. Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson, says, indeed, that all the facts lead to the conclusion that the Egyptians had already "made very great progress in the arts of civilization be-

[p. 36]

fore the age of Menes, and perhaps before they immigrated into the valley of the Nile." [**]

Menes himself was a native of Teni, or Thinis, the chief city of that part of Upper Egypt in which the priestly authority had established its supremacy. In this region numerous cities existed before the foundation of Memphis. "It was," says Lenormant, "the country of the great prehistoric sanctuaries, seats of the sacerdotal dominion, which played the most important part in the origin of civilization." The people themselves were known as Schesou-Hor, "the servants of Horus," the national god par excellence of the Egyptian people, and after death they were said to become the conductors of the bark of the Sun in his celestial voyage, and the cultivators of the happy fields of the other life. M. Maspero affirms, that to this prehistoric race "belongs the honour of having constituted Egypt, such as we know it, from the commencement of the historic period. At first divided into a great number of tribes, they commenced by establishing at several points small independent states, each of which had its own laws and worship." They founded

[p. 37]

the principal cities of Egypt and established the most important sanctuaries. These primitive inhabitants of the Nile valley may have been less highly cultured than their descendants of the Great Pyramid epoch, but as they possessed the hieroglyphic form of writing special to the Egyptians, they must have been already considerably advanced in civilization. M. Maspero supposes, that when they first settled in Egypt, the sands of the desert covered all the soil which was not affected by the yearly inundation of the Nile. He adds, however, that "little by little, the new comers learnt to regulate the course of the river, to embank it, to carry by means of irrigating canals fertility into the most distant corners of the valley. Egypt rose from the waters, and became in the hand of man one of the countries the best adapted to the peaceable development of a great civilization." [**]

Footnotes

^21:* "Life and Work at the Great Pyramid," Vol. iii. pp. 465, seq., 521 seq.

^21:+ "A Miracle in Stone," p. 210.

^22:* "A Miracle in Stone," p. 226.

^23:* "Life and Work at the Great Pyramid," Vol. iii. p. 530.

^24:* Sir J. Gardner Wilkinson ascribes the Pyramid of Abouseir to Shure (Soris), the immediate predecessor of Cheops, according to Manetho. (See Appendix II.)

^26:* "Life and Work," etc., Vol. L p. 268.

^28:* Tom. ii, p. 71.

^31:* "Ancient History from the Monuments."--Egypt, pp. 42-46.

^32:* Rawlinson's "Herodotus," vol. ii. p. 344.

^33:* Tom. ii, p. 58.

^34:* Tom. ii. p. 58, seq.

^35:* It should be mentioned, however, that Egyptologists are not agreed in supposing this inscription to be contemporaneous with Cheops.

^36:* Rawlinson's "Herodotus," Vol. ii. p. 345.

^37:* Lenormant, Tom. ii. p. 51, seq.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE TOMB THEORY.

DURING how many centuries before the foundation of the monarchy by Menes the Egyptian culture had been developing, we do not know, but we cannot doubt that under Cheops it was well able to give origin to the Great Pyramid, the construction of which must be regarded as the chief glory of his reign. We have now to consider, from the testimony of ancient writers, what was the object of that gigantic structure. From the inscriptions, it would seem to have been called "the Great Temple of Shofo," and with its precinct to have been dedicated at one time to the worship of that king. We are, however, dependent entirely on the Greek writers for any account of its construction. Herodotus, who lived in the 5th century before Christ, states that the founder of the Great Pyramid, Cheops, was a prince whose crimes and tyranny rendered

[p. 39]

his name odious, even to posterity. He closed all the temples and forbade the Egyptians to perform sacrifices; after which he made them all work for him. Some were employed to cut stones in the quarries of the so-called Arabian Hills, on the east side of the Nile, and to convey them to the other side of the river, whence the stones were dragged to the Libyan hills; 100,000 men were thus employed at a time, and they were relieved by an equal number every three months. The construction of the causeway for the transport of the stones occupied ten years, which was exclusive of the time spent in levelling the hill on which the Pyramids stand, and in making the subterranean chambers intended for the tomb. The building of the pyramid itself occupied twenty years. After describing the mode of construction, Herodotus states that on the exterior was engraved in Egyptian characters the sum expended in supplying the workmen with food, amounting to 1,600 talents, equal to L200,000 sterling. After other statements, the historian continues, "Cheops, having reigned 50 years, died, and was succeeded by his brother Cephren, who followed the example of his predecessor. Among other monuments he also

[p. 40]

built a pyramid, but much less in size than that of Cheops. . . . It has neither underground chambers nor any canal flowing into it from the Nile, like the other, where the tomb of its founder is placed in an island surrounded by water." [**] The Greek writer adds that the priests informed him that Cephren reigned 56 years, so that "the Egyptians were overwhelmed for 106 years with every kind of oppression, and the temples continued to be closed during the whole time. Indeed, they have such an aversion for the memory of these two princes that they will not even mention their names, and for this reason they call the Pyramids after the shepherd Philitis, who at the time of their erection used to feed his flocks near this spot." Herodotus concludes by referring to the erection of the Third Pyramid, which he ascribes to Mycerinus, the son of Cheops. This monarch, disapproving of the conduct of his father, "ordered the temples to be opened, and permitted the people, who had been oppressed by a long series of cruelties, to

[p. 41]

return to their work and their religious duties; and administering justice with great equity, he was looked upon by the Egyptians as superior to all the kings who had ever ruled the country."

The next Greek writer whose description of the pyramids of Ghizeh is preserved to us, is Diodorus, who lived about the beginning of the Christian era. He gives the name Chemmis, or Chembis, as that of the builder of the Great Pyramid, which had lasted to his time at least 1,000 years, or "as some say, upwards of 3,400 years," and the whole structure was then uninjured. The building, he says, was by means of mounds (inclined planes), machines not having yet been invented. In this statement he differs from Herodotus, whose account is not otherwise contradicted. After referring to the erection of the Second Pyramid by Cephren, Diodorus says: "Of the two kings who raised these monuments for themselves, neither one nor the other was destined to be buried therein. The people who had endured so much fatigue in building them, and had been oppressed by their cruelty and violence, threatened to drag their bodies from their tombs and tear them to pieces, so that these princes at their death ordered their friends

[p. 42]

to bury them privately in some other secret place." Strabo, writing at about the same date, remarks that the pyramids were the sepulchres of kings, and he adds, what is not mentioned by the earlier writers quoted, that "near the centre of the sides is a stone which can be taken out, from which a passage leads to the tomb." Finally, Pliny the Roman historian, who lived about 100 years later, refers to the Egyptian pyramids, which he describes as being an "idle and silly display of royal wealth." The three largest pyramids he affirms were all built in 68 years and 4 months. He refers to the supposed use of mounds in their erection, but as these had disappeared he mentions another suggestion, that bridges were made of mud bricks, which, when the work was completed, were used to build private houses. Pliny adds to the details given by other writers, that within the Great Pyramid is a well 86 cubits (129 feet) deep.

It is evident from the agreement of the descriptions given by Herodotus and other Greek writers with the facts, that they must have derived them from well-informed sources. The entrance to the Great Pyramid mentioned by Strabo, near the centre of the side, was discovered

[p. 43]

by Col. Vyse, and the well referred to by Pliny is a remarkable feature of the building. No excavation or structure answering to the subterranean chamber upon an island surrounded by water from the Nile described by Herodotus, has yet been discovered, but Col. Vyse seemed to think nevertheless that it actually exists. The outer casing of the Great Pyramid having been removed, the inscription in the Egyptian character seen by Herodotus must have disappeared, but those modern writers who ascribe the erection of that structure to divine inspiration suppose it to have been unique in being entirely without inscriptions. The statement of Herodotus is, however, confirmed by various Arab authors, who, according to Dr. Sprenger, "have given the same accounts of the Pyramids, with little or no variation, for above 1000 years." It appears from Masoudi, one of the earliest of these authors, that the pyramids were covered with continuous inscriptions, and he relates the Coptic tradition that the builder ordered the prophecies of the priests to be inscribed on columns and upon the large stones of the pyramids, and written accounts of their wisdom and acquirements in arts and sciences to be depicted on

[p. 44]

them. [**] It is impossible now to ascertain how far this statement was correct, but Col. Vyse found the cartouche of Cheops (Suphis) in the rubbish near the Great Pyramid, and recently a piece of the casing has been discovered showing remains of a Greek inscription, which is the more valuable as, says the discoverer, "nothing besides a few fragments with single letters had been previously discovered of the many inscriptions that existed on the casing." [*+]

As the accounts given by the ancient Greek writers are true in so many particulars, we cannot doubt that they have correctly reported what they had heard as to the object with which the Pyramids were erected. They all agree in declaring them to be the tombs of the kings by whom they had been built, although, according to Diodorus, the Egyptian priests asserted that neither Cheops nor Cephren were actually buried in the pyramids which are ascribed to them. That this story was an invention, however, may be assumed from its not being mentioned by

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Herodotus, although he refers to the aversion which the Egyptians had for the memory of those kings, and accounts for it by their oppressive conduct, and the closing of the temples during the continuance of their reigns. If the sacred places were actually closed, we should have a sufficient reason for the hatred of the memory of Cheops and Cephren exhibited by the Egyptian priests; a hatred which led them afterwards to declare that the people would not allow their bodies to be deposited in the monuments prepared for them.

It has been often pointed out that it is extremely improbable Cephren would have been at the trouble and expense of erecting a gigantic pyramid for his tomb if the body of his predecessor, Cheops, had not been deposited in the pyramid tomb prepared for its reception. There is some reason to believe, however, that these two monarchs, who were brothers, reigned during the same period, a warrant for which belief is found in the statement of Pliny that the three largest pyramids were all erected in 63 years and 4 months. [**] It is possible, indeed, that the priests

[p. 46]

knew of the absence of any corpse, not only from the rock-cut chamber, but also from the coffer in the so-called King's Chamber, and that they invented the story of the people's hatred to account for such absence. Some ground for the belief in the irreligion of Cheops and Cephren may perhaps be found in the fact that their names were not preceded by that of Osiris, as was the case with their successor Mycerinus. [**] "Among the ancient Egyptians, the departed soul," says Dr. Ebers, "if it were found pure and faithful, became absolutely one with the universal soul whence it was derived, and received the same name, Osiris." [*+] It is true that Dr. Ebers denies that Cheops and Cephren were wicked contemners of the god, on the ground that "as long as Egypt was governed by independent sovereigns, there were prophets or priests of the Osirian or deceased Cheops, [*++] and of the other principal pyramid builders, who conducted the worship in the fallen temple of Isis, and who

[p. 47]

usually belonged to the oldest families of Memphis." This is consistent, however, with the fact of the deceased monarchs having worshipped a "strange" god and given him priority oar Osiris, which would be sufficient to stamp them in the eyes of the orthodox priests as enemies of the Gods of Egypt.

But is there any evidence besides the statements of Greek writers that the Great Pyramid was really used as the tomb of Cheops or any other person? That it was thus used, might perhaps be inferred from the fact, sometimes forgotten, that it is situate in a vast necropolis. M. Perrot in his "Histoire de l'Art," remarks that "the nobles of Egypt, all those who had assisted in the work of the monarchy and received a reflection of its glory, grouped themselves as near as possible around the prince they had served. Distributed thus by reigns and quarters, the private tombs lie close together, all furnished with steles which preserve the name of the dead, most of them ornamented with bas-reliefs painted in brilliant colours, some even decorated with statues placed before their facade." [**] We know that the smallest

[p. 48]

of the three Great Pyramids was the tomb of its builder Mycerinus or Men-ke-ra, as Col. Vyse found in the burial chamber a basalt sarcophagus, with the lid of its wooden coffin having on it in  an address to the deceased monarch, as identified with Osiris. [**] Vyse states that great precautions had been taken to conceal the position of the sarcophagus, and he doubted whether the real tombs had been discovered in the two larger pyramids. [*+] He adds that the three larger pyramids were all intended for the same purpose, and their construction was carried on upon the same principles. The sarcophagus of the Second Pyramid has no inscription, and is, according to Belzoni, not larger than is necessary for the wooden case of an embalmed human body. [*++] It is true that a piece of bone, supposed to be that of an ox, was found in this sarcophagus, but it may not have had anything to do with the original burial, as the Arab writers say nothing apparently of the discovery

[p. 49]

in this pyramid of any human or other remains, when it was opened by their countrymen. As to the Great Pyramid, if we are to believe those writers, an embalmed human body was actually discovered in the so-called King's Chamber when it was opened by the Caliph Mamoon. This is said to have taken place in the year 820 A.D., and the Arab historian, Abd-el-Hokm, relates that "a statue resembling a man was found in the sarcophagus, and in the statue (mummy case) was a body with a breastplate of gold and jewels, bearing characters written with a pen which no one understood." [**] Alkaisi gives much the same story, and he adds that the case stood at the door of the king's palace at Cairo in the year 511--that is, 1133 A.D. [*+] It may be doubted, however, whether this had anything to do with the Great Pyramid. Dr. Ebers mentions that in the middle of the 15th century, "an Emir caused the  of the much admired 'green shrine,' which was formed out of a single block of a stone as hard as iron, and ornamented with figures and inscriptions. It was smashed to pieces." He adds, "the golden statue, with

[p. 50]

eyes of precious stones, which had once been enshrined in this marvel of art--dedicated probably to the Moon-god Chonsu--had long before disappeared. [**] In this shrine and statue we have no doubt the case and body mentioned by Abd-el-Hokm, as Alkaisi when referring to these speaks of an image of a man in green-stone, containing a body in golden armour with a large ruby overhead.

It must be admitted, therefore, that there is no reliable evidence of any human body having been found in the Great Pyramid. Nevertheless this is not any proof that the building was not used as a tomb. The Arab writer Abd Allatif refers to an early statement that when the Persians conquered Egypt they took away great riches from the Pyramids, which were the sepulchres of the kings, [*+] and, therefore, no doubt the receptacle of their treasures. Moreover, according to Sir Gardner Wilkinson, the Egyptians themselves had in many instances plundered the tombs of Thebes, [*++] and he seems to think that the Great Pyramid met with the same fate at their hands.

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] The Meydoom Pyramid, which is said to be that of the last king of the Third Dynasty, has been recently opened, and inscriptions have been found showing that it had been opened before the Twentieth Dynasty. [**] M. Lenormant states that the priestly legend as to the popular hatred of the builders of the two Great Pyramids, had at least a real historical foundation. He says: Everything seems to indicate that the end of the Fourth Dynasty, immediately after the princes constructors of the great pyramids, was a time of revolutions and of troubles caused by the  oppression. [*+] The comparison of the list of Manetho and of the monuments of the necropolis of Sakkarah reveal during this period violent competitions. The splendid statues of Kha-f-Ra (Cephren) in diorite, in rose granite, in alabaster, and in basalt, which decorated the temple near the Great Sphinx, have been found in pieces in a well where they had been precipitated in a revolutionary movement, evidently but little posterior to his reign. These statues,

[p. 52]

moreover, of which some represent him in the vigour of manhood, and the others in a state of advanced age, confirm the tradition which attributed to him a reign of 50 years." [**] Remains of this character have not yet been found in association with the Great Pyramid, notwithstanding the tradition as to its being the tomb of Cheops, and the fact that it became dedicated to his worship.

It is not at all improbable that the bodies of both Cephren and Cheops were removed from their resting places during the commotions which occurred at the end of the Fourth Dynasty. As to the latter monarch, at least, it is not necessary to suppose that he was buried in the so-called King's Chamber or in the cave below the base of the pyramid. A more likely place for the purpose would be the niche in the cast wall of the Queen's Chamber, where Maillet, [*+] who in 1692 described it as being three feet deep, eight feet high, and three feet wide, supposed the mummy of the queen to have been placed upright. The niche appears, however, to have an inner shelf, on which the embalmed corpse may have been

[p. 53]

laid. The Queen's Chamber is stated, however, by Edrysy [**] to have had an empty "vessel," such as the sarcophagus of the King's Chamber, so that if the niche were used for another purpose the body of Cheops may still have been there deposited. It appears, indeed, that according to some ancient inscriptions, the Pyramids were regarded as sepulchral temples, and priests were appointed for the service of the princes who were buried there, and had attained to the divine nature. A tomb found at Sakkarah belonged to "a priest of Chufu and Chafra." [*+]

Footnotes

^40:* In connection with this statement it may be remarked, that from ancient inscriptions it appears that during the reign of Amenemha III. of the Twelfth Dynasty, the average height of the inundations from the Nile was 24 feet greater than at present. (See Dunckers's "History of Antiquity," Vol. i. p. 105.)

^44:* Vyse, Vol. ii., 324-8.

^44:+ Mr. Petrie's letter in The Academy. M. de Sacy refers with approval to the statements of Abd Allatif and other Arab writers, that the surfaces of the two great pyramids were covered. with inscriptions. (See Vyse, Vol. ii. p. 342).

^45:* Wilkinson says that the Great Pyramid was built by Suphis I. (Cheops), and his brother Suphis II. (Num Shufu), while Cephren (Shafra of the Fifth Dynasty), was the founder of the Second Pyramid.--Rawlinson's "Herodotus," Vol. ii. p. 346.

^46:* Vyse, Vol. ii. p. 95. Dr. Birch says that the coffin of this monarch marks a new religious development in the annals of Egypt.--"Egypt," p. 41.

^46:+ "Egypt," Vol. ii., p. 132.

^46:++ A religious work, called "The Sacred Book," was ascribed to him by the Greek writers.

^47:* Tom. i. p. 244. Abd Allatif mentions that there were formerly at Ghizeh a considerable number of small pyramids, [p. 48]which were destroyed by Karakousch, an Emir in the army of Salaheddin Youssef, to supply materials for the building of the walls and citadel of Cairo. (See Vyse, "Operations" etc., Vol. ii. p. 336.)

^48:* Tom. i., Vol. ii. p. 94.

^48:+ Ditto, p. 104.

^48:++ Ditto, p. 298.

^49:* Wilkinson's "Hand-Book (Egypt)," p. 168.

^49:+ Vyse, Vol. ii. p. 333.

^50:* "Egypt" (Eng. Ed.), Vol. i. p. 125.

^50:+ Vyse, Vol. ii. p. 345.

^50:++ Hand-Book (Egypt)," p. 168.

^51:* Miss Amelia B. Edwards, The Academy for Jan. 7th, 1882.

^51:+ May there not have been a religious cause, connected with a difference of race, such as the opposition, hereafter referred to, between Seth and Osiris?

^52:* Tom ii. p. 73.

^52:+ Vyse, "Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 226.

^53:* Vyse, Vol. ii. p. 334. May not the Eighth Pyramid, which tradition assigns as the tomb of the daughter of Cheops, have been that of his wife? The masonry has much resemblance to that of the Great Pyramid. Vol. ii. p. 70.

^53:+ Duncker, "History of Antiquity," Vol. i. p. 99.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE RELIGIOUS THEORY.

THE Great Pyramid was intended to be something more than the tomb or even a temple in honour of Cheops. The astronomical character of many of the chief features of the structure confirms this view, and it is supported by the arguments used by Mr. Proctor to establish its connection with astrological observances. The pyramid had, indeed, a religious character of its own, which probably supplied the primary object of its erection. It is true that Mr. Proctor remarks that it is not "easy to understand why any building at all, except an astronomical observatory, should be placed so that its four faces front the four cardinal points." He says, however, that "a temple devoted to Sun-worship, and generally to the heavenly bodies, might be built in that way. For it is to be noticed that the

[p. 55]

peculiar figure and position of the Pyramids would bring about the following relations: when the sun rose and set south of the east and west points, or (speaking generally) between the autumn and the spring equinoxes, the rays of the rising and setting sun illuminated the southern face of the pyramid; whereas, during the rest of the year, that is, during the six months between the spring and autumn equinoxes, the rays of the rising and setting sun illuminated the northern face. Again, all the year round the sun's rays passed from the eastern to the western face at solar noon. And, lastly, during seven months and a half of each year, namely, for three months and three quarters before and after Midsummer, the noon rays of the sun fell on all four faces of the pyramid, or, according to a Peruvian expression (so Smyth avers) the sun shone on the pyramid 'with all his rays.'" Such conditions as these might have been regarded as very suitable for a temple devoted to Sun-worship. And yet Mr. Proctor declares that the temple theory is as untenable as the tomb theory, on the ground, first, that the pyramid form is unsuited for all "the ordinary requirements of a temple of worship," and, secondly, that it gives no explanation

[p. 56]

of the fact that each king built a pyramid, and each king only one. [**]

These objections would, however, present no difficulty if the temple theory were restricted to the Great Pyramid, the other pyramids being probably intended only for the tombs of their founders. That the erection of the former had a distinctly religious purpose can hardly be denied. What that purpose was may be gathered from the statements of certain Arab writers. Thus Soyuti mentions from earlier writers that the Sabaeans made pilgrimages to the Pyramids and had opened one of them, and that they sacrificed hens and black calves, and burnt incense. He says also that Seth took possession of Egypt, and his son was Hermes, and that he introduced Sabaism, which inculcated, among other things, a pilgrimage to the Pyramids. He adds that, according to some accounts, one pyramid is the tomb of Seth. [*+] An earlier writer, Eddin Ahmed Ben Yahya, does not refer to Seth, but he says that each pyramid was consecrated to a star, and that the Sabaeans performed religious pilgrimages to the greatest

[p. 57]

and also visited the others. He observes that every pyramid presents the form of a lantern surrounded by equilateral sides, which indicates that it was sacred to a star. [**] Abd Allatif, who wrote nearly 200 years earlier, also refers to the pilgrimages made to the Pyramids, and he affirms that he had read in ancient Sabaean books that one pyramid was the tomb of Agathodaemon, and the other of Hermes. [*+] Agathodaemon was none other than Seth, and according to some writers Hermes was his son. [*++]

A modern author, Mr. Palgrave, states that frequent enquiries were made of him in Oman regarding the Egyptian Pyramids, a memory, he thinks, derived from old Sabaean times. [* section] This traveller remarks elsewhere that the Arab writers give us the following information as to the ancient Sabaeans. "That they worshipped the seven planets, and pre-eminently the sun; that they observed a fast of thirty days, set apart in the early spring, before the vernal

[p. 58]

equinox; that their chief annual feast coincided with the entrance of the sun in the sign of Aries (a fact which supposes a solar, not lunar, computation of the months); that they had a special veneration for the two great pyramids of Egypt, believed by them to be the sepulchres of Seth and Idrus (Enoch); that their stated prayers recurred seven times a day . . . . and that during their devotions they turned their faces towards the north; lastly, that they possessed a book, or code of laws, ascribed to Seth himself (in what language, unhappily, it is not said), and believed to contain the dogmas and institutions of that primeval patriarch." Mr. Palgrave adds, that two points of great importance seem to have distinguished the ancient form of Sabaism: one, the absence of image-idols and idolatry; the other, the absence of any priestly caste [**] These points are, indeed, of great importance, and if it can be shown that the two great pyramids had really anything to do with Sabaism, it is not surprising that their founders were regarded with hatred by the Egyptian priests. The builder of the Third Pyramid, Mycerinus, was not so regarded, however, and

[p. 59]

perhaps, therefore, he may be referred to in the legend which spoke of one of the pyramids of Ghizeh as the tomb of Hermes. This personage was not only the son of Seth, but probably also the same as Thoth, the Egyptian god of Wisdom; and to the reign of Mycerinus was assigned the discovery of a mystical text, which formed the most profound passage in the Book of the Dead. M. Lenormant states that numerous legends of the discoveries of books of a supernatural and divine origin were current among the Egyptians, who generally placed them under the earliest dynasties. [**]

We have already had occasion to notice that the city of Memphis, near which the Pyramids were situated, was founded by Menes, who established a political and military monarchy on the ruins of the priestly authority. Prior to his reign, the priests had exercised supreme power, the chief seat of which was in the middle part of Upper Egypt. 'In this region, says Lenormant, was situate Abydos, the principal centre of the. worship of Osiris, whose tomb was there shown, the only worship which was common to all Egypt; Thebes, which boasted itself to have

[p. 60]

been the birth-place of the same god; Tentyris, the favorite abode of the goddess Hathor; Deb or Edfou, where Har-m-akhouti, with his son Har-houd, are supposed to have assembled the army with which they combatted Set or Typhon. [**] Set or Seth is thus brought into connection with the Egyptian mythology, and he occupies a remarkable position in relation to it. "Seth was at one time," says Bunsen, "a great god, universally adored throughout Egypt, who conferred on the sovereigns of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Dynasties the symbols of life and power. The most glorious monarch of the latter dynasty Sethos, derives his name from this deity. But, subsequently, in the course of the Twentieth Dynasty, he is suddenly treated as an evil demon, inasmuch that his effigies and name are obliterated on all the monuments and inscriptions that could be reached." The hatred of the Osirian priests to the worship of Seth, which this conduct betokens, cannot, however, have had a sudden rise. It must have been merely the culmination of a feeling similar to that which led to the detestation in which the memory of Cheops and Cephren was held. It was, indeed, probably

[p. 61]

connected with the hatred of the Pyramid builders, if we may judge from the position occupied by the god Seth. According to Bunsen, this deity was the primitive god of Northern Egypt and Palestine, and appears as the background of religious consciousness among the Semites. Moreover, his genealogy as "the Seth of Genesis, the father of Enoch (the man) must be considered as originally running parallel with that derived from the Elohim, Adam's father." [**] Seth, therefore, is not only the primitive god of the Semites, but also their semi-divine ancestor. We have here, probably, the explanation of a fact mentioned by Herodotus, who, after speaking of the aversion of the Egyptians for the memory of Cheops and Cephren, says, "they will not even mention their names, and for this reason they call the Pyramids after the Shepherd Philitis, who at the time of their erection used to feed his flocks near the spot." The occupation of a keeper of sheep was an abomination to the Egyptians, and if a shepherd prince dwelt near Memphis there must have been some very powerful reason for his doing so. That there was a religious reason we may infer from the

[p. 62]

stories related to Herodotus by the priests, who told him that the temples were closed during the reigns of Cheops and Cephren. M. Lenormant has, indeed, shown that this statement cannot have been correct, as an inscription preserved in the Museum at Boulak enumerates the temples built by Cheops, the pious foundations made by him, and his splendid offerings to the gods, [**] thus confirming the opinion expressed by Dr. Ebers. Nevertheless, there may have been some ground for the accusation of impiety made against Cheops, and it was probably his recognition of the supremacy of a god foreign to the strictly Egyptian Pantheon, which might be quite consistent with his continuing to show respect for the native gods. Who the strange deity was may probably be determined by the nationality of Philitis, whose name is mentioned in connection with the Pyramids, although they may have been erected long before his time; unless indeed the name stands for a people and not merely an individual. M. Budenger [*+] ingeniously identifies Philitis with Salatis, the first Hyksos king, and Prof. Duncker states that the name of the former

[p. 63]

points to a Semitic tribe for the Hyksos, "and one immediately bordering on Egypt on the Syrian coast--the Philistines (Pelischtim), from whom the whole Syrian coast was called by the Greeks Palaestina." [**] The first Hyksos king fixed his residence at Memphis in the neighbourhood of the great pyramids, which had perhaps already become connected with the shepherd princes, and among a people who were probably prepared to receive him as a friend rather than as an enemy. M. Lenormant remarks that the Delta, and especially its eastern part, "appeared to have been inhabited from the highest antiquity by a population somewhat different from that of the rest of Egypt--of a more Asiatic character, and probably mixed in a certain measure with Semitic element." That region, before even the foundation of Memphis by Menes, was for Egypt "the cradle of he worship of more important deities, who took a leading place in the national Pantheon, but in their origin were connected with the cycle of Euphratico-Syrian divinities." One of those deities vas Hathor; the other was Set, "the special god of the northern country--in opposition to Horus, the god of the southern

[p. 64]

country--of whose name the Soutekh of the Shepherds and of the Kheta is only an enlarged form; whom we find adored under the name of Schita in several parts of Assyria; and whom it is perhaps necessary to compare with the antediluvian patriarch Scheth (Seth) in the narrative of Genesis." [**] We see thus that not only was Set (Seth) by his name Soutekh the rational god of the Hyksos, but he was also the chief deity of the semi-Semitic population of the Memphitic region in which that shepherd race established itself. It is not surprising, therefore, that the hatred of the native Egyptians for the Hyksos was afterwards entertained in an intensified form towards the god whom they adored, although previously, as the special deity of Lower Egypt, he had been recognised as the Agathodaemon.

The Hyksos and their congeners of Northern Egypt, however, were probably more closely connected with the ancient Cushite race, referred to by Arab tradition as the people of Ad, than with the pure Semitic stock. The Arabian branch of that race was thought to have become extinct before the establishment of the later Arabs in the peninsula. Remnants of it, however, are still

[p. 65]

to be found in the territory between the Hedjaz and Yemen, and also in the Hadramaut and Mahrah, between Yemen and Oman, where a large number of independent tribes exist. [**] The religion of these tribes was down to a comparatively recent period star-worship, and their ancestors, the people of Ad, were adherents of the Sabaism which was so widely spread in the ancient world. To this cult the Hyksos belonged, as shown by the identification of their god Soutekh with the Seth of the Sabaeans. The race connection between the population of Lower Egypt and the Hyksos, with the position occupied by Seth as the national deity, agree with the fact of Sabaism being the religion also of the northern Egyptians. Dr. Tiele, remarks that "star-worship was not unknown to the Semites, but the highly-developed astrology and magic which we find among the Babylonians and Assyrians were derived from the Akkadians," to whom the early population of Arabia, known as the people of Ad, were related. That early race, moreover, furnished the Babylonians with the

[p. 66]

models on which their temples were built, "namely, in the form of terraced pyramids, such as were erected also in Elam, and among the oldest inhabitants of Media and India, to which class belonged the famous Tower of Babel." [**] The Great Pyramid of Egypt may well, therefore, have been a monument of star-worship, dedicated to the god Seth.

Nor is this conclusion, that the Great Pyramid was intimately associated with the worship of Seth, inconsistent with the fact that it appears to have been sometimes referred to by the Egyptians as the tomb of Osiris. [*+] This opinion is connected with the myth of Osiris and Isis in its later form, which introduces Seth (Typhon) as the great enemy of Osiris. According to Bunsen, however, this form was not known earlier than the 13th or 14th century B.C., so that the Great Pyramid would not be spoken of as the tomb of Osiris before that date. It could not have been thus regarded originally, as we know that neither Cheops nor Cephren received the name of Osiris, an honour which was conferred by the Egyptian priests on the later monarch, Mycerinus, owing

[p. 67]

to his great benevolence and justice--or, shall we say, his orthodox religious views. The learned Dupuis expresses the opinion that the Agathodaemon, or Good Spirit, whom the Sabaeans believed to repose under the pyramid, was in reality Osiris, the benevolent god of Nature. The Agathodaemon of the early Egyptians was, however Seth, the special deity of Northern Egypt, and we shall not be wrong in supposing the Great Pyramid to have been erected by the Sabaeans in his honour.

In so doing, we explain perfectly the scientific features which have been traced in the structure. The worshippers of the heavenly host would, undoubtedly, in so grand a religious monument as the Great Pyramid, embody all the astronomical knowledge they possessed, and this must have been considerable. The Arabian historian, Abulfaraj, as quoted by Dupuis, [**] says that the religion of the Chaldeans and of the Sabaeans was the same, and that the former were distinguished by their astronomical observations and studied the nature of the stars and their secret influences. Nor was this true merely of the later Chaldeans. Mr. Proctor remarks, that "no one

[p. 68]

who considers the wonderful accuracy with which, nearly 2,000 years before the Christian era, the Chaldeans had determined the famous cycle of the Saros, can doubt that they must have observed the heavenly bodies for several centuries before they could have achieved such a success." [**] As to the later Chaldeans, the Jewish writer Philo observes that they make everything depend on the movement of the stars, which they regard as the sovereign arbiters of the order of the world. They limit their homage to the visible, and do not form any idea of the invisible and intellectual being; on the contrary, in observing the order of the world, they think they see in it the divinity itself, which exercises its power by the movements of the sun, the moon, the planets, and the fixed stars, by the successive revolutions of the seasons, and by the combined action of the heaven and the earth. [*+]

A religion such as this could have no fitter monument than a vast astronomical observatory, which the Great Pyramid probably was, until at least it was completed on the death of its royal founder. The building was a worthy

[p. 69]

symbol of the remarkable system of religion which, according to ancient writers, once pervaded nearly the whole world, and was said to have been founded by Seth, the son of Adam. According to Philo, Abraham was educated in its principles, which he held, until having opened his eyes, he saw the light and recognised in the Universe a sovereign guide, whom he had not before suspected.

Footnotes

^56:* "Myths and Marvels of Astronomy," p. 89.

^56:+ See Vyse, "Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 358.

^57:* Vyse, "Operations," Vol. ii. p. 349. According to the Platonists, a pyramid is the figure of fire.

^57:+ Vyse, vol. ii., p. 342.

^57:++ See Appendix I. for various ancient references to Seth and Hermes, as give by Dr. Sprenger.

^57: section Vol. ii. p. 264.

^58:* Vyse, vol. ii. p. 258.

^59:* "Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient," 9th edition, Tom. ii. p. 74.

^60:* Tom. ii. p. 55.

^61:* God in History, Vol. i., pp. 233-4.

^62:* Tom. ii., p. 72.

^62:+ Quoted in Duncker's "History of Antiquity." Vol. i. p. 98 n.

^63:* Ducker, Vol. i. p. 127.

^64:* Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient, Tom. ii. p. 147.

^65:* M. Vivien de Saint-Martin, in his "Nouveau Dictionnaire de Geographie Universelle,"--art. Arabie. And see the "Preliminary Discourse," in Sale's "Koran," as to the tribe of Ad, and other early peoples of Arabia.

^66:* "Outlines of the History of Religion" (Eng. Trans.), p. 75.

^66:+ Dupuis, "L'Origine de tous les Cultes," Tom. i. p. 424.

^67:* Tom, i. p. 7.

^68:* "Myths and Marvels of Astronomy," p. 73.

^68:+ Treatise on Abraham, Sec. 15.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

CHAPTER V

  

SETH AND SERPENT WORSHIP

THE association of the name of the god Seth with the Great Pyramid--a structure which appears to embody or to bear a relation to the chief scientific truths recognised by the ancient world, throws light on certain ideas entertained as to the nature of that deity. The god of intelligence of the Egyptians was Thoth, the Hermes of the Sabaeans. Hermes was, however, called the son of Seth, and this deity is in some sense to be identified with Thoth. In a passage of the Book of the Dead, the former has the name Tet which, according to Bunsen, intimates that Thoth inherited many of the attributes of Seth. [**] It may, indeed, show that they are the same deity. Seth was the true god of Wisdom, and the pillars of Seth, on which, according to Josephus, [*+] was inscribed the astronomical knowledge of the

[p. 71]

ancient world, were the same as those mentioned in an apocryphal work ascribed to Hermes, which, according to Cedrenus, affirmed that "Enoch, foreseeing the destruction of the Earth, had inscribed the science of astronomy upon two pillars." [**] By these structures was probably intended the two great pyramids of Ghizeh, which appear originally to have had many inscriptions on their external coverings. Makrizi cites various authors as to the origin of the Pyramids, and among other statements it was said that that they were built by Surid, and that the First was dedicated to history and astronomy, and the Second to medical knowledge. [*+] As Seth, Thoth, or Hermes was the god of Wisdom, so the serpent was its emblem, and especially connected with that God and with other deities of similar characteristics. "Wise as serpents. [*++] and harmless as doves," is an old saying, which probably has a deeper meaning than that usually ascribed to it. The connection between the serpent and the idea

[p. 72]

of wisdom is well seen in the Hindu legend as to the Nagas. Mr. Fergusson remarks, "the Naga appears everywhere in Vaishnava tradition. There is no more common representation of Vishnu than as reposing on the Sesha, the celestial seven-headed snake, contemplating the creation of the world." The Upanishads refer to the science of serpents, by which is meant the wisdom of the mysterious Nagas who, according to Buddhistic legend, reside under Mount Meru, and in the waters of the terrestrial world. One of the sacred books of the Tibetan Buddhists is fabled to have been received from the Nagas, who, says Schlagentweit, are "fabulous creatures, of the nature of serpents, who occupy a place among the beings superior to man, and are regarded as protectors of the law of the Buddha. To these spiritual beings Sakyamuni is said to have taught a more philosophical religious system than to men, who were not sufficiently advanced to understand it at the time of his appearance." The serpent holds an analogous place in the religious ideas of the modern Hindus. Siva, [**] as Sambhu, is the patron of the Brahmanic

[p. 73]

order, and, as shown by his being three-eyed, is essentially a god possessing high intellectual attributes. Vishnu also is a god of wisdom, but (notwithstanding the association with him of the Sesha), of a somewhat lower type, such as is distinctive of the worshippers of truth under its feminine aspect. The serpent has been connected with the god of Wisdom from the earliest times of which we have any historical notice. This animal was the especial symbol of Thoth or Taut, a primeval deity of Syro-Egyptian mythology, and of all those gods, such as Hermes and Seth, who can be connected with him. This is true also of the third member of the primitive Chaldean triad, Hea or Hoa. According to Sir Henry Rawlinson, the most important titles of this deity refer to "his functions as the source of all knowledge and science." Not only is he "the intelligent fish," but his name may be read as signifying both "life" and a "serpent," and he may be considered as "figured by the great serpent which occupies so conspicuous a place among the symbols of the gods on the black stones recording Babylonian benefactions." M. Lenormant identifies Hea with the fish-god Oannes of Babylonian mythology, who, according to

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] Berosus, "spent the whole day amongst men without taking any food, while he taught them letters, science, and the principles of every art, the rules for the foundation of towns, the building of temples, the measurement and boundaries of lands, seed-time and harvest, in short, all that could advance civilization, so that nothing new has been invented since that period." [**] Hea, as the god of Science, was the defender of "the frame of nature against the incessant ravages of the wicked spirits," and "help was sought from him when neither word, rite, talisman, nor even the intervention of any other of the gods had availed to destroy the demons' power." [*+] The Chaldean god was moreover, the healer of disease, [*++] in which character he resembled the God of the Hebrews, the sight of whose serpent-symbol was supposed to cure those bitten by the fiery serpents in the wilderness. There is reason to believe [* section] that this deity was the same as Seth, the Agathodaemon of the early Egyptians, who was represented under the form of the serpent,

[p. 75]

and who was the giver of happiness and good fortune. [**] The good genius which presided over the affairs of men as the guardian spirit of their houses was a serpent, the Asp of Ranno, the snake-headed goddess who is represented as nursing the young princes. That the idea of health was among the Egyptians intimately associated with the serpent, is shown, moreover, by the crown formed of the asp, or sacred Thermuthis, having been given particularly to Isis, a goddess of Life and Healing. It was also the symbol of other gods of health and the like attributes, as stated by the learned Dupuis in the chapters entitled "Esculapius, Serapis, Pluto, Esmun, Cneph, and all the divinities with the attributes of the serpent" [*+] is remarkable that a Moslem saint of Upper Egypt is still thought to appear under the form of a serpent, and to cure the diseases which afflict the pilgrims to his shrine. The power of healing is an evidence of the possession of wisdom, and so also

[p. 76]

is the power of influencing atmospheric changes. This is a most important attribute, and, as Mr. Fergusson points out, a chief characteristic of the serpents throughout the East in all ages seems to have been their power over the wind and rain. According to Colonel Meadows Taylor, in the Indian Deccan, at the present day, offerings are made to the village divinities (of whom the nag, or snake, is always one) at spring time and harvest for rain or fine weather, and also in time of cholera or other diseases or pestilence. So, among the Chinese, the dragon is regarded. as the giver of rain, and in time of drought offerings are made to it. In the spring and fall, of the year it is one of the objects worshipped, by command of the Emperor, by certain mandarins. The Chinese notion of the serpent or dragon dwelling above the clouds in spring to give rain reminds us of the Aryan myth of Vritra, or Ahi, the throttling snake, or dragon with three heads, who hides away the rain-clouds, but who is slain by Indra, the beneficent giver of rain. M. Breal says, [**] that "Typhon is the monster who obscures the heavens, a sort of Greek Vritra." The myth of Indra and Vritra is reproduced in

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Latin mythology as that of Hercules and Cacus. Cacus also is analogous to Typhon, and as the former is supposed to have taken his name from, or given it to, a certain wind which had the power of clothing itself with clouds, so the latter bore the same name as a very destructive wind which was much dreaded by the Phoenicians and Egyptians. Moreover, the name Typhon was given by the Egyptians to anything tempestuous and hence to the Ocean.

We have here a reference to the serpent as the embodiment of the Evil Being; and in the later identification of Seth with Typhon, the enemy of Osiris, we have evidence of the connection of the serpent with the former deity. M. Lenormant tells us that, "evil was personified in a particular god, Set or Soutekh, [**] called also sometimes Baal, who was the supreme god of the neighbouring Asiatic populations, and, at a later period, of the shepherd kings; the Greeks considered him the same as their Typhon, and it was said that Osiris  to his blows." [*+]

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] The name Typhon appears to have been given more especially to the Evil Being, as the opponent of Horus, who was, however, the same deity as Osiris, whose son he was said to be. The former was then represented as Apap or Apophis, or the giant serpent, who was pierced by the spear of Horus, as the serpent Pytho was slain by Apollo. [**] Henceforth Seth, instead of being regarded by the Egyptians as the Agathodaemon, was looked upon as the principle of evil. The same change took place among the Accadian population of Media. M. Lenormant states that the "worship of serpent-gods is found amongst many of the Turanian tribes. The Accadians made the serpent one of the principal attributes, and one of the forms of Hea." When once, however, "the Iranian traditions were fused with the ancient beliefs of the Proto-Medic religion, the serpent-god naturally became identified with the representative of the dark and bad principle, for, according to the Mazdean myths, the serpent was the form assumed by

[p. 79]

[paragraph continues] Angromainyus, in order to penetrate into the heaven of Ahuramazda." [**] Here is the conflict between light and darkness, and between life and death, which is reproduced in Egyptian mythology, where the evil principle is represented in the one case by the serpent Apap, and in the other by Set [*+] (Seth), whose symbol was the serpent.

The association between the serpent and the idea of darkness had an astronomical foundation. The position which the constellation Draco at one time occupied showed that the Great Serpent was the ruler of the night. This constellation was formerly at the very centre of the heavens, and it is so extensive, that it was called the Great Dragon. Its body spreads over seven signs of the Zodiac, and Dupuis, who sees in the Dragon of the Apocalypse a reference to the celestial serpent, says, "It is not astonishing that a constellation so extended should be represented by the author of that book as a great dragon with seven heads, who drew the third part of the stars from heaven and cast them to the earth." [*++]

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Moreover, when the constellation Draco occupied its elevated position, it supplied the polestar of the heavens. The importance of this fact, in connection with the erection of the Great Pyramid, will be understood after what has been said as to the association of the Pyramid with the god Seth. That structure was erected, not only as a tomb for its founder, but as a monumental temple in honour of a deity whose special symbol was the serpent, the emblem of wisdom with the primitive race whose religion would appear to have been a combination of serpent-worship and Sabaism. The Great Pyramid is thus a monument not only of Sabaism, but of serpent-worship, and, as such, its scientific as well as its astronomical character receives the proper explanation. The builders of such a temple would apply their utmost skill in its construction and they would seek to preserve in it, as far as possible, the scientific knowledge which they had derived from their ancestors.

According to a Coptic MS., upon the walls of the Pyramids were written the mysteries of science, astronomy, geometry, physic, and much useful knowledge. The same MS. states, that they were built before the Flood by Surid, for

[p. 81]

safety, and as tombs for himself and household. [**] It is remarkable that, as Sir Gardner Wilkinson points out, Tuphan, which appears to be the same word as Typhon, the name of the Evil Being, is the Arabic name of the Deluge. [*+] The association of the Pyramids with a flood has, however, a purely astronomical explanation. Mr. Proctor, when speaking of the position of the pole-star Alpha Draconis, at the date of the erection of the Great Pyramid, says, [*++] "We know that in the past the constellation of the Dragon was at the pole, or boss, of the celestial sphere. In stellar temples, like those of which Rawlinson gives examples, the Dragon would be the uppermost or ruling constellation. And here, in passing, it may interest the reader to note that, some find evidence in this relation that when writers of old spoke of the Old Dragon as having been cast from heaven, carrying two-thirds of the celestial beings with him, reference was made--unconsciously, perhaps, on the narrator's part

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] --to some tradition of the passing away or fall of the Dragon from its former ruling position among the constellations. Those who thus interpret ancient records (much more ancient than Jewish history), find in Hercules, with his heel assailed by the serpent, as in our constellation figures, the first Adam; in Ophinchus, the serpent holder, the second Adam. In Argo they find the Ark--in fact, in a whole series of constellations they find the story of the Flood. In Aquarius, with the streams pouring from his water-jug, they find the beginning of the Flood. In the river Eridanus and the seas in which Pisces and the great sea-monster Cetus seem to swim, they see pictured the prevalence of deep water over the whole earth. The Raven of the Heavens is the raven of the Flood-narrative. Argo is the Ark, shown as if only the stern-half of a great ship lodged in the mountain. The Centaur, bearing sacrifice, as Aratus says, to Ara, the altar, is Noah offering sacrifice after he had left the Ark; and the bow of Sagittarius in the smoke (the Milky-way), which seems to ascend from the altar, is the bow of promise. These may, of course, be only fancies, but it is singular how closely these constellations, which are among

[p. 83]

the few really seeming to picture recognisable objects in the heavens, correspond in sequence and in range of right ascension with the events recorded respecting the Flood." [**]

Fancies or not, it is unquestionable that the Deluge has been associated in the legends of some Eastern peoples, not only with the Pyramids, [*+] but also with the constellations. Thus it is with the Chaldean legend, according to which Saturn in a dream announced the coming catastrophe to Xixutrus, who, like Noah, escaped in an ark. The Assyrian tablets discovered by the late Dr. Smith, and which contain what is called the Nimrod Epic, have preserved a similar account of the Deluge. It is now established that the twelve cantos of that Epic "refer to the annual course of the sun through the twelve months of the year. Each tablet answers to a special month, and contains a distinct reference to the animal forms in the signs of the Zodiac." Thus, "the Deluge forms the subject of the eleventh canto, corresponding

[p. 84]

with the month of Skebat (Feb.-Jan.), which is consecrated to Rimmon, the god of storms and rain, and harmonises with the eleventh sign of the Zodiac--Aquarius, or the Waterman. The latter month is styled in Sumerish-Accadian 'the month of the curse of the rain,' or, as we might almost say, the Deluge month." [**] The ancient Babylonians are usually accredited with the invention of the worship of the heavenly bodies, and the existence among them of the deluge myth in connection with the constellations is an important fact. It is no less important in relation to the question of the object of the Great Pyramid, that the capital of Babylonia contained a structure described by Strabo as a pyramid dedicated to the worship of the planetary bodies, exceeding in size the great Egyptian monument itself, and much resembling the Egyptian Pyramid of Degrees at Sakkarah. The Babylonian Tower was at the base a square of 600 feet, and consisted of eight towers, each 75 feet high, one above the other, making a total height of 600 feet. M. Lenormant speaks of the erection of this temple as having been attributed

[p. 85]

to "the most ancient king, the first king," and he says it was "the tangible expression, the material and architectural manifestation, of the Chaldaic-Babylonian religion. Serving both as a sanctuary and as an observatory for the stars, it agreed admirably with the genius of the essentially siderial religion to which it was united by an indissoluble bond" [**]--language which might be used with exactly the same propriety of the Great Pyramid itself.

That the erection of the Great Pyramid had some connection with the constellations is not at all improbable. We have already seen that Mr. Proctor prefers the date 3350 B.C. to the later one of 2170 B.C. for the building of the pyramid. The latter date would seem, however, to be the more probable one. That it was erected during the reign of Cheops [*+] is almost universally admitted; and, although the time when he reigned has not been satisfactorily established, there are grounds for believing it to have been about 2200 B.C. Prof. C. Piazzi Smyth affirms that

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] "the only monumental conclusion formed by comparing the quarry marks of the Great Pyramid with whatever is to be trusted, or is tolerably agreed upon among Egyptologists, and both of them with an astronomical date of the buildings,--can be no other than that two of the kings of the Fourth Dynasty of Egyptian history--Shofo and Nu-Shofo by name--lived through a period including the epoch of 2170 B.C." [**] It is true that, as Prof. Smyth points out, this date differs from that fixed by nearly all modern Egyptologists, [*+] although it agrees very nearly with the date 2228 B.C., assigned for the commencement of the Fourth Dynasty by Mr. Wm. Osburn, the author of the "Monumental History of Egypt." It is consistent, moreover, with the chronological facts given by Dr. Birch. This Egyptologist gives 3000 B.C. for the commencement of the first dynasty; and if this Dynasty continued for 263 years, the Second Dynasty for 306 years, and the Third Dynasty for 214 years, as stated by Manetho, we have 2223 B.C. as the date of

[p. 87]

the commencement of the Fourth Dynasty, and therefore of the erection of the Great Pyramid, if Cheops was its builder. Curiously enough, however, this is about the date fixed for the origin of the constellations. Mr. Proctor states that between 2100 and 2200 years before the Christian era the southern constellations had their original position, the invisible southern pole then lying at the centre of the space free from constellations. He adds, "It is noteworthy that for other reasons this period, or rather a definite epoch within it, is indicated as that to which must be referred the beginning of exact astronomy. Amongst others must be mentioned this--that in the year 2170 B.C. quam proxime, the Pleiades rose to their highest above the horizon at noon (or technically made their noon culmination) at the spring equinox. We can readily understand that to minds possessed with full faith in the influence of the stars on the earth, this fact would have great significance." At that epoch the southernmost constellations would be seen in their natural position--standing upright when above the southern horizon at midnight. On those grounds, Mr. Proctor affirms that the period when the old southern constellations

[p. 88]

were formed must have been between 2400 and 2000 years before the Christian era, He deems it highly probable, moreover, that the year 2170 B.C. may be regarded as the date, not of the beginning of astronomy, but of the introduction of a new astronomical system, the substitution of the use of the twelve zodiacal signs for that of the twenty-eight lunar mansions. Assuming that conclusion to be correct, we have a most remarkable coincidence between the date of the invention of the Zodiac and that of the erection of the Great Pyramid. If it is true, however, as Dupuis supposed, that the Egyptians invented the constellations, the agreement between those dates was probably more than a coincidence. The French writer remarks, "The figures traced in the Zodiac and in the other constellations have not been placed there haphazard: they are the hieroglyphic calendar of the ancient peoples; they are connected with their wants and their climate; and they all have a meaning in their origin, although it may be difficult for us now to discover the sense of all the symbols." Dupuis shows what was the primitive position of the constellations, considered as the astronomical and rural calendar of

[p. 89]

a people both intellectual and agricultural, and he affirms that it accords perfectly with the agriculture of Egypt, and at the same time with the position of the solstitial and equinoctial points in the heavens at a certain epoch. Moreover, owing to the difference in the order of agricultural operations followed in Egypt from that in other climates, the rural calendar which fitted the Egyptians could not suit any other people, and therefore he ascribes to them the honour of having invented the astronomical sciences; a conclusion supported, it is said, by the fact that the Egyptians regarded their Zodiac, not only as a rural and meteorological calendar, but as the base of all their religion and of their astronomy. [**] M. Flammarion appears to doubt whether Dupuis has satisfactorily established his theory of the origin of the constellations, [*+] and the date fixed by Mr. Proctor for the formation of the Zodiac is hardly consistent with that theory. It is possible, however, that whilst the constellations were formed by the Chaldeans long before that date, the zodiacal signs were only then arranged

[p. 90]

in an order to accord with the climate of Egypt by settlers in this country. Mr. Proctor, after fixing the probable limits of the place where the constellations were formed, at from 35 to 39 degrees north of the equator, says, "The Great Pyramid, as we know, is about 30 degrees north of the Equator; but we also know that its architects travelled southwards to find a suitable place for it. One of their objects may have been to obtain a fuller view of the star-sphere south of their constellations." [**] This suggestion is a very important one, for it assumes that the constellations were formed before the erection of the Pyramid, and therefore that the date of the latter event cannot have been earlier than that of the former. Mr. Proctor goes further, however, and even suggests that one of the objects which the architects of the Great Pyramid may have had was "the erection of a building indicating the epoch when the new system was entered upon, and defining in its proportions, its interior passages, and other features, fundamental elements of the new system." The construction of that building implies considerable proficiency in astronomical observation,

[p. 91]

and hence, says Mr. Proctor, "the year 2170 B.C. may very well be regarded as defining the introduction of a new system of astronomy, but certainly not the beginning of astronomy itself. [**]" That year becomes, however, the date of the pyramid itself, and in the suggestion that it was intended to commemorate the substitution of the twelve zodiacal signs for the twenty-eight lunar mansions, we have a strong confirmation of the opinion expressed in these pages that the Great Pyramid was a monument of Sabaism, and that it was erected in honour of Seth, the Agathodaemon of the ancient world, and consecrated to his worship.

Footnotes

^70:* "Egypt," Vol. iii. p. 427.

^70:+ "Antiquities," Chap. ii. sec. iii.

^71:* Vyse, "Operations, etc.," vol. ii. p. 330 n.

^71:+ Ditto, p. 354. See Appendix II. for Masoudi's account of the Legend of Surid.

^71:++ The Sophia, or Divine Wisdom and the Ophis-Christos of the Gnostics, was represented under the form of a serpent.--Matter's "Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme," Planches II. A. B. c. Matter appears to identify the Ophis with the god Kneph, p. 32.

^72:* Siva would seem to be the same deity as Saturn, and possibly therefore as Set (Seth), a fact which confirms the serpent character of the last named deity.

^74:* Lenormant "Chaldean Magic and Sorcery" (Eng. trans.), p. 157.

^74:+ Ditto, p. 158.

^74:++ Ditto, p. 21.

^74: section See the "Journal of Anthropology," 1870, p. 209, on this point.

^75:* Wilkinson's "Ancient Egyptians," Vol. iv. p. 413. Mr. Lane states that each quarter of Cairo (which was built out of the ruins of Memphis and its tombs), is supposed to have its guardian genius or agathodaemon, in the form of a serpent.--"Manners and Customs of the Egyptians," Vol. i. p. 289.

^75:+ "Origine de tous les Cultes," Tom. ii. Part 1, p. 165.

^76:* "Melanges de Mythologie et de Linguistique," p. 95.

^77:* The earlier character of this deity is well shown by the remark of Tiele, that the name Sutech is an attempt to reproduce in Egyptian form the Semitic divine name, Sedeq, "the righteous."--"Outlines of the History of Religion," p. 55.

^77:+ "Chaldean Magic," p. 83.

^78:* "Chaldean Magic," p. 83; Wilkinson, Vol. iv. pp. 395, 435--Apophis, may have given name to Papi, and Egyptian king, who lived about a century after Cheops, and also to Apepi, or Apappos one of the Hyksos kings; unless the 'Giant' Serpent took this title from the former monarch.

^79:* "Chaldean Magic," p. 232.

^79:+ Tiele, "Outlines of the History of Religions," p. 47; also, "History of the Egyptian Religion," Vol. i. p. 72.

^79:++ Dupuis, Tom. iii. p. 255.

^81:* Vyse, "Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 330, and see Appendix II.

^81:+ "The Ancient Egyptians," Vol. iv. p. 427 n.

^81:++ Knowledge, Vol. i. p. 243.

^83:* Knowledge, Vol. i. p. 243--Dupuis explains fully the position of the heavens at the date of what he terms the "sacred fiction" of the Deluge, Tom. iii. p. 176, seq.

^83:+ See Appendix II. for the Arabian legend as to the connection between the Deluge and the building of the Pyramids.

^84:* "The Nineteenth Century," 1382, p. 236.

^85:* "Chaldean Magic," p. 322.

^85:+ If Soris was the first monarch of the Fourth Dynasty, the Great Pyramid may possibly have been commenced in his reign, and completed during that of Cheops.

^86:* "Life and Work at the Great Pyramid," Vol. iii. p. 338.

^86:+ M. Vivien de Saint-Martin gives 3893 B.C. as the best date for the epoch of Menes.--"Nouveau Dict. de Geographie Universelle," Art. Egypte.

^89:* "Origine de tous les Cultes," Tom. iii. p. 339.

^89:+ "Histoire du Ciel," p. 153.

^90:* "Myths," etc., p. 362.

^91:* Ditto, p. 360.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

NOTE

ONE of the most curious series of relations found by the Pyramidists is connected with the Great Coffer, or sarcophagus, of the King's Chamber. John Taylor and his followers assert that this coffer is the same in capacity with the Ark and with the Laver of the Hebrew Tabernacle, and that the Molten Sea of Solomon's Temple was just fifty times such capacity, and exactly equal in interior cubic space with the contents of the King's Chamber itself. There is nothing absurd or improbable in there being some such relation between those vessels, if the Pyramid was a temple dedicated to the god Seth. Judging, indeed, from the analogy presented by Hindoo usage, the coffer was "a sacred trough, filled by the Priests on certain festivals with sacramental water and lotus-flowers." This explanation of its use was given to Mr, St. John by some learned Brahmins, who said that the

[p. 93]

[paragraph continues] Great Pyramid was a temple, and that if it had an underground communication with the Nile it must have been intended for the worship of Pad Madevi. [**] An early English writer, Mr. Shaw, would seem to have been much of the same opinion, as he thought the coffer was intended for the celebration of the mystical worship of Osiris, and he supposed it to have contained images, sacred vestments and utensils, or water for lustration. If for Osiris we substitute Seth that opinion will be near the truth. The so-called King's Chamber, of which an enthusiastic pyramidist says, "The polished walls, fine materials, grand proportions, and exalted place eloquently tell of glories yet to come," if not "the chamber of perfections" [*+] of Cheops's tomb, was probably the place to which the  was admitted after he had passed through the narrow upward passage and the grand gallery, with its lowly termination, which gradually prepared him for the final stage of the sacred mysteries.

Footnotes

^93:* Referred to by Col. Vyse, "Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 313.

^93:+ This was one of the names of the principal chamber of a tomb. See "Records of the Past," Vol. xii. Egyptian Texts, p. 106.

     
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

APPENDIX I

The following is Dr. Sprenger's account (taken from Arab and Syrian sources) of Seth and Hermes, in connection with the Pyramids of Ghizeh. He says (as quoted by Col. Vyse in the 2nd vol. of his work, p. 364):--

"In Abul Feda's 'Historia Anteislamitica,' edited by Fleisher, p. 16, it is stated, that Syria was one of the earliest inhabited countries, and that the Syriac language was the first that was spoken; that the Sabaean language was established by Seth and Edris (Enoch); that there was a town called Haran, to which pilgrims resorted, as they did to the two large Pyramids of Ghizeh, one of which was said to be the tomb of Edris, and the other of his son Syabi; where they celebrated as a festival the day on which the sun entered the sign of Aries. In the 'Melelwa Nahil,' MS., 47 in Nic. Cat., Hermes is represented as the pupil of Agathodaemon. In another account, MS. 785, Uri's Cat. Agathodaemon is

[p. 95]

mentioned as a King of Egypt. The Sabaeans consider the Great Pyramid of Ghizeh as the tomb of Seth; the Second, that of Hermes; and the Third, that of Izabi; while the Copts state that the Great Pyramid is the tomb of Surid; the Second, that of Herjib, or Haukith, his brother; the Third, that of his son."

Dr. Sprenger says, further:--"In the Syrian chronicle of Bar-Hebraeus (translated into Latin by Professor Bruns), Enoch is said to have invented letters and architecture, under the title of Trismigistus, or of Hermes, to have built many cities and established laws, to have taught the worship of God, [**] and astronomy, to give alms and tithes, to offer up first fruits, libations, etc., to abstain from unlawful foods, and drunkenness, and to keep feasts at the rising of the sun, or new moons, and at the ascent of the planets. His pupil was Agathodaemon (Seth); according to other accounts, Asclepiades, a king renowned for wisdom, who, when Enoch was translated, set up an image in honour of him, and thereby introduced idolatry. The Egyptians are supposed to have been descended from these persons.

[p. 96]

[paragraph continues] According to Hadgi Walfah, they derived their knowledge from the Chaldeans, who are said to have been the Persian Magi, and to have originally come from Babylon. The statues of the Grecian Hermes, which seem to agree in name with the Pyramids (Haram), were not images, but symbols of the deity and of the generative principle of nature in the form of obelisks (see Winkelman, Book i., Cap. i. 1011.) Statues of this kind sacred to Hermes were erected by the Greeks in honour of distinguished heroes; and the same allegorical allusion might have been kept in view when the Pyramids were constructed as tombs. The Egyptian account, however, of Hermes, is very obscure; that person is mentioned in the 'Burham-i-Kati' as the son of Rahman, sun of Isfendiar, and to have arrived from the East. One of the sons of Aunshirwan has also that title. Hormig is the name of the first day of the month, which is considered propitious for any undertaking; and it is a name of the planet Mercury; and Wednesday (dies Mercurii) was sacred to him: for to most of the planets days were attributed, in which their influence was supposed to govern human affairs, and even Mohammedan superstition assigned to

[p. 97]

children born on these days various qualities, characteristic of the heathen personifications of the different planets. Hermes is mentioned in many astrological treatises as presiding over the sixth climate. An idea, a period of time, or any remarkable occurrence, were frequently connected with ideal persons in mythology, and when any similarity existed received the same appellation. In this manner there were five Hermes; and the fifth was the Oriental Hermes who was worshipped by the Phineatae, and is said to have fled after the death of Argus into Egypt, and to have civilized that country under the name of Thoth. This coincides with the account of Tifashi, which is evidently taken from an Egyptian tradition; reference may also be made to Plato, Philel. 21, 24, Phaedro, p. 340. Hermes was likewise distinguished by his wisdom; and was reported to have been buried in a great building called Abou Hermes, which, together with another, the tomb of his wife, or of his son, was afterwards named Haraman. These were the two large Pyramids, and the form of their construction was called Makhrut."

Footnotes

^95:* "This agrees with the Biblical statement that in the days of Enos men began "to call on the name of the Lord," Gen. iv. 26.

    
The Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid, by C. Staniland Wake, [1882], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

APPENDIX II

MASOUDI, who died in the year 967 A.D., professes to relate the Coptic tradition, which says, "that Surid [**] Ben Shaluk Ben Sermuni Ben Termidun Ben Tedresan Ben Sal, one of the kings of Egypt before the Flood, built the two great pyramids; and notwithstanding they were subsequently named after a person called Shed-dad Ben Ad, that they were not built by the Adites, who could not conquer Egypt, on account of the powers which the Egyptians possessed by means of enchantment; that the reason for

[p. 99]

building the Pyramids was the following dream, which happened to Surid three hundred years previous to the Flood. It appeared to him, that the earth was overthrown, and that the inhabitants were laid prostrate upon it; that the stars wandered confusedly from their courses, and clashed together with a tremendous noise. The king, although greatly affected by this vision, did not disclose it to any person, but was conscious that some great event was about to take place." Soon afterwards the king had another vision, which so much alarmed him that he repaired to the Temple of the Sun, "where, with great lamentations, he prostrated himself in the dust. Early in the morning he assembled the chief priests from all the Nomes of Egypt, a hundred and thirty in number. No other persons were admitted to this assembly, when he related his first and his second vision. The interpretation was declared to announce, 'that some great event would take place.'" The high-priest, whose name was Philimon, or Iklimon, related a dream which he had had a year before, in which the firmament descended till it overshadowed him and the king like a vault as they sat upon the tower of Amasis. "The king then directed the astrologers to ascertain, by taking the altitude,

[p. 100]

whether the stars foretold any great catastrophe, and the result announced an approaching deluge. [**] The king ordered them to inquire, whether or not this calamity would befal Egypt; and they answered, Yes, the flood will overwhelm the land, and destroy a large portion of it for some years. He ordered them to inquire if the earth would again become fruitful, or if it would continue to be covered with water. They answered that its former fertility would return. The king demanded what would then happen. He was informed that a stranger would invade the country, kill the inhabitants, and seize upon their property; and that afterwards a deformed people, coming from beyond the Nile, would take possession of the kingdom, upon which the king ordered the Pyramids to be built, and the predictions of the priests to be inscribed upon columns, and upon the large stones belonging to them; and he placed within them his treasures, and all his valuable property, together with the bodies of his ancestors. He also ordered the priests to deposit within them written accounts of their wisdom and acquirements in the different arts

[p. 101]

and sciences. [**] Subterraneous channels were also constructed to convey to them the waters of the Nile. He filled the passages with talismans, with wonderful things and idols, and with the writings of the priests, containing all manner of wisdom, the names and properties of medical plants, and the sciences of arithmetic and geometry, that they might remain as records, for the benefit of those who would afterwards comprehend them." After describing the construction of the three pyramids, Masoudi, says, "In the eastern (Great) Pyramid were inscribed the heavenly spheres, and figures representing the stars and planets in the forms in which they were worshipped. The king also deposited the instruments and the thuribula with which his forefathers had sacrificed to the stars, and also their writings; likewise, the position of the stars and their circles, together with the history and chronicles of time past, of that which is to come, and of every future event which would take place in Egypt. He placed there, also, coloured basins (for lustration and sacrificial purposes),

[p. 102]

with pure water, and other matters." After referring to the deposit of the bodies of the priests in the coloured (Third) Pyramid, Masoudi describes the guardians assigned by the king to each pyramid. "The guardian of the eastern pyramid was an idol of speckled granite, standing upright, with a weapon like a spear in his hand; a serpent was wreathed round his head, which seized upon and strangled whoever approached, by twisting round his neck, when it again returned to its former position upon the idol. . . . When everything was finished, he caused the Pyramids to be haunted with living spirits; and offered up sacrifices to prevent the intrusion of strangers, and of all persons excepting those who by their conduct were worthy of admission." The author then says, that, according to the Coptic account, the following passage was inscribed, in Arabic, upon the Pyramids: I, Surid the King, have built these Pyramids, and have finished them in sixty-one years. Let him, who comes after me, and imagines himself a king like me, attempt to destroy them in six hundred. To destroy is easier than to build. I have clothed them with silk: let him try to cover them with mats." [**]

 

 

 

Footnotes

^98:* Surid may be the same as Suphis or Cheops, as in a papyrus said to have been found in the monastery of Abou-Hormeis, Surid is said to have been buried in the eastern (Great) Pyramid, his brother Haukith in the western, and his nephew Karwars in the smaller pyramid. (Vyse, "Operations," etc., vol. ii. p. 332.)--Surid appears to be given in the list of Manetho, under the name of Soris, as the first king of the fourth dynasty. This king is, however, treated by M. Lenormant as non-historical. (Sec List of the Kings of Egypt, "Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient," tom. ii. p. 430), and he refers to Khoufou (Suphis) the tablet at the mouth of the ancient mine at Sinai, which English Egyptologists ascribe to Soris (Shure). The name of this king is also said to have been found in the tombs near Ghizeh, and in the quarry marks of the northern pyramid of Abou-Seir, which is, therefore, thought to be his tomb. (Sir J. G. 'Wilkinson, in Rawlinson's "Herodotus," vol. ii. p. 344, 346).

^100:* According to Makrizi, fire was to proceed from the sign Leo, and to consume the world.

^101:* Masoudi says that all these marvellous things were placed within the Pyramids; whilst Makrizi, on the authority of Usted Ibrahim, particularises the subterraneous passages as the depositories. On the margin of one of Makrizi's MSS., we read that the inscriptions of the priests were on the ceilings, roofs, etc., of the subterraneous passages.

^102:* Col. Vyse, "Operations," etc., Vol. ii. p. 322 seq.

    
